91503
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Acknowledgements
                         This study was prepared by a World Bank Group team, led by Gevorg Sargsyan (WB) and Yana
                         Gorbatenko (IFC). The team consisted of Sergei Solodovnikov, Ksenia Mokrushina, Denzel
                         Hankinson, and Lauren Pierce. Special gratitude is due to Igor Bashmakov, Director of the Center
                         for Energy Efficiency in Moscow, and his team. CENEf ’s assessment of energy efficiency potential in
                         various sectors of the Russian economy, estimation of costs and benefits of achieving this potential,
                         and advice on barriers to energy efficiency, were integral to the findings of this report.

                         The authors wish to thank Klaus Rohland, the World Bank director for Russia and Charles
                         Feinstein, the World Bank sector manager for Europe and Central Asia countries for guidance
                         provided to the team and peer reviewers Ian Crosby, Peter Johansen, Jeremy Levin, Ashok Sarkar,
                         Mathew Savage, and Bob Taylor. The report also benefited from valuable ideas, opinion and
                         expertise of Zeljko Bogetic, Isak Froumin, Huw Martyn Howells, Victor Loksha, Boris Nekrasov,
                         Christian Petersen, Anastasiya Rozhkova, Helmut Schreiber, Miles Stump, and Victor Sulla.

                         The authors also wish to express their gratitude to a number of experts for their advice on a variety of
                         topics covered in this paper: Tatyana Abankina (SU-HSE), Vladimir Begalov (Institute for Regional
                         Energy, Yekaterinburg), Vladimir Drebentsov (BP), Anatoly Kovalchuk (Center for Energy Saving
                         and Innovative Technologies, Rostov-on-Don), Sergei Krainev (Fund to Assist Reforming of
                         Housing and Communal Services), Vladimir Milov (Institute for Energy Policy), Remir Mukumov
                         (former Head of the Regional Development Department of MEDT), Dmitry Novoselov (Fortum),
                         Vladlen Prokofyev and Emin Askerov (Institute for Urban Economics), Natalia Tipenko (Center
                         For Fiscal Policy), Artem Troitsky (Institute for Energy Strategy), Evgeny Zenyutich (NICE, Nizhny
                         Novgorod), and the staff of Mytischenskie Teploseti. The authors remain indebted to many other
                         experts and energy efficiency practitioners, not named here [or, too numerous to name here], who
                         provided insights from their experience.

                         This work was co-funded by the World Bank and IFC through its advisory services Russia
                         Sustainable Energy Finance Program. The Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program is supported
                         by grants from the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Danish Energy Authority (DEA),
                         Finland’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Employment and the Economy, and IFC’s
                         Sustainable Financial Markets Facility.

                         The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this study are entirely those of the
                         project team and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank or IFC, to its affiliated
                         organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
                         The material in this paper is owned by the World Bank and IFC. Dissemination of this study is
                         encouraged and the World Bank and IFC will normally grant permission promptly. This paper was
                         issued in English and in Russian. For questions about this report including permission to reprint
                         portions or information about ordering more copies, please contact the World Bank and IFC at the
                         addresses below.

                         The World Bank                                        International Finance Corporation
                         1818 H. Street, NW                                    IFC Advisory Services in Eastern Europe and
                         Washington, DC 20433 USA                              Central Asia
                         Tel: +(1202) 473-1000                                 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
                         Fax: +(1202) 477-63-91                                Washington, DC 20433 USA
                         www.worldbank.org                                     Tel: +(1202) 458-0917
                                                                               Fax: +(1202) 974-4312
                                                                               www.ifc.org/pep
   2
Table of Contents




                    3
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Acronyms
                         AAU	   –	 Assigned Amount Units                       NEMA	    –	 National Electrical
                         APG	   –	 Associated Petroleum Gas                                Manufacturers Association
                         bcm	   –	 Billion Cubic Meters                        NESHP	 –	 National Emissions Standards
                                                                                           for Hazardous Pollutants
                         BR	    –	 Building Regulation
                                                                               NGO	     –	 Non-Governmental
                         BRIC	  –	 Brazil, Russia, India and China
                                                                                           Organization
                         CENEf	 –	 Russia’s Center for Energy Efficiency
                                                                               NPG	     –	 Norwegian Petroleum
                         CHP	   –	 Combined Heat and Power Plant
                                                                                           Directorate
                         COMECON	 – Council for Mutual Economic
                                                                               OECD	    –	 Organization for Economic
                                   Assistance
                                                                                           Cooperation and Development
                         CSE	   –	 Cost of Saved Energy
                                                                               PO	      –	 Public Organization
                         DSM	   –	 Demand Side Management
                                                                               PPP	     –	 Purchasing Power Parity
                         EBRD	  –	 European Bank for Reconstruction
                                                                               RAO UES	 –	 Russia’s Unified Energy Systems
                                   and Development
                                                                                           (Russian electricity company)
                         EE	    –	 Energy Efficiency
                                                                               ROSSTAT	 –	 Russia’s Federal State Statistics
                         EEBPP	 –	 UK Energy Efficiency Best Practice                      Service
                                   Program
                                                                               RUR	     –	 Russian Ruble
                         EMAS	  –	 Eco-Management Audit Scheme
                                                                               SEC	     –	 Specific Energy Consumption
                         EMF	   –	 Economy Modernization Fund
                                                                               SME	     –	 Small and Medium Enterprises
                         EPA	   –	 Environmental Protection Agency
                                                                               toe	     –	 Tons of Oil Equivalent
                         EPC	   –	 Energy Performance Contracts
                                                                               TOU	     –	 Time Of Use
                         ESCO	  –	 Energy Service Company
                                                                               UNDP	    –	 United Nations Development
                         EU	    –	 European Union                                          Programme
                         FBI	   –	 Federal Buildings Initiative                WB	      –	 World Bank
                         FEMP	  –	 Federal Energy Management Program           YOLL	    –	 Years of Life Lost
                         Gcal	  –	 Gigacalorie
                         gce	   –	 Grams of coal equivalent
                         GDP	   –	 Gross Domestic Product
                         GHG	   –	 Greenhouse Gases
                         GIS	   –	 Green Investment Scheme
                         GJ	    –	 Giga-Joules
                         HOA	   –	 Homeowners Association
                         IEA	   –	 International Energy Agency
                         kgoe	  –	 Kilograms of Oil Equivalent
                         kWh	   –	 Kilowatt-Hours
                         MED	   –	 Russian Ministry of Economy
                         MEPS	  –	 Minimum Energy Performance
                                   Standard
                         MPC	   –	 Minimum Performance Criteria
                         MUP	   –	 Municipal Unitary Enterprise
                         mtoe	  –	 Million Tons of Oil Equivalent
                         MW	    –	 Mega-Watts
                         MWt	   –	 Mega-Watt thermal
                         NAAQ	  –	 National Air Quality Standards
                         NEDO	 –	 New Energy and Industrial Technology
                                   Development Organization


   4
                                                                                                                          E xe c u t i ve S u m m a r y




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



T
        his report was designed to provide senior Russian policymakers with a comprehensive and
        practical analysis of energy efficiency in Russia: potential, benefits, and recommendations
        on how to fully tap into this resource. Shortly after his inauguration, President Medvedev
made several public statements identifying Russia’s inefficient use of energy, and the associated
economic and ecological consequences, as one of the most pressing problems facing the nation.
He has called for an action plan to halve Russia’s energy intensity by 2020. The goal of this report
is to make a significant contribution toward developing such a plan.

POTENTIAL
Russia can save 45 percent of its total primary energy consumption
Russia’s current energy inefficiency is equal to the annual primary energy consumption of France.
Achieving Russia’s full energy efficiency potential would cost a total of $320 billion to the economy
and result in annual costs savings to investors and end users of about $80 billioni, paying back in
just four years. Benefits to the total economy are much higher: $120-150 billionii per annum of
energy cost savings and additional earnings from gas exports.

By realizing its energy efficiency potential Russia can save:
       n	    240 billion cubic meters of natural gas,
       n	    340 billion kWh of electricity,
       n	    89 million tons of coal, and
       n	    43 million tons of crude oil and equivalents in the form of refined petroleum products.




i	    In 2007 internal prices.
ii	
      The range depends on which gas export prices are used for the calculation. This study considered gas prices ranging from
      $230-350 per thousand cubic meter.




                                                                                                                                                  5
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s



                         Figure 1. Russia energy efficiency potential, investment and benefits


                                    700
                                                        654
                                    600
                                                                               -45%
                                    500

                                    400                                           360               Total incremental investments:	   $320 billion
                          mtoe




                                                                                                    End users costs savings: 	        $80 billion/	
                                    300
                                                                                                    			                               year

                                    200                                                             Benefits to economy: 		           $120-150 		
                                                                                                    			                               billion/year
                                    100

                                       0
                                                   Russia energy       Russia energy consumption
                                                   consumption         after realizing the energy
                                                   in 2005             efficiency potential


                         Source: CENEF for the World Bank



                         BENEFITS
                         Energy efficiency is one-third the cost of building new energy supply facilities, and can
                         be done more quickly
                         The forecast shortfall of natural gas production (35-100 bcm by 2010) and potential gap in addi-
                         tional electrical generation capacity (~20,000 MW) can be compensated by energy resources released
                         through increased efficiency (240 bcm of gas and ~43,000 MW of electricity capacity). Russia would
                         require investments of over $1 trillion to construct energy supply facilities to generate the same
                         amount of energy while energy efficiency can achieve the same effect at a third of the cost.

                         Energy efficiency mitigates the risks and costs of Russia’s high energy intensity, and will
                         allow Russia to:
                                 n	        Maintain competitiveness: As rising tariffs diminish the world’s largest energy subsidy
                                           ($40 billion in 2005), profits of industrial enterprises will decrease by at least 15 percent.
                                           Energy efficiency will allow companies to maintain competitiveness;
                                 n	        Increase oil and gas export earnings: Russia’s energy intensity has a cost of $84-112
                                           billion per year in terms of foregone export revenues;
                                 n	        Lower budget expenditures: $3-5 billion can be saved annually from federal and local
                                           budgets by eliminating the inefficient use of energy;
                                 n	        Reduce environmental costs: By ignoring the consequences of emissions caused by its
                                           energy intensity, Russia sacrifices the health and welfare of its citizens and roughly $10
                                           billion per year in direct economic benefit from selling CO2 emissions reduction units.

                         Russia can use energy efficiency to avoid becoming a CO2 buyer
                         If its energy efficiency potential was to be fully realized, Russian CO2 emissions in 2030 would
                         be approximately 20 percent below the 1990 level. Russia’s energy efficiency potential translates
                         into a CO2 emissions reduction of 793 million tons of CO2 equivalent per year (about half of
                         2005 emissions). Not only will this contribute to addressing the challenge of climate change, but
                         it will significantly improve Russia’s international image and help Russia to reemerge as a leader
                         in addressing global environmental issues.
   6
                                                                                                                                   E xe c u t i ve S u m m a r y



CURRENT EFFORTS
Russia’s energy intensity has decreased by 3.4 percent per year on average since 1990, while
most former Soviet Republics achieved 6-7 percent average annual reductions for the period.
The improvement in Russian energy intensity was driven primarily by a shift toward less energy
intensive industries and increased industrial capacity utilization. Since most major industries were
already approaching full capacity utilization as early as 2006, this will not be a major driver for
reducing energy intensity in the future.

Ongoing energy sector reforms increase financially viable opportunities…
The government’s liberalization of the electricity market and establishment of a set schedule for gas
price increases constitute an important step toward a more energy efficient economy. For example,
projected 2010 tariffs would make the financially viableiii energy efficiency potential almost equal
to the economic potentialiv.

But only robust policy can tap Russia’s energy efficiency potential
Roughly half of Russia’s potential energy savings can already be achieved through financially
viable investments. Yet even financially viable investments have slow uptake. For example, in the
manufacturing sector, 80 percent of energy efficiency potential is financially attractive, but few
companies take advantage of all those opportunities.

Current federal and regional legislation on energy efficiency is largely declarative and does not
address key barriers such as lack of information and insufficient access to long term funding.
Measures to remove these barriers and stimulate uptake of financially viable energy efficiency
projects are essential to realizing Russia’s energy efficiency potential and avoiding the consequences
of continued high-energy intensity at higher tariffs.

HOW GOVERNMENT CAN INTERVENE
Strong leadership required to enable energy efficiency investment
Achieving greater energy efficiency requires that many individual decision makers gain comfort
in investing their capital in projects to use energy more rationally. A strong government role
can provide that comfort by removing barriers, establishing clear conditions and standards, and
supplying critical information. By creating a “pro-energy efficiency” business environment, the
government can catalyze significant investment flows.

Prerequisites to success: energy efficiency champion, reliable statistics
In order to ensure proper focus of purpose and resources, the government should designate a
ministerial department or dedicated energy efficiency agency with the responsibility, authority and
necessary funding to develop and implement a comprehensive energy efficiency policy for Russia.

This body could coordinate work with Rosstat to ensure the availability of reliable statistical
information essential for understanding the current situation and monitoring the effectiveness of
policy. Currently, statistical data on a number of sectors, such as buildings, heating, and transport
is virtually nonexistent.




iii	
       An investment is financially viable if it generates attractive return under existing energy prices.
iv	    An investment is economically viable its value to the economy as a whole justifies the investment, e.g. the cost of saving a unit
       of energy is less than the cost to building a new unit of production capacity or the opportunity cost to Russia of exporting a
                                                                                                                                                           7
       unit of gas, whichever is greater.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s



                         Implementation options
                         The government should focus on the following categories of measures, each of which is necessary
                         to achieve the full energy efficiency potential of the country. “Quick Wins” will demonstrate some
                         rapid results and increase political support, “Essentials” will stimulate investments that are already
                         financially viable, and “High Cost, High Return” measures will remove fundamental sources of
                         inefficiency and will make more energy efficiency investments financially viable.

                         Quick Wins
                         These measures can be introduced in less than a year and are likely to produce significant impact
                         at moderate cost. Some of the key solutions are listed below:
                                 n	      Energy efficiency information awareness campaign
                                 n	      Flexible budgeting and procurement rules in public organizations
                                 n	      Transformation of municipal heat suppliers into commercial entities

                         Essentials
                         These approaches are the backbone of a comprehensive energy efficiency policy, affecting the areas
                         of greatest potential by raising standards and enabling investment.
                                 n	      Energy efficiency standards in areas such as buildings, industrial equipment, fuel
                                         efficiency
                                 n	      Demand side management
                                 n	      Energy efficiency as a condition for subsidy in capital renovation
                                 n	      Coordinated heat supply plans
                                 n	      Facilitated financing through financial institutions

                         High Cost, High Return
                         These interventions carry a much higher initial cost to the economy, but most of them have a high
                         return in terms of energy savings as well and are critical to ensure long lasting impact and sustain-
                         ability. Some of these interventions have already been initiated; others are still to be developed.
                                 n	      Tariff reform
                                 n	      Liberalization of electricity and gas market
                                 n	      Integrated transport planning
                                 n	      Charging the full cost of vehicle usage

                         SECTORAL REVIEW
                         The largest technical energy efficiency potential can be found in the residential, electricity
                         generation, and manufacturing sectors. Figure 2 presents the energy efficiency potential by sector
                         and indicates what level of the potential is economically attractive and financially viable.




   8
                                                                                                                                 E xe c u t i ve S u m m a r y



Figure 2: Energy Efficiency Potential by Sector



             Residential buildings


             Electricity generation

                   Manufacturing


                   Transportation                                                                                  Technical

                                                                                                                   Economical
           Heating supply systems
                                                                                                                   Financial
              Fuel production and
                   transformation                                                                                  2005 Energy
                                                                                                                   Consumption
         Non-residential buildings


                       Gas Flaring

         Accompanying decrease in
      primary energy consumption

                                      0         50                 100                150                200

                                                                  mtoe
Source: CENEF for the World Bank


As can be seen from Figure 2, the energy efficiency potential in end-use sectors is significantly
higher than on the energy supply side. In fact, the financially viable potential in end-use sectors is
four times higher than that in electricity and heat supply systems. Moreover, end-use savings are
accompanied by an additional decrease in primary energy consumption (94 mtoe) across the entire
energy value chain. For example 1 kWh of reduction of consumption in the residential sector will
lead to a 5 kWh reduction in primary supply.

In sectors with a high level of financially viable potential (manufacturing and transportation),
policy should focus on interventions that do not affect prices or offer subsidies, but remove non-
financial barriers. In sectors with a low level of energy efficiency potential (electricity and heat
generation), prices should be adjusted accordingly or other fiscal incentives offered to help achieve
significant savings.

The summary below contains key conclusions in each sector related to energy efficiency potential,
specific barriers, and required government interventions.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS

        Potential: -49%, 53.4 mtoe, economically viable 84%, financially viable 46%
        Focus: over 70% in space heating and water heating
        Incremental investment: $25-50 billionv
        Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 pricesvi: $14 billion



v	
       Including public buildings.
vi	
       Here and below energy cost savings are estimated at Russia internal energy prices in 2007 benefits for the whole economy                          9
       are much higher.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s



                         The most significant barriers to energy efficiency in residential housing relate to building standards,
                         public behavior, and difficulties in organizing and financing energy efficiency improvements in
                         common areas.

                         Mandating energy standards in new and renovated buildings is the most cost-effective way to
                         ensure energy savings in the residential sector. A recent transition to voluntary building standards
                         could undermine the progress in space heating efficiency. To be effective, building standards must
                         be (a) mandatory, (b) regularly updated, (c) clearly enforced.

                         Through public awareness campaigns and by encouraging widespread use of metering, the govern-
                         ment can influence behavior so that energy efficiency becomes a social norm in Russia. Energy
                         efficiency improvements in common areas can be mainstreamed through the following package of
                         interventions: (a) model performance-based management contracts, (b) a building renovation loan
                         guarantee facility, (c) an awareness campaign to stimulate collective management of buildings.

                         PUBLIC ORGANIZATIONS
                                 Potential: -42%, 15.2 mtoe, economically viable 90%, financially viable 58%
                                 Focus: 49% in space heating
                                 Incremental investment: see residential buildings
                                 Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 prices: $3.5-5 billion


                         This potential is “low hanging fruit” for the government. Yet, energy efficiency improvements
                         have limited uptake by public organizations due to the following regulatory barriers. Public
                         organizations are not allowed to retain or reallocate savings on communal expenses, and they
                         cannot conclude long-term contracts or contracts that pay for investments with future savings.
                         Procurement rules favor the lowest cost of the bid, not the lowest lifetime cost.

                         By introducing flexible budgeting and/or giving public organizations autonomous status, the
                         government can establish a fundamental incentive to save. This, however, should be accompanied
                         by setting energy consumption targets based on benchmarking. Changes to procurement
                         legislation that introduce multi-year contracts, performance-based contracts and the lowest lifetime
                         cost principle are essential to allow public purchases of energy efficient goods and services.

                         INDUSTRY
                                 Potential: -38%, 41.5 mtoe, economically viable 97%, financially viable 80%
                                 Focus: 53% in ferrous metals, pulp and paper and cement, 42% in non-energy intensive
                                 sectors
                                 Incremental investment: $35 billion
                                 Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 prices: $14 billion


                         Industry is slow in realizing its energy efficiency potential primarily due to a lack of awareness
                         among managers and insufficient supply of long-term capital to finance energy efficient modern-
                         ization. In addition, companies in a number of sectors lack the incentive to save because energy
                         tariffs are growing at a slower pace than product prices.

                         Launching targeted information dissemination campaigns and channeling long-term financing for
                         energy efficiency investments through Russian financial institutions will help enterprises realize
                         immediate energy saving opportunities. The continuation of electricity and gas sector reforms are
  10                     important to maintain the attractiveness of energy efficiency as a business case.
                                                                                                   E xe c u t i ve S u m m a r y



Fiscal instruments such as tax rebates or accelerated depreciation could provide additional
incentives in the current context to stimulate investment in new state-of-the-art equipment and
management practices to produce competitive goods and services.

TRANSPORT
    Potential: -41%, 38.3 mtoe, economically viable 95%, financially viable 84%
    Focus: 49% in road transport, 40% in gas pipelines
    Incremental investment: $124-130 billion
    Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 prices: $20 billion


Road transport is a rapidly growing energy consumer, driven by the rapid increase in the number
of private vehicles, at the expense of more efficient public transport. The quality of public transport
is inadequate, and efforts are focused primarily on providing more space and roadways for use by
private vehicles rather than developing public transport. In addition, private vehicle owners do
not have real incentives to travel efficiently and tend to choose less efficient but cheaper or more
powerful cars.

To increase the attractiveness of public transport, the government needs to introduce an integrated
transport planning approach, improve the quality of public transport and enhance intermodal
solutions (e.g., safe parking at rail stations). By tightening fuel efficiency standards and establish-
ing car scrapping schemes, the government can speed up efficient renewal of the country’s car
fleet. Charging users the full cost of private vehicle usage through congestion road pricing and car
ownership/motor fuel taxes, accompanied by improved public transportation, car labeling and
public awareness campaigns, can drive the desired changes in consumer behavior.

ELECTRICITY
    Potential: -31%, 44.4 mtoe, economically viable 90%, financially viable 13%
    Focus: 46% in natural gas
    Incremental investment: $106 billion
    Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 prices: $8 billion


The Russian electricity sector is currently undergoing extensive restructuring. A number of positive
changes have already been made, including: the unbundling and privatization of RAO-UES’ assets,
the establishment of an electricity market, the continued increase of tariffs to move the electric
utilities closer to full cost recovery, and the commitment of the government to pilot a new tariff
methodology. These reforms will all help Russia to improve its energy efficiency.

A few other barriers, however, are not currently on the government’s radar screen. Firstly, the
general bias in the electricity industry, perpetuated by exaggerated demand-growth projections,
to build traditional, new-generation capacity rather than invest in energy efficiency. Secondly, the
lack of coordination with heat supply systems and cumbersome administrative rules for small-scale
CHP lead to a sub-optimal energy supply system. Thirdly, tariff methodologies currently in place
discourage energy and operational efficiency behavior.

First and foremost, the government should complete electricity sector reforms, including tariff
methodologies reform. The government can also introduce other measures, such as providing
greater financial incentives or obligating power companies to implement demand-side management
programs, as well as simplifying the rules for siting small scale CHP plants and connecting those
plants to the grid.                                                                                                       11
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s



                         HEAT SUPPLY SYSTEMS
                                 Potential: -19%, 28.8 mtoe
                                 	           generation: economically viable 90%, financially viable 25%
                                 	           heat distribution: economically viable 99%, financially viable 92%
                                 Focus: 55% stand for heat losses, in generation: 74% industrial boilers
                                 Incremental investment: $18-28 billion
                                 Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 prices: $7 billion


                         The most significant barriers to energy efficiency in the heat supply sector relate to the application
                         of tariff methodologies, the legal structure of municipal utility providers, and a lack of sectoral
                         information and coordination. Solutions require substantial reform of the tariffs system,
                         transformation of municipal heat suppliers into commercial entities, better collection of statistical
                         information, and development of a heat supply plan.

                         GAS FLARING
                                 Potential: 20-38 bcm/year or 4-5% of Russia’s total gas production, financially viable
                                 ~30%;
                                 Incremental investment: n/a
                                 Annual energy cost savings for investors/end-users in 2007 prices: $2.3 billion


                         The main barriers to utilizing associated petroleum gas include limited access to gas transport
                         infrastructure, low prices for dry natural gas, low flaring penalties, and a lack of accurate
                         information on the volume of gas flaring and utilization.

                         The Russian government has taken steps to increase utilization of associated gas, and additional
                         measures are being discussed by the policymakers. However, without an overarching plan that
                         legislates, monitors and enforces gas flaring limits while providing both rewards and penalties for
                         compliance, the Russian government may not reach its target of 95 percent utilization by 2011.

                         CONCLUSION
                         Energy efficiency is rising to the top of the public policy agenda in Russia. Increasing energy costs
                         are making the benefits more compelling – and the consequences of inaction more painful – than
                         ever before.

                         In order to fully realize its energy efficiency potential, Russia needs a robust and comprehensive
                         energy efficiency policy. The Russian government needs to face the challenge and focus on
                         changing attitudes and behaviors of diverse individuals and entities. The starting point is to create
                         and fund an “energy efficiency champion” that is empowered to formulate and implement this
                         agenda. This will enable the government to provide effective leadership to remove both general
                         and sector specific barriers, and create a framework conducive to public and private investment
                         in energy efficiency improvements.

                         Russia has an opportunity to foster the rational use of its energy resources that will improve its
                         economy, industrial competitiveness, and environment, establishing it as an energy superpower in
                         the fullest sense of the word. What is required is a clear vision of the potential, an understanding
                         of how to tap into it, and the political will to ensure that it is done properly.
  12
1. Introduction



E
       nergy efficiency has received very little attention in Russia until recently; now the topic seems
       to have the attention of leadership at the highest levels. Former President and now Prime
       Minister Vladimir Putin has indicated that under Russia’s leadership of the G8, the summit
will prioritize the topic of energy efficiency. Russia appears to be ready to consider the potential
benefits of energy efficiency, and how to achieve those benefits. Shortly after his inauguration,
President Medvedev made several public statements identifying Russia’s inefficient use of energy, and
the associated economic and ecological consequences, as one of most pressing problems facing the
nation. As he acknowledged, “Our country ranks first in the world in terms of heating energy loss.
This is a deplorable record. As for the level of energy efficiency, the majority of our industries are
between 10 and 20 times less efficient than modern industry should be. That is why we set ourselves
the goal of effectively reducing our economy’s energy consumption by almost half.”1

There may be good reasons for energy efficiency’s mixed reception in Russia until recently.
Messages about the importance of energy efficiency are often bundled with other agenda about the
importance of liberalizing energy markets, or contributing to the fight against global warming. This
paper, in contrast, focuses on energy efficiency for Russia’s sake. The paper shows how improving
energy efficiency can benefit Russia, and what Russia can do to ensure that it reaps the most
benefits from improving energy efficiency.

The paper does include recommendations on energy sector liberalization, and pollution reduction,
but only insofar as these measures directly improve Russia’s national welfare. More specifically,
energy sector liberalization is treated as a means to an end. Reducing pollution is treated as one of
the benefits of improving energy efficiency. The analysis is structured as follows:
      n	   Chapter 2 shows why energy efficiency matters to Russia in terms of energy security,
           competitiveness of the economy, fiscal strength, and human health and environment.
      n	   Chapter 3 analyzes the extent to which Russia is energy inefficient relative to its peers.
      n	   Chapter 4 evaluates how much Russia can improve its energy efficiency, how much of that
           potential is financially viable (and therefore presents an opportunity for private individuals
           or firms to invest), and how much of that potential is economically viable (and therefore
           presents an opportunity for government to invest in the interest of the country as a whole).




1	
     President of Russia. Opening Remarks at the Meeting on Improving Environmental and Energy Efficiency in the
     Russian Economy. The Kremlin, Moscow. 3 June 2008.
                                                                                                                   13
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 n	      Chapter 5 analyzes why Russia has not yet realized the energy efficiency potential assessed
                                         in Chapter 4. The chapter identifies what barriers Russia will need to overcome to achieve
                                         its energy efficiency potential, and recommends what the federal, regional and municipal
                                         government can do to help remove these barriers.

                         The study represents 12 months of detailed, sector-by-sector analysis of energy use in Russia, and
                         the policies, regulations, and market structures which determine that energy use. The World Bank
                         Group (World Bank and IFC) worked closely with Russia’s Center for Energy Efficiency (CENEf )
                         to assess the potential for energy efficiency improvements in Russia, and determine possible
                         interventions.

                         Russia’s energy efficiency potential was assessed based on international comparisons of energy
                         intensities of specific industries, and processes and equipment used in those industries.

                         Barriers and solutions were assessed based on in-depth regional studies within Russia. The team
                         looked, in particular, at barriers to energy efficiency within Russia’s regions and municipalities,
                         and innovative solutions being used or planned to remove those barriers. International experience
                         with energy efficiency policy was also reviewed to identify similar barriers in other countries, and
                         identify best practices for removing barriers. In addition, a number of in-depth interviews were
                         conducted with prominent experts in the Russian energy sector.




  14
2. Why Should Russia Care
about Energy Efficiency?



R
           ussia’s energy intensity imposes significant costs to the country in terms of energy security,
           government revenues, economic output, and health and human environment; and therefore
           also presents significant opportunities for savings.

Achieving Russia’s full energy efficiency potential would require a total of $ 320 billion in
investments from private and public organizations and households. This investment would result in
annual costs savings for end users of about $ 80 billion, paying back in just four years. The economy
as a whole would receive substantial additional benefits from sources such as gas exports.

Energy efficiency mitigates risks and costs of Russia’s high energy intensity, and will allow Russia to:
      n	    Ensure energy security. Many experts see a large investment gap in Russia’s oil, gas, and
            electricity sectors. In the face of production capacity limitations and increasing demand,
            reducing energy intensity will be a key factor in ensuring adequate supply. Investing in
            energy efficiency can achieve that reduction and can address rising demand at a third of
            the cost of investing in new energy supply capacity.
      n	    Stimulate stable economic development:
             –	 Maintain competitiveness: As rising tariffs diminish the world’s largest energy
                subsidy ($40 bln in 2005), profits of industrial enterprises will decrease by at least 15
                percent. Energy efficiency will allow companies to maintain competitive
             –	 Increase oil and gas export earnings: Russia’s energy intensity has a cost of
                $84-$112 billion per year in terms of foregone export revenues for the government.2
                This is roughly equivalent to 32-36 percent of the Russian government’s 2008 budget
             –	 Lower budget expenditures: Over $3 billion can be saved annually from federal and
                local budgets by eliminating the inefficient use of energy
      n	    Reduce environmental costs: By ignoring the consequences of localized NOx, SOx and
            particulate emissions caused by its energy intensity, Russia puts at risk the health and
            welfare of its citizens. By ignoring the consequences of its CO2 emissions, Russia misses
            out roughly $10 billion per year in carbon credits, and risks compromising its international
            standing on a commitment to fighting climate change.




2	
     The range depends on which gas export prices are used for the calculation. This study considered gas prices ranging
     from $230-350 per thousand cubic meter.                                                                               15
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         2.1 How does energy intensity affect energy security?
                         There are signs that Russia’s energy industry is already having trouble serving the needs of domestic
                         customers. On its current path, Russia will increasingly face the need to choose between serving
                         Russian electric and gas customers, and gas export customers. The choice thus far has appeared to
                         favor the more lucrative export markets. In the past several years, electric and gas customers have
                         faced supply rationing of electricity and gas during winter months.

                         Russia can overcome its supply constraints by investing in new production capacity, but energy
                         efficiency investments are a much cheaper way of meeting supply needs. Russia can invest in energy
                         efficiency at one-third the cost of building new energy supply capacity. For every kilowatt-hour
                         of electricity, cubic meter of gas, or barrel of oil Russia saves, it delays the need to invest in new
                         supply capacity. Russia would need to invest at least $1 trillion to supply as much energy as it
                         could save by investing in energy efficiency.3 In order to reach its full potential for energy savings,
                         Russia will need to invest only about $320 billion. More generally, the capital investments required
                         to save 1 toe of primary energy in Russia are, on average, six-to-nine times lower than the capital
                         investments required to build new supply capacity. Chapter 4 describes in more detail the energy
                         efficiency investments Russia could make instead of investing in new production capacity.

                         The following subsections look in more detail at Russia’s energy security challenges in the natural
                         gas, electricity and oil sectors, which together supply most of Russia’s energy needs.

                         2.1.1 Natural Gas
                         Some experts, including the International Energy Agency (IEA), have forecasted that Russian gas
                         supply could, without significant additional upstream investment, fall short of projected domestic
                         and export demand within the next few years. Russia may increasingly face the uncomfortable
                         choice of using its gas to either serve domestic or export markets.

                         Russia’s gas production has increased since the Russian financial crisis but is currently only slightly
                         higher than it was in 1990. In contrast, domestic gas consumption grew on average 1.7 percent per
                         year between 1999 and 2006 and is currently growing at 2.5 percent, despite a quadrupling in the
                         domestic tariff for natural gas.4 European natural gas import demand, meanwhile, is expected to
                         continue to climb rapidly, from roughly 500 bcm to 800 bcm by 2030.5 As domestic supply falls,
                         Europe will need to import a much larger percentage of the natural gas it uses. The EU countries
                         currently import roughly 50 percent of their natural gas needs, but by 2030 are expected to import
                         84 percent of those needs.6 Russia currently supplies roughly 25 percent of Europe’s natural gas
                         needs. The inability to guarantee sufficient supplies was demonstrated in mid-February 2006 when
                         Russia unexpectedly cut gas deliveries to Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Italy, Romania,
                         and Poland, due to lack of available gas.7 To the extent that Russia’s supply constraints continue to
                         leave it unable to meet these growing supply needs, Europe will increasingly look elsewhere to serve
                         its gas supply needs reliably.


                         3	
                               $1 trillion in investment needs are projected for the 2005-2020 period, as estimated by CENEf for the World Bank.
                               The number is based on international comparisons of costs. In Russia the cost is usually significantly higher.
                         4	
                               IEA Energy Balance Data Set.
                         5	    IEA.
                         6	
                               European Commission, Directorate-General for Energy and Transport, European Energy and Transport: Trends
                               to 2030 – Update 2005, 2006, at http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/energy_transport/figures/trends_2030_update_2005/
                               energy_transport_trends_2030_update_2005_en.pdf
                         7	    Fredholm, Michael. “Natural Gas: An Expensive Trickle.” TOL Special Report: Energy. Prague: Transitions Online,
  16                           2008: 19-21.
                                                                                                               2 . Why S h o u l d R u s s i a Ca re a b o u t En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




A number of experts have questioned whether Gazprom has been investing enough in new
exploration, production and transport infrastructure to meet combined domestic and export
demand. The Russian Energy Strategy has ambitious targets in relation to investments in the
hydrocarbon sector. In the period 2000 to 2005, investments have increased, on average, 7.5
percent annually. In 2005 and 2006, the amounts directed to investment in gas production
amounted to $3.5 billion and $4.8 billion. This level of investment proved sufficient to maintain
existing production levels but was not sufficient to allow for major new field developments. It has
been estimated that Russia will need to invest, on average, $11 billion per year over the next two
decades to bring on new sources of supply and to upgrade and maintain gas infrastructure.8

As Figure 1 shows, the International Energy Agency (IEA) has estimated a shortfall of roughly 35
bcm by 2010 if no new upstream investments are made. According to Russia’s own projections,
published by the Energy Tribune in December 2006, gas shortfalls as large as 100 bcm are expected
by 2010.9 Gazprom’s $20 billion investment program for 2007 included only $4 billion for
investment in the Yamal, Shtokman, Prirazlomnoye, South Russkoye and Yamburg fields. More
than half of the investment program was directed toward acquisitions of other companies and
development of gas transport infrastructure.10 If current trends continue, Russia will increasingly
face the difficult decision of whether to serve export customers or domestic demand.

Figure 1: Gas demand exceeds supply of Russia’s domestic and export markets


         800

         700
                                                                                                                                     Unmet demand
         600

         500
BCM




                                                                                                                                            Total demand
         400                                                                                                                                plus export*
                                                                                                                                            Russian & Central
         300                                                                                                                                Asian production
                                                                                                                                            Russian production**
         200                                                                                                                                Russian domestic
                                                                                                                                            demand
         100
                                                                                                                                    * Assumes export demand remains
                                                                                                                                    constant
            0
                                                                                                                                    ** Assumes no new upstream
                2005

                       2006

                              2007

                                     2008

                                            2009

                                                   2010

                                                          2011

                                                                 2012

                                                                        2013

                                                                               2014

                                                                                      2015

                                                                                             2016

                                                                                                    2017

                                                                                                           2018

                                                                                                                    2019

                                                                                                                           2020




                                                                                                                                    investment by Gazprom



Source: IEA (2005) forecast up to 2010. Forecast after 2010 has been extrapolated from series for 2005-2010.




8	
    IEA. Reform and Climate Policy. Optimizing Russian Natural Gas. Paris: IEA, 2006: 15-16.
9	  Economides, Michael J. et. al. “Gazprom: The State Within the State.” TOL Special Report: Energy. Prague: Transitions
    Online, 2008: 22-24.
10	 Based on Gazprom press release of January 16, 2007.
                                                                                                                                                                                       17
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         As Figure 2 shows, most of Russia’s mature gas fields are in decline and new investment in upstream
                         gas production has stalled. Production at Russia’s three super-giant fields – Urengoy, Yamburg and
                         Medvezhye – will decline 30 percent by 2020 (these fields together account for more than 60
                         percent of production). Production at Zapolyarnoye, Russia’s fourth super giant field, has already
                         peaked at 100 bcm per year.11 Currently, Russia is able to import cheap gas from Central Asia in
                         order to shore up any shortages in its supply, but this will become an increasingly costly alternative
                         as both Europe and China have already begun to look to Central Asia to meet their energy needs.
                         In addition, Central Asia has and will continue to significantly increase prices for Russia.


                         Figure 2: Russia’s existing gas fields are in decline

                                                    600
                                                                                                                                            Other
                                                                                                                                            Orenburg
                                                                                                                                            Astrakhan
                                                    500
                                                                                                                                            Urengoy (achimov)
                                                                                                                                            Yeti-Purovskoye
                                                                                                                                            South Russkoye
                                                    400
                          Annual Production (bcm)




                                                                                                                                            Vyngayakhinskoye
                                                                                                                                            Pestsovoe
                                                                                                                                            Yubilyeynoe
                                                    300
                                                                                                                                            West Tarkosalinskoye
                                                                                                                                            Komsomolskoye
                                                                                                                                            Zapolyarnoye
                                                    200
                                                                                                                                            Medvezhe
                                                                                                                                            Aneryakhinskoye
                                                                                                                                            Kharvutinskoye
                                                    100
                                                                                                                                            Yamburg
                                                                                                                                            En-Yakhinskoye
                                                                                                                                            Urengoy
                                                      0
                                                      2004                2010                              2015                     2020

                         Source: Jonathan Stern, Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, The future of Russian gas and Gazprom. 2005.




                         Domestic gas customers began to feel the pinch of limited supply during the winter of 2005/2006.
                         Russia’s local gas distributors had to cut five-six bcm of supply to consumers during January-
                         February 2006. These cuts included gas supply cuts to Russian power stations of as much as 80
                         percent of their contractual supply volumes.12




  18                     11                  	 IEA. World Energy Outlook 2006. pp. 122-123.
                         12	                   Figures from RAO UES.
                                                                                                                 2 . Why S h o u l d R u s s i a Ca re a b o u t En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Box 2.1: Gas Flaring

                    Gas flaring – the process of burning-off surplus combustible vapors from a well – has been singled out as one of the greatest inefficiencies
                    in the production of oil and gas in Russia. Estimates vary as to the amount of gas flared in Russia each year. The official estimate of gas
                    flaring in Russia in 2006 was 15 bcm/year, making Russia the second largest contributor to gas flaring behind Nigeria. President Vladimir
                    Putin recently acknowledged that more than 20 bcm/year is being flared and, according to a recent World Bank-sponsored study, Russia
                    flares as much as 38 bcm/year. If the study is correct, Russia flares approximately 5 percent of Russia’s total gas production and 45 percent
                    of its APG production, roughly equal to the volume of gas it sold to Germany in 2006.13
                    Gas flaring has three harmful consequences, including:
                    n	    Loss of significant economic value.
                    n	    Increased GHG emissions. Russia’s flaring creates nearly 100 million tons of CO2 emissions annually if all flared gas is efficiently burned.
                          Russian flares are known to be inefficient which means that all of the gas flared is not burned. This releases methane (CH4), a much
                          more potent greenhouse gas than CO2, into the atmosphere.
                    n	    Release of pollutants dangerous to human health. Burning APG can also release compounds of carbon, sulfur, and nitrogen, which are
                          dangerous pollutants that are harmful to human health.14
                    According to the World Bank-sponsored study, approximately one-third of the APG currently flared could be utilized at current APG prices.
                    Effective utilization of this gas could result in incremental annual revenues of up to $2.3 billion and would eliminate over 30 million tonnes/
                    year of CO2 emissions.

Source: PFC Energy. 2007. “Using Russia’s Associated Gas.” Prepared for the Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership and the World Bank. 2-8.
BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2007.


2.1.2 Electricity
Russia needs to add a minimum of 20,000 MW of new generating capacity over the next two-
four years to meet growing electricity demand. The country will not come anywhere near this goal;
having added only 1,000-2,000 MW per year in recent years.15 Electricity consumption has been
increasing at a rate of roughly 2-4 percent per year, but supply has failed to keep pace, with Russia
importing roughly 200-800 MWh per month from Ukraine as of late 2006. Finland, which has been
importing electricity from Russia for years is now preparing to reverse the electricity flow and become
a net exporter to Russia rather than a net importer. Figure 3 shows that while electricity demand in
neighboring regions will grow moderately over the next 30 years, Russia’s demand will grow rapidly.

Figure 3: Russia’s electricity demand growth is expected to outpace the region

                         2,000


                         1,600

                                                                                                                                                   Russian Fed.
Consumption (TWh)




                         1,200                                                                                                                     Black Sea
                                                                                                                                                   C. Europe
                          800                                                                                                                      SE Europe
                                                                                                                                                   Casp./C.Asia

                          400


                            0
                                    2005             2010              2015             2020             2025             2030

Source: World Bank Energy Flagship Study, 2008 (Draft).


13
   	 BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2007.
14	  Section 2.4 contains more discussion of the harmful environmental and health effects of carbon, sulfur and nitrogen
     compounds.
15	 Obetkon, Robert and Richard Lukas. “Russia’s power sector on the threshold of an $80bn investment program.”                                                                          19
     Russian Construction Review.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         RAO UES has had to ration electricity supply in recent years. In the spring of 2005, a breakdown
                         at the Chagino substation triggered the disconnection of 2,500 MWt of electricity capacity, equal
                         to roughly a quarter of Moscow’s consumption levels. The breakdown affected four million people,
                         including more than 20,000 stuck in the subway, 1,500 residential buildings, and 25 hospitals.
                         The damage to Moscow and the surrounding region of the half day outage is estimated at $90-180
                         million.16 In addition, RAO cut 1.3 GW of electric power to consumers during January-February
                         2006, in nearly all of Russia’s regions17, driven to some extent by residential customers switching to
                         electric heating in response to gas outages. No supply rationing was necessary during the winter of
                         2007/2008, helped, at least in part, by the abnormally warm temperatures.

                         Electricity shortages have also limited RAO UES’s ability to connect new customers. The company
                         approved only 16 percent of new connection requests in Winter 2005/2006, equal to roughly
                         5,000-10,000 MW of new demand.18 36 percent of new connection requests were approved in
                         2006/2007.19 The cost of a new connection is often prohibitively expensive for most residential
                         consumers: in many cases from $1,200 to $1,500/kW and can be as high as $4,000 in some regions.

                         2.1.3 Oil
                         The Russian government has acknowledged that Russian oil production has stagnated and oil
                         exports are largely believed to be nearing a plateau. A top energy executive for Russia’s largest
                         independent oil company believes that Russia’s oil production has already peaked and may never
                         return to its current level.20 Meanwhile domestic demand for petroleum products continues to
                         increase at a robust rate. The IEA has said it expects crude output to decline as early as 2010.21
                         Other sources expect that crude production may already be declining. Figure 4 shows how Russia’s
                         oil output growth declined from 2003 to 2005.

                         Figure 4: Slowing growth in Russian oil output


                                                              Year-on-year growth kb/d (left axis)   Percentage year-on-year growth (right axis)

                            1000                                                                                                                   14
                               900
                                                                                                                                                   12
                               800

                               700                                                                                                                 10

                               600
                                                                                                                                                   8
                               500
                                                                                                                                                   6
                               400
                               300                                                                                                                 4
                               200
                                                                                                                                                   2
                               100

                                 0                                                                                                                 0
                                     Jan-03
                                     Feb-03
                                     Mar-03
                                     Apr-03
                                     May-03
                                     Jun-03
                                      Jul-03
                                     Aug-03
                                     Sep-03
                                     Oct-03
                                     Nov-03
                                                                                 Dec-03
                                                                                 Jan-04
                                                                                 Feb-04
                                                                                 Mar-04
                                                                                 Apr-04
                                                                                 May-04
                                                                                 Jun-04
                                                                                  Jul-04
                                                                                 Aug-04
                                                                                 Sep-04
                                                                                 Oct-04
                                                                                 Nov-04
                                                                                 Dec-04
                                                                                 Jan-05
                                                                                 Feb-05
                                                                                 Mar-05
                                                                                 Apr-05
                                                                                 May-05
                                                                                 Jun-05
                                                                                  Jul-05
                                                                                 Aug-05
                                                                                 Sep-05
                                                                                 Oct-05




                         Source: IEA (2005).


                         16
                            	 ‘Rossiyskaya gazeta”, 21 June 2005, ‘RIA novosti’ 20 June 2005.
                         17	
                              RAO UES.
                         18	 Obekton and Lukas.
                         19	 RAO UES.
  20                     20	 Hoyos, Carola and Javier Blas. “Fears emerge over Russia’s oil output.” Financial Times. 15 April 2008.
                         21	 “Russian oil output to plateau until 2020-EconMin”. Reuters. 24 July 2007.
                                                                                                           2 . Why S h o u l d R u s s i a Ca re a b o u t En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Russia’s economic growth, coupled with energy intensity and a dearth of investment in production
capacity, may threaten Russia’s ability to serve export markets. Indonesia and the UK provide
examples of how economic growth can turn a net oil and gas exporter into a net importer. Both
countries went from being major oil exporters to net importers within seven-eight years.22 There
are expectations that countries like Mexico and Iran could follow the same path. Russia’s case is
arguably different, because it has larger reserves, but accessing these reserves requires investment. In
oil and gas production, as in most sectors, investing in energy efficiency is a less expensive way to
serve incremental demand than investment in upstream production.

2.2 How does energy intensity affect economic competitiveness?
Russia’s energy intensity has direct costs to the industries driving the Russian economy. Profits
will decrease by at least 15 percent for Russian companies and industries that fail to mitigate the
impact of tariff increases by improving their energy efficiency. Russian companies currently share
in one of the world’s largest energy subsidies, equal to roughly $40 billion per year.23 The Russian
government recognizes the need to raise domestic electricity and gas prices to reflect the actual
long run cost of meeting demand, maintaining reliability, and operating and maintaining those
assets. The government has been gradually increasing natural gas and electricity tariffs, and plans to
continue to do so, as shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Rising electricity and gas tariffs


                                                          Electricity (left axis)           Natural Gas (right axis)

                         10                                                                                                                         160
                          9                                                                                                                         140
                         8
                                                                                                                                                    120
                         7
US cents/kWh (nominal)




                         6                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                                                                                             US$/tcm



                         5                                                                                                                          80

                         4                                                                                                                          60
                          3
                                                                                                                                                    40
                         2
                         1                                                                                                                          20

                         0                                                                                                                          0
                              1999   2000   2001   2002   2003       2004           2005   2006     2007*      2008*    2009*    2010*     2011*


Source: FEC, FTS, Minpromenergo, and MEDIT projections for 2007-2010.




22	
    Brown, Jeffery J. and Samuel Foucher. “A quantitative assessment of future net oil exports by the top five net oil
    exporters.” Energy Bulletin. 8 January 2008.
23	 IEA.World Energy Outlook 2006. p. 279. $40 billion is the value of the government energy subsidy to all sectors in                                                             21
    the economy, not just industry.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Growth in energy tariffs will increase costs and reduce the profitability of industrial enterprises.
                         Companies will either accept a decline in profitability – some of them possibly going out of
                         business – or compensate it with an increase in prices for their goods and services. Both options
                         have an adverse effect on their competitive position. Estimates from the Center for Macroeconomic
                         Analysis and Short-term Planning indicate that from 2007-2010 growth in energy costs will
                         translate into a 15 percent (3-7 percent on an annual basis) reduction in profits. For certain
                         industries, profits may decline by more than 25 percent. Estimated annual impact by sector is
                         presented in Figure 6. Negative values demonstrate a reduction of profits in the respective sectors,
                         driven by rising energy tariffs, and the positive values indicate how much enterprises will need to
                         increase prices to compensate for rising energy costs and still maintain their current profitability.

                         Figure 6: Impact of energy (gas and electricity) cost increases on profits
                         (percentage of profit, average per year in 2007-2010)

                                                                                Growth in prices to compensate energy costs increase, %

                                  20
                                             16.2              16.6
                                  15

                                  10
                                                                                  6.3               6.2               5.3
                                   5                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                          1.6         0.9
                                   0
                                                                                                                                                          -1.9        -0.8
                                  -5                                                                -3.2               -3               -3.5
                                                                -6.9              -6.4
                                 -10

                                 -15
                                             -15.1
                                 -20
                                           Communal           Cement         Light industry    Construction Chemicals,               Pulp and          Machine        Food
                                            Services                                            materials petrochemicals              paper            building

                                                                                     Profit reduction due to energy costs increase, %

                         Source: Center for Macroeconomic Analysis and Short-term Planning for ‘Expert’ “Macroeconomic and sectoral impacts of gas price increase.”



                         Enterprises can maintain their competitive position only by increasing labor and energy resource
                         productivity. Industrial equipment modernization projects, witnessed by the World Bank Group,
                         boosted energy efficiency of production and reduced specific energy consumption by 40-70
                         percent. Observed energy efficiency improvements have translated into a 5-7 percent profit
                         increase, even for non-energy intensive industries.

                         Despite these achievements, many enterprises ignore investments that could improve their energy
                         efficiency. At least 20 percent24 of enterprises did not take operating and maintenance cost into
                         account while purchasing new equipment, and another 22 percent preferred less efficient, cheaper
                         options.



                         24	
                               IFC On the Path to Energy Efficiency: Experience and Prospect. Survey of 625 industrial enterprises.

  22
                                                                          2 . Why S h o u l d R u s s i a Ca re a b o u t En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




2.3 How does energy intensity affect Russia’s government budgets?
Russia’s energy intensity has consequences for both federal and regional budgets. High energy
intensity means both federal and state government budgets must devote relatively more to energy
expenditure than their peers in other countries. Moreover, the federal government loses export
revenue for every unit of gas or oil the country uses domestically.

Energy expenditure by state and federal governments
Government expenditure on energy has increased significantly since 2000. Federal budget funding
for energy services increased from $1.14 billion in 2000 to $2.96 billion in 2005 and S$3.81 billion
in 2006, constituting a three-fold increase. Of the $2.96 billion spent in 2005, $1 billion paid for
electricity supply, $727 million paid for heating, $131 million paid for gas consumption, and $178
million paid for consumption of other fuels for boilers.25 Total government budget spending,
including regional and municipal budgets, on energy supply and maintenance amounts to $12.7
billion, equivalent to 1 percent of Russia’s GDP.

Chapter 4 shows the technical potential for energy efficiency in Russia. If this technical potential
were realized in the non-residential sector alone, budgetary expenditures on utility services would
fall by $3-5 billion.26 The majority of this savings would be achieved at the local and regional level,
freeing up funding for other municipal and regional projects.

Foregone export revenue
Russia sacrifices export revenue for every 1000 cubic meters of gas export demand it cannot serve.
The Russian government therefore currently loses income for every 1000 cubic meters of gas wasted
in inefficient electricity production, lost in transmission and distribution, flared at oil wells, or lost
through inefficient use by households. Russia could earn an additional $84-112 billion in export
revenues every year by reaching its technical energy efficiency potential.27 This figure is equal to
roughly 5 percent of Russia’s 2006 GDP. Oil & gas exports together currently contribute to roughly
20 percent of Russian GDP.28 A failure to reduce energy intensity at home costs Gazprom and the
government dearly.

2.4 How does energy intensity affect the environment?
Russia’s energy intensity has consequences for the country’s local environment, as well as the global
environment. By ignoring the consequences of localized NOx, SOx and particulate emissions,
Russia sacrifices the health and welfare of its citizens. By ignoring the consequences of its CO2
emissions, Russia sacrifices direct economic benefit and international standing.




25	
      CENEf for RAO UES. Analytical Note “Risks of Low Energy Efficiency,” prepared under the project “Promotion of
      energy efficiency and energy savings in budget and communal spheres,” 2006.
26	   Utility services are also often referred to as “communal services” in Russia.
27	
      This assumptions behind this calculation are described at the beginning of Chapter 4.
28	   Russian Economic Report, 13. World Bank. 2006.

                                                                                                                                                  23
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Local Environment
                         There is substantial evidence of the harmful health and environmental effects of increased energy
                         use in Russia. Industrial pollution declined with industrial output throughout much of the 1990s,
                         but vehicle use increased. Car exhausts were estimated to account for 87 percent of air pollution
                         in Russia in the mid-1990s. The number of vehicles on Russia’s roads has increased more than
                         80 percent since then.29

                         A handful of pollutants, primarily PM10, SO2 and NOx, linked to fossil fuel combustion are
                         responsible for 90 percent of human health risks from air pollution in Russia. These health risks,
                         which increase rates of premature mortality, include: respiratory illnesses, cardiovascular disease,
                         increased prevalence of chronic bronchitis, and upper and lower respiratory tract infections. 30
                         One study, based on 1993 and 1998 Rosgidromet31 data for 178 Russian cities, estimated that
                         219-233 thousand premature deaths or 15-17 percent of the total number of mortality cases in
                         Russian towns might be due to air pollution. These are aggregated numbers and pollution-related
                         mortality rates in towns with the highest level in air pollution are believed to be much higher.32
                         Another study estimated that for 1999, the mortality rate linked to air pollution was 44 persons
                         per 100,000. Furthermore, an estimated 30 persons per 1,000 were likely to get sick due to air
                         pollution.33

                         Another major challenge for Russia could be the potential increase of the share of coal in the fuel
                         mix, as export markets take priority for oil and natural gas use. RAO-UES’s power generation
                         development plan to 2020 is based on new coal, hydro and nuclear, with little new oil-fired and
                         gas-fired capacity.34 According to one estimate, Russia is currently planning to triple the share of
                         coal in the energy mix so that the amount of coal burnt will grow to between 150 million and
                         290 million tons of coal per year by 2020. A single, traditional 150-megawatt coal-fired power
                         plant produces more than one million tons of greenhouse gas emissions per year; the amount
                         that 300,000 cars would produce.35 Measuring premature mortality in terms of Years of Life Lost
                         (YOLL), a recent study estimated that such a change in the fuel mix would result in the additional
                         loss of 118,000 YOLL Russia wide. The Central and Volga-Viatsky region could even experience
                         additional mortality of more than 30 percent.36 New coal generation is potentially a good option
                         for Russia to increase its generation capacity, but care will need to be taken to identify the best
                         clean-coal technologies to use in these new plants.




                         29
                           	 Rosstat. 2006. Main Indicators of Transport Performance in Russia. Ministry of Transport.
                         30	 Avaliany, S., D. Dudek, A. Golub and E. Strukova. “Ancillary Benefits of Climate Change Mitigation in Russia.” 2004.
                             Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change; http://www.springerlink.com/content/b2226485v488014t/
                         31	 Russia’s Federal Service on Hydrometeorology and Environment Monitoring (Rosgidromet).
                         32	 Reshetin, V.P and V.I. Kazazyan. 2004. “Public-health impact of outdoor air pollution in Russia.” Environmental
                             Modeling and Assessment 9: 43-50.
                         33	 Bobylev S, et al. 2003. “Macroeconomic assessment of environment-related human health costs for Russia.” Moscow.
                             Working paper; citing in: Golub, A. et al. Economic Growth, Fuel Mix and Air Quality in Russia. Environmental
                             Defense, Washington DC. http://www.edf.org/documents/2878_fuel-mix_05_view.pdf
                         34	 RAO-UES. General Scheme for Deployment of the Power Sector Entities until 2020. Moscow. April 2007.
                         35	 “Russia’s Carbon Emissions: A Truly Burning Issue.” Moscow News No. 22 2008. 6 June 2008.
                         36	 Avaliany, S., D. Dudek, A. Golub and E. Strukova. 2004.Ancillary Benefits of Climate Change Mitigation in Russia.
                             Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change; http://www.springerlink.com/content/b2226485v488014t/
  24
                                                                                             2 . Why S h o u l d R u s s i a Ca re a b o u t En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Global Environment
Russia has the potential to reduce its CO2 emissions 793 million tons per year (about 50 percent
of its 2005 emissions) by reducing its energy intensity. Reducing CO2 emissions helps slow climate
change, and has direct value to Russia through carbon credits the country can sell. At $13.70/ton,
Russia’s technical potential for energy efficiency reduction is worth roughly $10.2 billion in carbon
credit sales annually.37, 38 Moreover, by ratifying the Kyoto Protocol, Russia has shown a desire,
unlike some of its industrialized peers, to be part of the global community’s solution to climate
change. Box 2.2 discusses how Russia’s position vis-à-vis Kyoto targets will likely adjust during the
2008-2012 period.
Box 2.2: Will Russia be a net carbon buyer or seller after 2012?

      On November 5, 2004, Russia ratified the Kyoto Protocol, and the Protocol came into force in February 2005. Russia is listed in Annex B
      of the Protocol and, as such, is subject to a constraint on its GHG emissions for the period 2008-2012. The target for Russia is that the
      country’s combined emissions of Kyoto gases should not exceed five times their combined 1990 levels during the period 2008-2012. This
      target is generally expressed in annual terms: on average, Russia’s annual emissions of the six Kyoto gases should not exceed their 1990
      level – 3,048 MtCO2e – over the period 2008-2012. Since 1999, Russia’s economy has grown at a pace of more than 6 percent per year,
      calling into question whether Russia will stay within the borders set by the Kyoto Protocol for the period beyond 2012.
      Based on forecasts by international experts and by the Russian Ministry of Economic Development (MED), there is almost no chance that
      Russia’s emissions will exceed the limits set by the Kyoto Protocol. The table below – based on figures from the MED – shows that even in
      the most pessimistic scenario (dark column) the emissions would only in the year 2020 increase beyond the limits set for 2012.

           120%

           100%
                                                                                                                    “Innovative” scenario
            80%
                                                                                                                    Base scenario
            60%                                                                                                     “Energy intensive“
                                                                                                                    scenario
            40%

            20%

             0%
                         1990              2005             2010             2020             2030



Russia will, and perhaps has already seen, the impact of climate change. Opinions and evidence on
the impact of climate change for Russia vary. Many believe, and some studies support the idea that
climate change will benefit Russia because warmer temperatures will mean increased productivity
of land, and access to the northern regions that are currently covered with ice. On the other
hand, climate change in Russia may also bring with it new diseases, infestations, harmful climatic
anomalies, and decreases in agricultural productivity which offset the advantages of access to more
arable land.39 A recent World Bank study found that by 2020, productivity levels will decrease in
9 out of 13 regions in Russia as a result of climate change. Table 2.1 describes some of the effects
experts believe climate change has already had, or may eventually have, in Russia.




37	
    €10/ton was used as the price of carbon for the purpose of this analysis. At the time this analysis was conducted
    (autumn 2007), €10/ton was equivalent to $ 13.70/ton. By the time this study was ready for release (Summer 2008),
    the US dollar price of carbon was been considerably higher because of the US dollar’s depreciation.
38	 This excludes the potential benefit of reducing gas flaring. However, if Russia starts to aggressively sell carbon credits,
    the price could go down considerably and have an adverse effect on CDM prices for developing countries.
39	 Kokorin, Alexey. Report No. 2: Expected Impact of the Changing Climate on Russia and Central Asia Countries.
    World Bank. Moscow: 2008.
                                                                                                                                                                     25
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                          Table 2.1: Climate Change Effects and Impact in Russia

                           Climate change             Potential impact in Russia             Examples of demonstrated and expected effects
                           effect
                           POSITIVE EFFECTS
                           Higher           Warmer winters.                                  Agricultural vegetation period could increase to be 5-10 days longer than it is currently.
                           temperatures                                                      Suitable land and production potentials for cereals could marginally increase in Russia.
                                                                                             A decrease in the number of frost days and a rise in the average winter temperature will
                                                                                             smooth out winter consumption of electricity and reduce heating demand.
                           Loss of sea ice            Increased commercial                   Vilkitsky Strait bottleneck will likely open for shipping for 120 days per year instead of
                                                      shipping.                              the current 20-30 days.
                           Permafrost                 Decreased flooding in some             Melting may improve drainage conditions and lead to a decrease in the groundwater
                           melting                    areas.                                 content in some areas.
                           NEGATIVE EFFECTS
                           Higher                     Thawing roads decrease                 Winter roads cannot be improved for use in non-frost periods due to their location in
                           temperature                winter road use accessibility          marshes and wetlands. The warm winter of 2006/2007 caused problems in several
                                                      for forest logging, oil, gas and       Russian European regions, in particular in Kostroma Oblast, where large logs were left to
                                                      mining transportation.                 decay in forests. Decreased access to roads will increase maintenance costs and make the
                                                                                             region less attractive to developers.
                                                      Evaporation causes increased           Frequent fires are a serious problem, especially in Eastern Siberia and Far East. In the next
                                                      risk of forest fires.                  10 years, increased evaporation will prolong the period of a high risk of fire by 5 days.
                           Permafrost                 Damage to building                     Permafrost melting is relevant to 60 percent of Russian territory and will have serious
                           melting                    infrastructure.                        implications for building infrastructure. In 2006 in Yakutsk, many cars suddenly slid into
                                                                                             a huge hole of unfrosted mud. In the last 30 years in Yakutsk permafrost melting caused
                                                                                             damage to more than 300 buildings, a power station, and a runway at Yakutsk Airport.
                                                      Increased risk to oil and gas          Many oil and gas pipelines are located in areas subject to freeze-thaw permafrost
                                                      pipelines.                             processes, increasing the potential for accidents and spills.
                           Increase in                Expansion of infectious and            There are 50 times more ixodidae ticks and the illness rate is 40 times larger than it was
                           duration of hot            tropical (southern) diseases.          45 years ago. The summer of 2007 broke the record for the rate of tick-born encephalitis
                           weather period,                                                   infections in Russia.
                           including heat-            Direct negative influence on           In Moscow, as a result of a heat wave, the mortality rate for July 2001 was 93 percent
                           waves                      human health.                          higher than average.
                                                      Impact on agriculture. Losses          Total losses of cereals productivity in Russia as a whole could be about 11 percent by 2015
                                                      in grassland vegetation.               and up to 20 percent and more by the middle of the 21st century, if adaptation measures
                                                      Risk of pests and disease              to resist dryness are not undertaken in the main agriculture regions of the country
                                                      outbreaks.
                           Changes in                 Impact on agriculture.                 Total losses of cereals productivity in Russia as a whole could be about 11 percent by 2015
                           precipitation:             Decrease in yield in middle            and up to 20 percent and more by the middle of the 21st century, if adaptation measures
                           Drought                    and long-term perspective.             to resist dryness are not undertaken in the main agriculture regions of the country
                           Changes in                 Damage to settlements,                 Localized floods have increased in downstream towns due to faster snow and ice melting.
                           precipitation:             roads, and infrastructure.             In 2001 in the upper Lena River, fast snow melting, ice crushing, and the forming of an
                           Floods                                                            ice dam below the city lead to a 20 m growth in the water level. Fifty-nine settlements
                                                                                             and 8,500 houses were damaged and 39,000 people were injured very seriously. In the
                                                                                             city, 80 percent of houses were lost.
                           Loss of sea ice            Disrupt commercial ship                Glacier decomposition will cause drifts of huge ice fields over hundreds of kilometers,
                                                      transportation.                        crucially increasing the risk for shipping and oil or gas platforms.
                                                      Wildlife disrupted (e.g. Polar         Absence of ice will undermine the food supply chains and lifestyles of polar bears,
                                                      Bear and Walrus dependent              walruses and other marine animals.
                                                      on sea ice)
                          Sources: The World Bank. 2008. Europe and Central Asia Region: How Resilient is the Energy Sector to Climate Change? and Kokorin, Alexey. 2008.
                          Report No. 2 Expected Impact of the Changing Climate on Russia and Central Asia Countries.


                         In addition to the direct effects of climate change in Russia, global warming in other parts of the
                         world could have significant negative political repercussions for Russia. Such repercussions could
                         include increased immigration, increased risk of conflict, and less access to resources and raw
                         materials (for example, in parts of Africa where Russia’s energy industry is now expanding).
  26
3. Is Russia Energy Inefficient?



R
        ussia is the world’s third largest energy consuming country, yet consumes more energy
        per unit of GDP than any of the world’s 10 largest energy consuming countries. In 2005,
        Russia’s energy consumption ranked it 12th out of 121 countries in terms of kilograms of oil
equivalent (kgoe) per US dollar of the country’s GDP. Russia’s energy intensity has decreased since
1990, but much less so than most former Soviet Republics. Instead, high energy intensity remains
endemic to every sector of the economy.

With the world’s largest land mass, centers of population in some of the coldest areas on earth,
the world’s 10th largest economy, and a predominance of heavy industry, it is understandable that
Russia will be at the higher end of any international ranking of energy intensity. Collectively,
however, these factors fail to explain all of Russia’s energy intensity. Russia remains more energy
intensive than international comparisons would suggest for countries with its level of income, land
mass, temperatures, and industry structures.

3.1 Is Russia less energy efficient than other countries?
Russia is one of the world’s most intensive users of energy by any aggregate measure. In 2005,
measured in terms of economic output, Russia’s energy consumption was equal to 0.42 kilograms
of oil equivalent (kgoe) per U.S. dollar of the country’s GDP, ranking it 12th out of 121 countries
by that measure. Figure 7 shows how Russia compares to other countries in terms of energy
consumption per U.S. dollar of GDP.
Figure 7: Global Comparison of Energy Intensity per GDP (PPP)

                         1.0
                         0.9
                         0.8
                         0.7
kgoe per US$ GDP (PPP)




                         0.6
                         0.5
                                                                                                                                        Russia
                         0.4
                         0.3
                         0.2
                         0.1
                          0
                                   Bangladesh
                                   Switzerland
                                    Philippines
                                       Denmark
                                              Italy
                                      Argentina
                               United Kingdom
                                           Greece
                                        Portugal
                                          Austria
                                            Spain
                                            Brazil
                                            Japan
                                       Germany
                                           France
                                             India
                                   Netherlands
                                            Latvia
                                        Hungary
                                             Chile
                                          Mexico
                                  New Zealand
                                        Slovenia
                                        Belgium
                                         Norway
                                        Armenia
                                          Poland
                                      Lithuania
                                         Sweden
                                        Australia
                                 United States
                                            China
                                        Romania
                                            Korea
                                         Finland
                                      Indonesia
                                Czech Republic
                               Slovak Republic
                                     Singapore
                                          Estonia
                                   South Africa
                                         Canada
                                        Bulgaria
                                    Kyrgyzstan
                                               Iran
                                     Azerbaijan
                                          Iceland
                                     Venezuela
                                         Belarus
                                  Saudi Arabia
                                       Tajikistan
                                        Moldova
                                           Russia
                                          Kuwait
                                    Kazakhstan
                                         Ukraine
                                      Mongolia
                                         Bahrain
                                          Nigeria
                                    Uzbekistan




Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank   27
Development Indicators Database.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Of the world’s 10 largest energy consuming countries, none consumes more energy per unit of
                         GDP than Russia. Table 3.1 shows how Russia compares to these other large consumers.

                         Table 3.1: Energy Intensity of Top 10 Energy Consuming Countries in 2005

                           Country                                     Total energy consumption                      Energy Intensity          Ranking
                                                                       (million toe)40                               kgoe per GDP              in terms of kgoe per GDP (PPP)*
                           United States                                               2,340.29                               0.19                                   58
                           People's Republic of China                                  1,717.15                               0.20                                   55
                           Russia                                                       646.68                                0.42                                   12
                           India                                                        537.31                                0.14                                   87
                           Japan                                                        530.46                                0.14                                   92
                           Germany                                                      344.75                                0.14                                   90
                           France                                                       275.97                                0.14                                   88
                           Canada                                                       271.95                                0.25                                   33
                           United Kingdom                                               233.93                                0.12                                  101
                           Korea                                                        213.77                                0.20                                   53
                                                                                                                                                                          * Out of 121 countries

                         Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank
                         Development Indicators Database.


                         Russia’s energy intensity has decreased over the past 15 years, but much less than most former
                         Soviet Republics.41 Russia’s energy intensity has decreased by roughly 3.4 percent annually. Only
                         Ukraine and Tajikistan have seen slower reductions in energy intensity, at annual rates of 2.7 and
                         1.8 percent, respectively.42 Meanwhile, the Baltic states, Belarus, Bulgaria, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
                         have all reduced energy intensity in the range of 5-8 percent per year. Of the former Soviet
                         Republics, Russia has gone from being roughly middle-of-the pack in terms of energy intensity,
                         to one of the most energy intensive. Figure 8 shows the energy intensities for other former Soviet
                         Republics during 1990-2005.




                         40
                               	 We distinguish “total energy consumption” from “end-use energy consumption”. “Total energy consumption”
                                 in this table, and throughout this paper includes both end-use energy consumption – referred to as “Total Final
                                 Consumption” in the IEA’s accounting of energy balances – as well as energy consumed in the transformation of one
                                 form of energy to another (for example, natural gas used in electricity production).
                         41	     A decline in energy intensity can of course be driven by a decrease in energy consumption relative to GDP, or an
                                 increase in GDP relative to energy consumption. Energy consumption decreased in only 28 of 138 countries between
                                 1990 and 2005. Fourteen of the 15 former Soviet Republics fall within this group, as do former COMECON
                                 members Albania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania and the Slovak Republic.
                                 Energy consumption has grown slightly in only one of the 15 Republics, Uzbekistan. Another former COMECON
                                 member, Cuba, also saw energy consumption decrease, as did three states of the former Yugoslavia (an associate
                                 COMECOM member). Energy consumption has also decreased in Germany and North Korea.
                         42	
                                 Sufficient data were not available to calculate the growth rate for Turkmenistan. Ukraine, and Tajikistan, unlike
                                 Russia, have both seen negative GDP (PPP) growth rates, meaning the effect of decreased energy consumption
                                 dominates the decrease in energy intensity.

  28
                                                                                                                                             3 . I s R u s s i a En e rg y I n e f f i c i e nt ?




Figure 8: Russia has become one of the more energy intensive countries of the former Soviet
Union


                                      1.4
                                                                                                                                          Kazakhstan
                                                                                                                                          Azerbaijan
                                      1.2
                                                                                                                                          Belarus
                                                                                                                                          Armenia
                                      1.0
                                                                                                                                          Estonia
kgoe/US$ GDP (PPP)




                                                                                                                                          Kyrgyzstan
                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                          Moldova
                                                                                                                                          Russia
                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                          Ukraine
                                                                                                                                          Georgia
                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                          Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                          Tajikistan
                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                          Lithuania
                                                                                                                                          Latvia
                                          0
                                          1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank
Development Indicators Database.



Energy intensity is endemic to every sector of Russia’s economy. Russia ranks among the top 25
energy intensive countries in seven major areas of economic activity: agriculture, hunting and
forestry; construction, manufacturing; transport, storage and communications; wholesale, retail
trade, restaurants and hotels; and other activities. Only Uzbekistan shares this distinction. Figure 9
shows how Russia compares to other countries in energy intensity of manufacturing. Appendix A
shows how Russia compares to other countries in six other sectors.

Figure 9: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities of Manufacturing

                                    2.5


                                    2.0
kgOE/ US$ Gross Value Added (PPP)




                                    1.5


                                    1.0


                                                                                                                                Russia
                                    0.5


                                     0
                                              Islamic Republic of Iran
                                                          Bangladesh
                                                          Switzerland
                                                           Philippines
                                                               Hungary
                                                              Germany
                                                             Argentina
                                                                   Japan
                                                             Lithuania
                                                      United Kingdom
                                            People’s Republic of China
                                                              Denmark
                                                                 Austria
                                                                   Korea
                                                                     Italy
                                                             Indonesia
                                                                  France
                                                                  Greece
                                                               Slovenia
                                                       Czech Republic
                                                                 Poland
                                                               Vietnam
                                                               Portugal
                                                        United States
                                                                    India
                                                                   Spain
                                                                 Estonia
                                                                 Mexico
                                                            Singapore
                                                      Slovak Republic
                                                          Netherlands
                                                                Albania
                                                               Belgium
                                                         New Zealand
                                                          South Africa
                                                                   Brazil
                                                                   Latvia
                                                                Sweden
                                                               Romania
                                                                Belarus
                                                                 Canada
                                                                  Sudan
                                                              Tajikistan
                                                               Australia
                                                                Norway
                                                               Bulgaria
                                                                Finland
                                                               Armenia
                                                  Republic of Moldova
                                                            Azerbaijan
                                                                    Chile
                                                                  Russia
                                                         Saudi Arabia
                                                                Ukraine
                                                           Kyrgyzstan
                                                                 Iceland
                                                            Venezuela
                                                           Kazakhstan
                                                           Uzbekistan
                                                                Ecuador
                                                                 Nigeria
                                                             Mongolia




Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set.
PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.



                                                                                                                                                                                           29
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         3.2 How much less efficient is Russia than its closest peers?
                         Levels of income, geographical size, temperature, and industry structure together describe some
                         of Russia’s appetite for energy, but not all of it. Temperature, land mass, and industry structure,
                         in particular, are often cited as explanations of Russia’s relatively higher energy intensity. These
                         explanations clearly have merit, because Russia is unique in having the world’s second coldest
                         average temperatures, the world’s largest land mass, and the most highly industrialized economy
                         in the former Soviet Union. However, these factors collectively do not explain the full extent of
                         Russia’s energy intensity.

                         In general, the larger a country’s GDP, the greater its surface area, the lower its average temperature,
                         and the larger portion of economic output produced by industry, the higher will be a country’s
                         energy consumption. These factors together explain most of the differences between countries’
                         levels of energy consumption. However, they appear to explain only around three-quarters of
                         energy consumption in Russia. In other words, Russia’s energy consumption is roughly 25 percent
                         higher than a comparison with other countries would predict.43 Reducing energy consumption
                         by 20 percent will therefore put Russia on par with the international average for energy intensity.
                         Chapter 4 shows how Russia can achieve and surpass this potential and how much Russia will save
                         by becoming a leader in energy efficiency.

                         Figure 10 shows a stylized estimate of the extent to which various factors determine the differences
                         in energy consumption between countries, and the extent to which these factors explain energy
                         consumption in Russia. As the figure shows, at least some of Russia’s energy consumption is due to
                         factors other than income, size, temperature, and industry structure. As the analysis in Chapters 4
                         and 5 suggest, there are other factors – many within the immediate control of Russia’s policymakers
                         and investors – which may be driving Russia’s energy intensity.

                         Figure 10: Weight of various factors in determining Russia’s energy intensity
                                               ~ 20 mtoe ~125 mtoe




                                                                                                                                                                        Not explained by
                                                                                                                                                Other                   comparison to
                                                                                                                                               factors                  other countries

                                                                                                                           Industry
                                                                           Geographic Size        Temperature              Structure
                          Energy consumption




                                                                                                                                                                         Explained by
                                               ~ 500 mtoe




                                                                                                                                                                         comparison to
                                                                     GDP                                                                                                 other countries




                                                                                                                                                                         * Not drawn to scale
                                                                                    Factors explaining Russia’s energy consumption
                         Source: Based on a series of econometric analyses undertaken by the study team, and subjective expert assessments. The following data sets were used: Energy consumption data
                         from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set; GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database; Temperature
                         data from data set TYN CY 1.1, Mitchell, T.D., Carter, T.R., Jones, P.D., Hulme,M., New, M., 2003: “A comprehensive set of high-resolution grids of monthly climate for Europe and
                         the globe: the observed record (1901-2000) and 16 scenarios (2001-2100)”. Journal of Climate: submitted; Gross Value Added data (by sector) from UNDP National Accounts
                         data set. PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.


  30                     43
                                          	 Based on a series of econometric analyses undertaken by the study team. Data sets used are cited below in Figure 10.
                                                                                                                                              3 . I s R u s s i a En e rg y I n e f f i c i e nt ?




Russia’s economic output, surface area, temperatures, and industry structure together predict a
level of energy consumption closer to Japan’s or India’s. At such levels of energy consumption
(holding GDP constant) Russia’s energy intensity would be 0.34 kgoe/GDP instead of 0.41 kgoe/
GDP; closest to the energy intensity of Iceland and Saudi Arabia, rather than (as currently) the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique, or Kazakhstan.

The following subsections look briefly at how Russia compares in terms of energy intensity to other
countries that share some of the economic and physical characteristics mentioned above.

3.2.1 Income
A simple analysis of the correlation between energy consumption and the factors listed above
suggests that a good determinant of energy intensity in any country is GDP.44 As Figure 11 shows,
a high correlation exists between countries’ total energy consumption and their PPP-weighted
GDP. As Figure 11 also shows, however, Russia is a clear outlier in this correlation. Russia is the
world’s tenth largest economy, but its third largest energy consumer. Russia’s energy consumption is
more than three times that of its closest peers in terms of GDP, Spain and Brazil.

Figure 11: Correlation of Energy Consumption to GDP (PPP), 2005

              2,500
                                                                                                                     y = 0.1833x
                                                                                                                     R2 = 0.9658

              2,000



              1,500
Million toe




              1,000
                                  Russia
               500



                 0
                      0             2,000               4,000               6,000               8,000              10,000              12,000              14,000

                                                                             Billion USD GDP (PPP)
Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank Development
Indicators Database.


Russia also appears to be far more energy intensive than countries with similar GDP per capita.
Russia’s per capita income in 2005 (roughly $10,000 per year in PPP terms) was closest to Mexico’s
but had twice the level of energy consumption per capita. Russia is also more than twice as energy
intensive as the next most energy-intensive BRIC country, China, in terms of energy consumed per
unit of GDP, and nearly four times as energy intensive as China in terms of energy consumption
per capita.45

44	
    This study chose to analyze the correlation between GDP and energy consumption, rather than between GDP and
    energy intensity. Energy intensity, when measured on a per capita basis, shows a high correlation to GDP per capita,
    but the correlation is likely overstated because GDP per capita shares a common numerator and denominator with
    both measures of energy intensity, namely, GDP per capita and kgOE per USD GDP.
45	 A 2001 Goldman Sachs report coined the acronym BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, China). The BRIC countries are
    large developing countries, in terms of population and land mass, which Goldman Sachs speculated would become                                                                           31
    major economic forces during the early decades of the 21st century. (Goldman Sachs, Global Economics Paper
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 12: Energy Intensities of BRIC Countries and Countries with Similar GDP per Capita


                                                                                                                                  kgoe per GDP (left axis)                                            PPP GDP per cap (right axis)

                                      0.45                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18000

                                              0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16000

                                      0.35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14000

                                              0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12000

                                      0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10000
                                              0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8000

                                      0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6000
                                              0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4000

                                      0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2000

                                               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                     Costa Rica

                                                                  Botswana

                                                                                Tunisia

                                                                                              Argentina

                                                                                                             Brazil

                                                                                                                        India

                                                                                                                                  Latvia

                                                                                                                                                   Chile

                                                                                                                                                                  Croatia

                                                                                                                                                                            Mexico

                                                                                                                                                                                       Lithuania

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thailand

                                                                                                                                                                                                              China

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Romania

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malaysia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Estonia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Africa

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bulgaria

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Iran

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belarus

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Russia
                         Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP, PPP conversion factor, and population data from the World Bank
                         Development Indicators Database.



                         3.2.2 Surface Area
                         Russia’s geographic size also appears to explain a portion of the country’s energy intensity. Figure
                         13 shows the correlation between select countries’ surface areas and their energy intensities.

                         Figure 13: Energy Intensities of Countries with large surface area


                                                     0.5                                                                                                                                                                              18,000,000
                                                    0.45                                                                                                                                                                              16,000,000
                                                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                              14,000,000
                                                    0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12,000,000
                             kgoe GDP (PPP)




                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sq. km




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10,000,000
                                                    0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8,000,000
                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6,000,000
                                                    0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Energy intensity
                                                     0.1                                                                                                                                                                              4,000,000                                                (left axis)

                                                    0.05                                                                                                                                                                              2,000,000                                                Surface area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (right axis)
                                                          0                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                    Argentina

                                                                                     Brazil

                                                                                                          India

                                                                                                                      Australia

                                                                                                                                   United States
                                                                                                                                                   People’s Republic
                                                                                                                                                            of China

                                                                                                                                                                        Sudan

                                                                                                                                                                                     Canada

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia

                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kazakhstan




                         Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP, PPP conversion factor, and surface area data from the World
                         Bank Development Indicators Database.




                         	                     No. 66. Building Better Global Economic BRICs, 2001). The lower energy intensities in the other BRIC countries
                                               may be due, at least in part, to the fact that these countries have lower proportions of their populations connected to
  32                                           electric and gas networks than Russia.
                                                                                                                                                               3 . I s R u s s i a En e rg y I n e f f i c i e nt ?




3.2.3 Temperatures
Temperatures appear to explain some, but relatively less, of Russia’s energy intensity than might be
expected. Russia is, on average, one of the world’s coldest countries, and much of its population
lives in areas far colder than the populations of countries at similar latitudes.46 Colder climates
undoubtedly require more energy for heating and arguably also require more energy to produce the
goods and services necessary to withstand cold temperatures. Figure 14 shows the energy intensities
of the 10 countries with average temperatures closest to Russia’s. As one of the coldest, Russia is also
one of the most energy intensive, but the relationship between temperature and energy intensity is
not clear for all countries. Notably, Canada, which has colder average temperatures than Russia, has
much lower energy intensity.

Figure 14: Energy Intensities of Countries with Similar Average Temperatures


                6                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                             0.45
                4
                                                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                             0.35
                2
                                                                                                                  Mongolia
                                                            Canada




                                                                                                                             0.3             Annual Average Temperature
                                                                                                         Russia




                                                                                                                                             (left axis)*
                0                                                                                                            0.25            kgoe per GDP
                      Norway

                               Sweden

                                        Finland




                                                                     Kyrgyzstan

                                                                                  Iceland

                                                                                            Tajikistan
                                                  Estonia




                                                                                                                                             (right axis)
                                                                                                                             0.2
               -2                                                                                                                   * Based on average annual temperature for 1961-1990
                                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                                             0.1
               -4
                                                                                                                             0.5
               -6                                                                                                            0

Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank Development
Indicators Database. Temperature data from data set TYN CY 1.1, Mitchell, T.D., Carter, T.R., Jones, P.D., Hulme,M., New, M., 2003: “A comprehensive set of high-resolution grids of
monthly climate for Europe and the globe: the observed record (1901-2000) and 16 scenarios (2001-2100)”. Journal of Climate: submitted.



Because Russia is closest to Canada in terms of average annual temperatures, it is worth comparing
the countries in terms of energy intensities, specifically in the residential sector, and specifically
with regard to heating energy use. The figure below shows this comparison.




46	
      Two recent books have attempted to make the case that Russia’s climate differentiates it from the rest of the World:
      The Siberian Curse by Fiona Hill and Clifford Gaddis (2003, The Brookings Institution), and Why Russia is Not
      America, by Andrey P. Parshev (“Pochemu Rossiya ne Amerika: kniga dlya tekh, kto ostayetsya zdes’. Moscow:
      Krymskiy Most-9D, Forum, 2000. Hill and Gaddis remind their readers that isotherms, not latitudes, matter more
      in determining temperature. Temperatures drop in Russia as one moves east of Moscow to Russia’s other large cities.
      They also argue that Russia is more energy intensive than its latitudinal peers because of the way in which population
      is distributed. Populations in Canada and the Scandinavian countries live along their southern borders whereas
      Russia’s population is distributed – as part of a deliberate effort by Soviet central planners – eastward and northward
                                                                                                                                                                                                             33
      toward colder temperatures.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 15: Energy intensity of residential energy consumption and heating in Russia and Canada


                                                  0.0800

                                                  0.0700

                                                  0.0600
                          kgoe/US$ GDP (PPP)




                                                  0.0500
                                                                                                                                                                                   Canada
                                                  0.0400
                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia
                                                  0.0300

                                                  0.0200

                                                  0.0100

                                                  0.0000
                                                                           Residential Space Heating                           Total Residential

                         Source: IEA Energy Balances, CENEf for the World Bank, and Natural Resources Canada.



                         3.2.4 Industry structure
                         Predominance of heavy industry also undoubtedly has some impact on a country’s energy
                         consumption. Much of the value of Russia’s economic activity (roughly one-third) comes from
                         heavy industry, which is generally more energy intensive than other economic activities such
                         as agriculture, or wholesale and retail trade. As Figure 16 shows, however, Russia is more energy
                         intensive than most of its peers with similar industry structures.

                         Figure 16: Energy Intensities in Countries with Similar Economic Structures (2005)


                                               100%                                                                                                          0.8
                                               90%                                                                                                           0.7   Wholesale, retail trade,
                                               80%                                                                                                                 restaurants and hotels
                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                               70%                                                                                                                 Transport, Storage and
                                                                                                                                                                   Communication
                                               60%                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                   Other
                                               50%                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                   Construction
                                               40%                                                                                                           0.3   Agriculture, hunting, forestry,
                                               30%                                                                                                                 fishing
                                                                                                                                                             0.2   Mining, Manufacturing, Utilities
                                               20%
                                                                                                                                                             0.1   kgoe per gdp
                                               10%
                                                  0                                                                                                          0
                                                      Argentina

                                                                  Brazil

                                                                              Chile

                                                                                      Norway

                                                                                               Korea

                                                                                                       Finland

                                                                                                                 Venezuela

                                                                                                                             Russia

                                                                                                                                      Kazakhstan

                                                                                                                                                   Ukraine




                         Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. GDP and PPP conversion factor data from the World Bank
                         Development Indicators Database. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set.




  34
4. By How Much Can Russia
Reduce its Energy Intensity?



R
        ussia can cut its total energy consumption by 45 percent. Such a reduction includes:


        	n   240 bcm of Russia’s largest fuel source, natural gas,
    	    n   340 billion kWh of electricity,
    	    n   89 million tons of coal, and
    	    n   43 million tons of crude oil and crude oil equivalents in the form of refined petroleum 	
             products.

In total, Russia can achieve energy savings equivalent to roughly 300 million tons of oil per year,
or 2.1 tons of oil per inhabitant. This level of savings is equivalent to all energy produced and
imported (net of exports) by countries like France or the United Kingdom, or 2 percent of all
energy produced in the world in 2005.

The largest reductions in end-use energy consumption are achievable in residential energy
consumption (53.4 mtoe), electricity generation (44.4 mtoe), manufacturing (41.5 mtoe), transport
(38.3 mtoe), and heat supply systems (31.2 mtoe). Figure 17 shows Russia’s energy flows, and
how those flows would change if Russia were to achieve its technical potential for improvements
in energy efficiency. The checkered portions of the energy flows indicate the extent to which
consumption of each fuel could be reduced. Appendix B contains the full 2005 integrated fuel and
energy balance used as a baseline for estimates of energy efficiency.




                                                                                                         35
Figure 17: Energy Efficiency Potential in Russia – Changes in energy flow




  36
                                                        Gas Stock
                                                                                    Primary      Primary
                                                                                     Supply      Demand                                                                                                                                                    5.51
                                                                                       176.08 176.08                                                                                                                                                                   Iron & Steel 20.16
                                  337.13
               Natural Gas
                 343.55                                                                                                                                                           18.41                      11.88




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              31
                                                                       167.27                              26.72




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12.
                                   6.22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.22

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.12
                                                                          Coal                                             36.52                                                                                                                           9.47
                                                                          Stock                                                                                                                                                        2.13
                                                                                      47.19      47.19                                                                                                                                                                  Other Industries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3                                22.17
                                  76.63                                                                                                                                             0.65          1.22                                  6.8
                   Coal
                  87.68           11.05
                                               39.23                                                        10.32                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                          Power         81.98                                                                                              3.7
                                                                                                                          Station                                   1.94             0.32                       9.71
                                                                                                                                        11.78                                                                                                             18.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 Renewables                                                                                                                                                                                               5.16
                                 23.45                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transport
                Electricity                                                                                                                                                                                                              31.46                                55.04
                                 Import 0.87
                  62.21                                                               62.21      62.21                                                                                                                                  0.21
                                 Nuclear
                                 39.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          97.01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Domestic 139.92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17.76
                                                                       Product
                                                                        Stock
                                   0.28                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.62

                                                                                                                    1.2

                Petroleum         Crude Oil                                           Oil Refineries     68.25
                                  467.64                                                                                                                              26.15                        1.2            0.4
                  463.4
                                                                                         97.10
                                   2.38
                                                       Crude
                                                       Stock              252.59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.06 0.13                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Non-specified 0.74
                                                                                                                                                                                                Energy Industry Use
                                                               Exports and Marine                                                               Conversion Losses          Non-Energy
                                                                                                                                                                                               and Distribution Losses
                                                                Bunkers 558.13                                                                       11.75                 Use 45.53
                                                                                                                                                                                                        23.16

                                                                                                                                                                    Notes:
                   Natural Gas                                 Coal                      Nuclear                          Electricity                  Crude Oil    1. Other Industry includes all non-steel manufacturing components, construction, agriculture, fishing, and mining
                                                                                                                                                                    2. Crude oil only used until refining, negligible non-energy uses not included
                                                                                                                                                                    3. Domestic use includes municipal activities, services, residential and heat generation
                                                               Coal Imports              Renewables/                                                   Crude Oil
                   Natural Gas Imports                                                                                    Petroleum                                 4. Renewables includes other solid fuels, hydro, solar, geothermal. Aggregated into electricity after power station step
                                                                                         Imports                                                       Imports
                                                                                                                                                                    5. Energy industry use represents any transformation use non crude oil in refining process

Source: CENEf for the World Bank. Energy Flow Diagram developed by the UK’s Department of Trade and Industry (now Department for Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform)
                                                                                                        4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




Investments in energy efficiency can save Russia energy directly, by reducing total final energy
consumption, and indirectly, by reducing the volume of fuel required to transform and transport
energy for end use consumption (primary supply). For example, a reduction in household electricity
consumption reduces the fuel generators must use to serve load. The less fuel generators burn, the
less fuel that needs to be extracted and transported (whether by pipeline, rail, or road), and the less
energy that needs to be spent extracting that fuel. In Russia, a reduction in electricity consumption
reduces overall energy sector consumption nearly five-fold; a reduction in heat consumption
reduces overall energy sector consumption by nearly three-fold. Figure 18 shows the end-use energy
efficiency potential in each of Russia’s major consuming sectors, and the accompanying reduction
of primary energy consumption brought about by reductions in final energy consumption.47 The
large accompanying decrease in primary energy consumption (94 mtoe) further demonstrates why
Russia should focus on achieving energy savings in end-use consumption.

Figure 18: Energy Efficiency Potential by Sector and the Multiplier Effect



             Residential buildings


             Electricity generation

                    Manufacturing


                    Transportation                                                                                                                          Technical

                                                                                                                                                            Economical
          Heating supply systems
                                                                                                                                                            Financial
              Fuel production and
                   transformation                                                                                                                           2005 Energy
                                                                                                                                                            Consumption
        Non-residential buildings


                        Gas Flaring

        Accompanying decrease in
     primary energy consumption

                                      0                         50                        100                       150                       200

                                                                                         mtoe
Source: CENEf for the World Bank. Statistical data on the economic and financial viability of fuel production and transformation and gas flaring is currently unavailable.



Most of Russia’s energy savings potential lies in reducing natural gas consumption. Figure 19 shows
the potential for gas savings in Russia through energy efficiency investments, as compared to gas
production, domestic consumption, and export.




47
     	 Appendix B contains a more detailed discussion of how these multipliers are calculated.
                                                                                                                                                                                   37
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 19: Gas savings potential in Russia


                                                      700

                                                      600

                                                      500
                          billion cubic meters




                                                      400

                                                      300
                                                                                                                           Gas Flaring (38 bcm)
                                                      200

                                                      100

                                                        0
                                                                 Gas production    Domestic consumption   Potential for reduced          Gas export
                                                                                                             consumption

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         Most of the investments required to reach Russia’s total energy savings potential will save money,
                         as well as energy. Three-quarters of Russia’s potential for energy savings can be achieved through
                         investments that are economically viable. In other words, the value of energy savings to Russia as
                         a whole outweighs the cost of investment. Roughly half of Russia’s potential energy savings can be
                         achieved through investments that are financially viable. In other words, households, companies,
                         and government agencies would save money and energy by making these investments.

                         The remainder of this chapter analyzes in more detail: i) the sectors in which Russia has potential
                         to reduce energy consumption, ii) the investment required to achieve that potential, and iii) the
                         amount of that investment estimated to be economically and financially viable. Section 4.1 briefly
                         introduces how these potential reductions are estimated.48 Sections 4.1 through 4.6 show detailed
                         estimates of potential reductions in energy consumption by each major energy consuming sector.

                         4.1 How to estimate potential energy savings?
                         Russia’s technically viable potential for energy savings can be estimated by comparing, for a given
                         sector, the energy efficiency of technologies used in Russia to the energy efficiency of commercially
                         available technologies, used elsewhere in the world. Russia’s technical potential is therefore
                         determined by technologies currently in commercial use elsewhere in the world, and not some
                         theoretical minimum level of energy efficiency.

                         Of these technically viable energy efficiency investments, some save energy, but are too expensive,
                         or yield too little energy savings over their lifetime to be attractive to energy consumers. Financially
                         viable investments are those that save energy and money for the individual consumers – private
                         companies, households, or government agencies – that make the investments. Economically viable
                         investments are those that save energy and money for Russia as a whole over the lifetime of the
                         investment, but the savings cannot necessarily be captured by any single energy consumer. The
                         government may be willing to make such investments in the public’s interest, but individual energy
                         consumers will not.



                         48
                                            	 Appendix B contains additional detail on the methodology described in Section 4.1.
  38
                                                                         4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




More specifically, an investment is financially viable if the cost of saving a unit of energy (for
example 1 kWh) is less than the cost of buying an additional unit of energy. The cost of saving
a unit of energy depends on what upfront capital expenditure must be made, what additional
operating and maintenance expenses may be required to save that energy, and what the investor
sacrifices by investing in energy efficiency rather than some alternative investment (the investor’s
opportunity cost of capital). This study assumes a 12 percent opportunity cost of capital for private
firms, and a 50 percent opportunity cost of capital for household (individual) investors.49 The
cost of buying an additional unit of energy is determined by the tariff or market price for energy
(depending on whether the energy price is regulated) those investors face. This chapter uses as its
reference domestic tariffs and market prices for energy in 2007.

An investment is economically viable if the cost of saving a unit of energy (for example, saving
1 kWh) is less than the cost to Russia of building a new unit of production capacity (for example,
1 kW), or the opportunity cost to Russia of exporting a unit of gas, whichever is the greater. In
determining economic viability, this study calculates the cost of saved energy assuming a 6 percent
opportunity cost of capital for the government investing on behalf of the public. This is based on
the assumption that government actors require a lower return on investment than private investors
but also can attract capital at lower cost. Economically viable investments are also distinguished
from financially viable investments in that externalities (positive and negative) are included as part
of additional costs. The largest externality considered in the sections that follow is the reduction
in carbon dioxide (CO2) which accompanies many energy efficiency investments. This study
assumes that the energy savings achieved in some sectors could be sold as CO2 reduction credits.
The value of these credits is included as an offset to the cost of saved energy, assuming a sale price
of €10 per ton of CO2.50 The actual economically viable potential of any investment is likely to be
much higher since other positive externalities such as the reduction of NOx and other pollution
reduction, is difficult to quantify, and therefore not included in this analysis.

This study therefore takes a relatively conservative approach when estimating Russia’s potential for
improving energy efficiency. The investments found here to be economically unviable, could in fact
be viable if externalities are properly quantified, if energy prices increase, or if capital investment
costs decrease.

4.2 By how much can Russia improve the energy efficiency of its
buildings?
The greatest potential to improve efficiency of final energy consumption lies in Russia’s residential,
commercial, and public buildings, where energy efficiency investments could save up to 68.6 mtoe
per year. Energy use in buildings (144.5 mtoe) was directly responsible for more than one-third of
energy end-use in Russia. Two-thirds of the potential energy savings in this sector can be achieved
through the reduction of district heating use for space heating and hot water. Figure 20 shows the
technically viable, economically viable, and financially viable potential for energy savings in Russia’s
buildings.



49	
    Households will typically have a higher opportunity cost of capital than other private investors because they tend to
    be more risk averse to making energy efficiency investments, need to borrow at (generally higher) retail lending rates
    in order to make any significant capital investment, and often have what they perceive to be higher value uses for their
    free cash.
50	 This study used $13.66 as the price of CO per ton in summer 2007. By the time of publication (Summer 2008), the
                                                2
    US dollar price was considerably higher given the depreciation of the US dollar.
                                                                                                                                                    39
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 20: Potential for energy savings in Russia’s buildings



                            Energy consumption 2005

                                   Technical potential                                                                              Residential building
                                                                                                                                    Commercial and
                                  Economically viable                                                                               public buildings

                                     Financially viable

                                                          0                       50                      100                 150

                                                                                        millions of toe
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         Most of the potential energy savings in buildings can be achieved through investments that are
                         economically and financially viable. Roughly 85 percent of the technical potential can be achieved
                         through investments that are economically viable. Nearly half (45 percent) of the technical
                         potential can be achieved through investments that are financially viable with 2007 energy prices.

                         Residential buildings
                         The residential sector is the second largest energy end-user in Russia after manufacturing. No direct
                         statistical data are available on the structure of residential energy consumption by end-use. Russia’s
                         CENEf has estimated for the World Bank Group a structure, based on equipment saturation data,
                         shares of dwelling with certain energy using equipment, and SECs for such equipment, which is
                         shown in Figure 21.51 Space heating is responsible for 58 percent of overall energy consumption
                         in residential buildings, with district heating systems serving three-quarters of dwellings. Water
                         heating is responsible for 25 percent of overall energy consumption in residential buildings.

                         Figure 21: Residential energy consumption in Russia


                                   70

                                   60

                                   50
                                                                                                                                            Electricity
                                   40
                                                                                                                                            Solid fuels
                          mtoe




                                   30                                                                                                       Petroleum
                                                                                                                                            products

                                   20                                                                                                       Gas
                                                                                                                                            Heating
                                   10

                                    0
                                                 Heating              Hot water        Cooking            Lighting   Appliances

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.




                         51	
                                 More surveys are needed to improve the statistical knowledge of residential energy end-use structure in Russia.

  40
                                                                                                          4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




The residential sector offers the greatest potential for improving energy efficiency in Russia. The
technical potential to reduce energy consumption is 53.4 mtoe. Of this technical potential, over 80
percent is achievable through investments that are economically viable and 46 percent is achievable
through investments that are financially viable with current domestic fuel prices. Most of the
potential energy savings come from improvements in space heating and water heating.

The average space and water heating intensities in Russian buildings are much higher than what
could be achieved. The Russian average heating energy intensity for multi-family, high rise buildings
is 229 kWh/m2/year. The heating energy intensity for new, multi-family high rise buildings
in Russia is 77 kWh/m2/year of heat.52 Rehabilitating existing housing stock can yield energy
intensities of roughly 151 kWh/m2/year.53 Figure 22 shows how the energy intensity of residential
heating in Russia compares to the energy intensities of residential heating in other countries. A
small percentage of the buildings erected after 2000 in compliance with new thermal insulation
standards actually meet modern thermal performance and heat efficiency requirements. However,
the majority of existing buildings have much lower parameters of space heating efficiency. As with
space heating, energy intensity of water heating differs depending on the age of the building. Figure
23 shows the estimates of the distribution of hot water energy intensities by age of the building.

Figure 22: Comparative Energy Intensities of Residential Heating, 2004


         0.025


         0.020


         0.015
toe/m2




         0.010


         0.005


             0
                      Bulgaria


                                 Lithuania


                                             Latvia


                                                      Greece


                                                                Poland


                                                                           Slovenia

                                                                                      Norvey


                                                                                                Denmark


                                                                                                             France


                                                                                                                      Finland


                                                                                                                                Italy


                                                                                                                                          Sweden


                                                                                                                                                    Germany


                                                                                                                                                                  Russia




Source: ODYSSEE for all countries except Russia. Russian data from CENEf and Rosstat, “Residential Sector and Consumer Services to Population in Russia”, 2007.




52	
    This estimate is based on a review of the designs of 28 multi-family, high-rise buildings currently under construction
    in Moscow.
53	 This estimate is based on similar intensities of renovated high rise buildings in Russia.


                                                                                                                                                                                     41
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 23: Distribution of Residential Buildings with Access to District Heating by Hot Water
                         Energy Intensities


                                        0.20

                                        0.18

                                        0.16

                                        0.14
                                                                                                                                            built before 1990
                                        0.12
                         Gcal/m2/Year




                                                                                                                                            overhauled
                                        0.10                                                                                                built between 1990
                                                                                                                                            and 2000
                                        0.08
                                                                                                                                            built after 2000
                                        0.06

                                        0.04

                                        0.02

                                        0.00
                                               0   120   300       400         500     700      900      1100   1300   1500   1700   1900

                                                                                 Million m2 of Living Space

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



                         There are significant opportunities for energy savings in both space and water heating in Russia’s
                         residential buildings. The technical potential to reduce energy consumption in residential space
                         heating ranges from 17 to 42 mtoe, depending on the method used to estimate the potential.54
                         This range of energy savings is equivalent to 35 to 49 percent of total 2005 final heat consumption.
                         Rehabilitating existing housing can save as much as 30-60 percent of 2005 energy consumption
                         for heating. The technical potential for improving the efficiency of water heating is 13.4 mtoe,
                         equivalent to 35 percent of 2005 use. Roughly 12 percent of this improvement comes from
                         rehabilitation of hot water delivery systems through, for example, investments that improve
                         regulation of water temperature and insulation of hot water pipes. Of the potential savings,
                         38 percent comes from investments within individual apartments, such as installing hot water
                         meters.55 Installation of hot water meters alone can save as much as 30 to 40 percent energy on hot
                         water by encouraging changes in consumer behavior.

                         Most of the investments required to improve space and water heating efficiency are economically
                         and financially viable. Figure 24 shows a conservation supply curve for space heating and water
                         heating. Roughly 78 percent of the investments are economically viable. About 38% percent of the
                         technically feasible investments are financially viable with 2007 heat prices.




                         54
                            	 A technical potential of 42 mtoe could be achieved by improving the energy efficiency of all buildings. However,
                              it is more practical to consider the technical potential in the rehabilitation of the existing housing stock rather
                              than overnight replacement of buildings with new, efficient ones. As such, if only buildings built before 1990 were
                              renovated, the technical potential is 17 mtoe. The technical potential increases with the renovation of buildings
                              built after 1990 and reaches 42 mtoe if all buildings were to achieve the technical potential of new buildings that
                              incorporate energy efficiency standards into construction.
                         55	 V. Papushkin, T. Tasenko, I. Bashmakov and others. Reliable, Energy Efficient Municipal Utility Services. UNDP, М.

  42                          2005.
                                                                                                4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




Figure 24: Conservation supply curve for Space Heating and Water Heating in Residential Buildings


             1200


             1000


              800
                                                                                                                                        Financial Viability
                                                                                                                                        Economic Viability
CSE, $/toe




              600
                                                                                                                                        Opportunity cost*
                                                                                                                                        2007 Natural Gas Price
              400


              200

                                                                                                                             * Natural gas export price with CO2 trading
                0
                       1.2          5.8    7.7           10.4         14.6           21.2           30.8      38.5

                                                    Cumulative fuel savings, mtoe

Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



.
The costs of energy efficiency investments depend on whether the investments are made in existing
or new buildings. No incremental investment costs appear to be required for energy efficiency
improvements in new buildings in Russia. Other factors, such as the number of floors, building
geometry and orientation, cost of materials, and labor costs drive the difference in construction
costs.56 For existing buildings, a number of rehabilitation measures are possible. Figure 25 shows



Table 4.1: Space and Water Heating Potential in Residential Buildings

   Measures                                            Technical potential          Total incremental       CSE (discount                  CSE (discount
                                                                                    costs                   rate=6%)                       rate=12%)
                                                       Million Gcal       %         $ million               $/toe                          $/toe
   Wall insulation (ventilated facade technology)          115.4          30                5239                     681.1                            1163.9
   Efficient faucets                                       65.4           17                1417                     216.7                             276.5
   Efficient windows                                       50.0           13                3929                     408.7                             627.6
   Others                                                  50.0           13                 268                     63.2                               97.1
   Window heat reflecting films                            46.2           12                 174                     37.7                               49.2
   Doors weather stripping                                  26.9           7                 145                     53.8                               64.4
   Insulation of indoor DHW pipes                           19.2           5                 32                      16.8                               21.9
   Radiator heat mirrors                                    11.5             3                  8                     7.3                                9.4
   Total                                                  384.5          100                11212
Source: CENEf for the World Bank.




56       	 Based on the lack of observed correlation between cost of construction and energy intensity of heating required in 28
           new buildings.                                                                                                                                                  43
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 25: Electricity savings potential in residential buildings


                                             1200


                                             1000
                                                                 Residential electricity savings                                     Conditioning
                                                                  potential is 50 billion kWh
                                                 800                                                                                 Space heating
                          kWh/person/year




                                                                                                                                     Water heating
                                                 600                                                                                 Cooking
                                                                                                                                     Refrigerators
                                                 400                                                                                 Appliances
                                                                                                                                     Lighting
                                                 200


                                                   0
                                                                    best                       average          worst

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         the potential for electricity savings in residential buildings. Table 4.1 shows the energy savings
                         potential of various energy efficiency investments in existing apartment buildings.
                         Public buildings
                         The public sector in Russia is a key final energy user. It is responsible for roughly 9 percent of all
                         energy end-use consumption in Russia. As in the residential building sector, there are no official
                         data on the structure of end-use. Figure 26 shows the structure of public sector consumption as

                         Figure 26: Energy end-use in the public sector, 2005 (mtoe)


                                            25


                                            20
                                                                                                                                                Heat
                                                                                                                                                Electricity
                                            15                                                                                                  Other solid
                                                                                                                                                fuels
                                                                                                                                                Gas
                                            10
                                                                                                                                                Petroleum
                                                                                                                                                products
                                                                                                                                                Coal
                                             5


                                             0
                                                       Heating               Hot water             Cooking   Lighting   Appliances

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.




  44
                                                                                  4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




estimated by CENEf for this study. Space heating is responsible for most of the energy use in this
sector (roughly 60 percent).
There is considerable technical potential for energy savings in Russia’s public and commercial
buildings. The technical potential for space heating in public buildings is, on average, 49 percent
of total consumption by that sector in 2005. This potential has been estimated based on the best
energy efficiency of the best new Russian public buildings. However, lack of sufficient data on
total floor space of public buildings and lack of data distribution based on building age does not
allow for a complete assessment of technical potential, which may be much higher than this study

Figure 27: Distribution of public buildings by specific heat consumption for space heating


               0.50

               0.45

               0.40

               0.35
                                                                                                                   built before 1990
               0.30
Gcal/m2/Year




                                                                                                                   renovated
               0.25                                                                                                built between 1990
                                                                                                                   and 2000
               0.20
                                                                                                                   built after 2000
               0.15

               0.10

               0.05

               0.00
                      0   38        69   100        154        200          300   400      500        593

                                               million m2 of Living space

Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


estimates. Figure 27 shows the estimates of the distribution for specific heat consumption by age of
the building.
Technical potential for health care facilities is 60 percent and experience from many Russian
regions shows that technical potential for educational institutions is 80 percent. Lighting systems
in many Russian schools have not been replaced in 40-50 years and widespread under- and over-
heating create vast inefficiencies. In one Moscow school, lighting accounted for 74 percent of
overall electricity consumption, yet still did not meet optimal illumination requirements to ensure
proper vision health for students and teachers.

The technical potential for gas savings in this sector is equal to 22 percent of 2005 consumption.
The technical potential of electricity savings in public buildings is equal to roughly 48 percent of
2005 consumption. Electricity savings for public buildings is particularly noteworthy because
of the characteristics of public building electricity consumption. Public facilities contribute two-
three times more to peak load consumption and capacity deficits compared to their share of total
electricity consumption. As such, the primary energy supply potential for energy savings in public
buildings is even greater because less efficient generation is typically used to serve loads during peak
periods.

Much of the technical potential for savings in this sector is also economically and financially viable.

                                                                                                                                                             45
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         All of the technical potential for gas savings in this sector is economically viable. Roughly three-
                         quarters of the total technical potential for electricity savings is achievable through investments
                         that are financially viable. One-third of the technical potential for improving energy efficiency in
                         space heating for public buildings can be achieved through investments that are both financially
                         and economically viable. $3-5 billion of the public utility services budget could be saved as a result
                         of investments in energy and water efficiency in public buildings. Investments in federal buildings
                         alone could save at least $1.2 billion per year.57

                         4.3 By how much can Russia improve energy efficiency of
                         Manufacturing?
                         Russia can cut its total final energy consumption by roughly 5 percent through investments
                         in energy efficiency in manufacturing. With total consumption of 109.5 mtoe, manufacturing
                         is the largest energy end-user in Russia, representing roughly 25 percent of total final energy
                         consumption and 15 percent of total final energy supply. The energy efficiency potential of Russia’s
                         manufacturing sector is estimated at 41.5 mtoe per year.

                         Energy efficiency potential in manufacturing is concentrated in some activities, and widely
                         distributed in others. On the one hand, the three most energy intensive industries – the ferrous
                         metals, pulp and paper, and cement industries – represent 53 percent of energy saving potential,
                         with 39 percent concentrated in ferrous metals, as demonstrated in Figure 28. On the other
                         hand, non-energy intensive industries such as bakeries, meat processing and other represent 42
                         percent of the potential, and cannot be discounted by policy interventions. Most of the savings

                         Figure 28: Energy Efficiency Potential in Manufacturing



                                           Other total


                                       Ferrous Metals
                                                                                                                              Technical Potential
                                                                                                                              2005 Consumption
                                         Pulp & Paper


                                              Cement

                                                         0          10         20   30          40   50   60        70

                                                                                         mtoe
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



                         can be achieved by improving the efficiency of electricity and heat use at Russia’s manufacturing
                         facilities.58
                         Most of the investments required to improve energy efficiency in manufacturing are economically
                         and financially viable: 97 percent of the technical potential is achievable through investments


                         57	
                               Based on 2006 prices.
                         58	
                               Industrial co-generation plants and boiler-houses are included in the assessment of energy efficiency potential in
                               Section 1.4. The estimates of energy efficiency potential in manufacturing therefore exclude savings possible from
                               industrial electricity and heat generation, CHPs, transmission and distribution, energy resources extraction,
                               enrichment or refining.
  46
                                                                                                                             4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




that are economically viable, while 80 percent of the technical potential is achievable through
investments that are financially viable with 2007 gas prices.

Russia can more cost effectively invest in energy efficiency than in new energy supply facilities.
On average, it costs Russia $294 to achieve 1 toe of energy efficiency savings in manufacturing.
In contrast, official estimates for 2010-2020 show that $1,990 to $2,740 are required to increase
primary energy production by 1 toe.59 In the manufacturing sector, Russia can meet rising energy
demand at a much lower cost by investing in energy efficiency.

4.3.1 Ferrous metals
Russia’s ferrous metals sector consumed 36.1 mtoe in 2005. The energy efficiency of Russian ferrous
metal production is well below levels achieved by other major international producers. Figure

Figure 29: Comparative Energy Intensity of Steel Production (2005)

          25


          20


          15
GJ/t




          10


           5


           0
                 Greece

                          Austria

                                    Luxembourg

                                                 Croatia

                                                           Slovenia

                                                                      Italy

                                                                              Poland

                                                                                       France

                                                                                                United Kingdom

                                                                                                                 Belgium

                                                                                                                           Hungary

                                                                                                                                     Netherlands

                                                                                                                                                   Germany

                                                                                                                                                             Sweden

                                                                                                                                                                      Czech Rep.

                                                                                                                                                                                   Slovakia

                                                                                                                                                                                              Russia

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Romania




Source: ODYSSEE for all countries except Russia. Russian data from CENEf.




29 shows how the energy intensity of Russia’s steel industry compares to the energy intensities
of European producers.60 Table 4.2 compares the actual efficiency of Russian plants for different
processes to the efficiency of producers abroad.
Russia can save as much as 16.4 mtoe through energy efficiency investments in the ferrous metals
sector – equal to 44 percent of the sector’s energy consumption in 2005. 99 percent of total




59
   	 Russia’s long-term economic development projections for 2007-2030 (scenarios). Russian Academy of Science,
     Institute for economic projections. Moscow, May 2007.
60	 Energy intensity data for Russia are for 2005. EU data are for 2004, but relative energy intensities are not likely to
     have changed dramatically between 2004 and 2005.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 47
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Table 4.2: Actual Efficiency and Benchmarks for Ferrous Metal Production

                           Process                                   Average Russian      International        Investments/Improvements
                                                                     Energy Intensity     Comparator61
                                                                                      (GJ/t)
                           Ore production and enrichment                       0.34             0.289
                           Sintering                                           1.83              1.49          Improving plant heat recovery, reduction of compressed air
                                                                                                               leaks, improved process control, and the use of waste fuels in
                                                                                                               sinter plants
                           Pellet production                                   1.28               0.7          Same as for sintering
                           Coke production (excluding Coke                     1.39              0.92          Pulverized coal injection technologies in blast furnaces
                           batteries heating)
                           Pig iron production                                 16.9              11.2          Top pressure recovery turbines, blast furnace gas recovery, hot
                                                                                                               blast furnace automation, and improved blast furnace controls
                           Electric arc furnaces                               3.2                1.6          Scrap preheating and increase oxygen use62
                           Open hearth furnaces                                 5                0.38          Switching to oxygen furnace.
                           Rolled steel production                             4.01        0.4 for cold rolled Transition to continuous, near-net shape and thin strips
                                                                                           steel; 0.9-1.6 for casting, which eliminates slabs heating and cooling stages
                                                                                            hot rolled steel and reduces rolling cycles
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         technical potential in the sector can be achieved through economically viable investments (16.3
                         mtoe). Twelve mtoe can be saved through investments which are financially viable with 2007 gas
                         prices. Table 4.2 shows those investments with the greatest technical potential to save energy.
                         Most of the savings comes from the use of pulverized coal injection technologies in blast furnaces
                         which allow for the replacement of coke with coal and thus avoid the need for coke making. Other
                         energy saving technologies, ranked by their relative costs include: electric arc furnace upgrade;
                         improved blast furnace control systems; process control in hot strip mill; recuperative burners;
                         programmed heating; automated monitoring and targeting system; efficient ladle preheating;
                         heat recovery on the annealing line; blast furnace gas recovery; reduced steam use in cold rolling;
                         pulverized coal injection; controlling oxygen levels and variable speed drives; hot blast furnace
                         automation; energy efficient drives for hot rolling; sintering and pellets production improvements;
                         iron ore production and enrichment improvements; waste heat recovery (cooling water); hot




                         61	
                               E. Worrell, M. Neelis, L. Price, et al. World best practice energy intensity values for selected industrial sectors.. LBNL-
                               62808. June 2007.
                         62	
                               See “Using energy and materials more efficiently: a precondition for sustainable development”. Conference organized
                               by Korea Resource Economics Association (KREA), Korea Energy Economics Institute (KEEI), Centre for Energy
                               Policy and Economics (CEPE), ETH Zurich, Switzerland and Ecofys, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Seoul, Republic of
                               Korea. September 21-22, 2006, and Energy Technology Perspectives 2006. Scenarios and Strategies to 2050. OECD/
                               IEA. 2006.
                         63	
                               Cost and savings data for each technology or group of technologies were taken from several sources, and figures for
                               earlier years were adjusted for dollar inflation. Sources used were: Energy Technology Perspectives 2006. Scenarios
                               and Strategies to 2050. OECD/IEA. 2006; “Using energy and materials more efficiently: a precondition for
                               sustainable development.” Conference organized by Korea Resource Economics Association (KREA), Korea Energy
                               Economics Institute (KEEI), Centre for Energy Policy and Economics (CEPE), ETH Zurich, Switzerland and
                               Ecofys, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Seoul, Republic of Korea. September 21-22, 2006; Ernst Worrell, Natan Martin,
                               and Lynn Price. “Energy Efficiency and Carbon Dioxide Emissions Reductions Opportunities in the U.S. Iron and
                               Steel Sector.” Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California. July, 1999; “Energy
                               and environmental profile of the U.S. iron and steel industry.” Prepared by: Energetics, Inc. Columbia, Maryland, for
  48                           U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Industrial Technologies. July 1996.
                                                                                                                                4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




charging; insulation of furnaces for hot rolling; thin strip and near-net-shape casting; continuous
casting; dry quenching; top pressure recovery systems; and coal moisture control.63

4.3.2 Pulp and paper
Russian pulp and paper mills could cut their energy use by roughly 50 percent. In 2005, energy
use in pulp and paper production totaled 6.9 mtoe. The technical potential for energy efficiency
improvements in pulp and paper making is 3.7 mtoe. The average energy intensity of Russian
pulp production is 18.1 GJ/t of pulp. International energy intensity of pulp production ranges
from 11-14.3 GJ/t of pulp.64 The most energy intensive process in paper making is paper drying,
which is responsible for 25 to 30 percent of overall energy consumption in pulp and paper making
combined. All but one Russian paper producing plants have energy intensities far above their peers

Figure 30: Comparative Energy Intensities of Paper Production (2005)

       30

       25

       20

       15
GJ/t




       10

         5

         0
               Lithuania

                           Greece

                                    Germany

                                              Netherlands

                                                            Austria

                                                                      Italy

                                                                              Croatia

                                                                                        Belgium

                                                                                                  France

                                                                                                           Hungary

                                                                                                                     Slovenia

                                                                                                                                 United Kingdom

                                                                                                                                                  Norway

                                                                                                                                                           Estonia

                                                                                                                                                                     Romania

                                                                                                                                                                               Slovakia

                                                                                                                                                                                          Poland

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sweden

                                                                                                                                                                                                            Russia




Source: ODYSSEE for all countries except Russia. Russian data from CENEf.


abroad, leaving a large potential for improvement.65 Figure 30 shows how the energy intensity
of Russia’s paper industry compares to the energy intensities of paper production in European
countries.66
Most of the technical energy efficiency potential is achievable through investments that are
economically and financially viable. Technologies that would improve the energy efficiency of pulp
making include (in order of lowest CSE): batch digester modifications, continuous digesters, and
heat recovery in thermo-mechanical pulping.67 Advanced technologies to reduce energy intensity
of pulp production also include the gasification of black liquor and other biomass residuals from
pulp production. Technologies that would improve the energy efficiency of paper making include

64	
       Energy Technology Perspectives 2006 and Proceedings; E. Worrell, M. Neelis, L. Price, et al. “World best practice
       energy intensity values for selected industrial sectors.” LBNL-62808. June 2007; 1998 Seoul Conference on Energy
       Use in Manufacturing: Energy Savings and CO2 Mitigation Policy Analysis.
65	
       The energy intensity of paper production varies considerably depending on the quality of the paper being produces.
       This study takes as its point of comparison the production of uncoated, fine paper.
66	
       Energy intensity data for Russia are for 2005. EU data are for 2004, but relative energy intensities are not likely to
       have changed dramatically between 2004 and 2005.
67	
       N. Martin, N. Angliani, D. Einstein, M. Khrushch, E. Worrell, L. Price. “Opportunities To Improve Energy Efficiency
       in The U.S. Pulp And Paper Industry, 2001.” Proceedings Paper Machine Technology, February 7-8, 2001, Lanaken,
       Belgium. LBNL. 2001.
68	
       Ibid.                                                                                                                                                                                                         49
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         (in order of lowest CSE): infrared profiling; extent nip press; high consistency forming; gap
                         forming; and dry sheet forming.68
                         4.3.3 Cement production
                         Russia’s cement industry could cut its energy use by 43 percent. Russian cement and clinker
                         producers consumed 5.7 mtoe in 2005. Technical potential in the cement industry is 2.5 mtoe,
                         of which two-thirds of the potential lies in improving the energy efficiency of clinker production.
                         Average energy intensity of Russia’s cement and clinker producers was 4.9 GJ/t in 2005. This level
                         of energy intensity is considerably higher than most energy efficient cement and clinker producers
                         abroad. Figure 31 shows how the energy intensity of Russian cement producers compares to
                         producers in Europe. As another example, Russia’s energy intensity was 76 percent higher than
                         energy intensity of cement and clinker production in South Korea69. In cement production, the best
                         international energy intensities range from 0.09-0.11 GJ/t. Energy intensities observed at Russian
                         cement facilities never falls below 0.2 GJ/t. In clinker production, using dry kilns, international

                         Figure 31: Comparative Energy Intensities of Cement Production (2004)


                                  0.14

                                  0.12

                                  0.10

                                  0.08
                          toe/t




                                  0.06

                                  0.04

                                  0.02

                                     0
                                             Germany


                                                          Italy


                                                                      Greece


                                                                                   Sweden


                                                                                               Hungary


                                                                                                         France


                                                                                                                  Belgium


                                                                                                                            Poland


                                                                                                                                     Norway


                                                                                                                                                United
                                                                                                                                              Kingdom


                                                                                                                                                         Croatia


                                                                                                                                                                   Russia




                         Source: ODYSSEE for all countries except Russia. Russian data from CENEf.


                         energy intensities are as low as 3 GJ/t. Wet kilns are less efficient, with energy intensities ranging
                         from 5.5-7 GJ/t. The average energy intensity of clinker production in Russia is 8.8 GJ/t.
                         All of the technical potential for energy efficiency improvement in cement and clinker production
                         is economically viable, and most of it is financially viable. Most of the energy efficiency potential in
                         clinker production can be achieved by moving more production to dry kilns. Dry kilns were used
                         at roughly 15 percent of Russian clinker production, versus 100 percent in Japan, 93 percent in
                         South Korea and India, 65 percent in the US and 58 percent in Western Europe.70

                         Most of the savings achieved in the cement and clinker industry are through gas savings. Russian
                         cement and clinker producers use natural gas as their principal fuel. In Russia, natural gas


                         69	 Using energy and materials more efficiently: a precondition for sustainable development. Conference organized by
                             Korea Resource Economics Association (KREA), Korea Energy Economics Institute (KEEI), Centre for Energy
                             Policy and Economics (CEPE), ETH Zurich, Switzerland and Ecofys, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Seoul, Republic of
                             Korea. September 21-22, 2006.
                         70	 Energy Technology Perspectives 2006.

  50
                                                                                                   4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




constitutes 90 percent of fuel consumed by cement and clinker producers, while in Europe and
North America coal constitutes 80 to 95 percent of fuel consumption.
4.3.4 Non-energy intensive industries
Non-energy intensive industries represent 42 percent of energy efficiency potential in
manufacturing and account for 20 percent of all electricity saving potential in final consumption.
In 2005 non-energy intensive industries consumed 53 mtoe. They have the potential to reduce
their energy consumption by 32 percent.

The underlying reason for existing inefficiencies in non-energy intensive industries is outdated

Figure 32: Obsolete equipment in non-energy intensive sectors

   The percentage of companies operating energy equipment that is more than 10 years old

                Ventilation systems

                        Compressors

        Circulation cooling systems

                              Pumps

    Electric circuits/ electric motors                                                                                          Equipment in use for:
                                                                                                                                   11-15 years
                    Heat exchanders                                                                                                16-25 years
                                                                                                                                   more than 25 years
                   Boiler equipment

   Combined heat and power units

      Frequency-controlled circuits

                  Refrigeration unit

                    Infrared heaters

                                         0%                        20%                       40%                       60%

                                                                       Percentage of respondents

Source: IFC On the road to energy efficiency: experience and future outlook.



equipment and management practices. As presented in Figure 32 more than a quarter of companies
use equipment for more than 25 years.
Existing practices among Russian mid-sized companies in improving energy efficiency indicate that
almost half of energy efficiency improvements are being made in production line improvements
while the rest are being made in generic energy equipment.

4.4 By how much can Russia improve the energy efficiency of
electricity generation and delivery?
Russia could reduce the fuel consumed in its electricity plants by nearly 31 percent. However,
this is a conservative estimate as it does not include the energy savings that can be realized in the
sector as a result of higher utilization of CHPs, distributed generation, and optimization of energy
delivery system designs. Figure 33 shows the technically viable, economically viable, and financially

                                                                                                                                                                              51
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 33: Potential to improve energy efficiency in electricity generation, by technology


                            Energy consumption 2005
                                                                                                                                    Condensing power
                                   Technical potential                                                                              plants (mtoe)
                                                                                                                                    Combined heat and
                                                                                                                                    power plants*
                                   Economic potential
                                                                                                                                    Diesel power plants
                                    Financial potential
                                     (2007 fuel prices)                                                                       * Consumption/potential for fuel
                                                                                                                              savings in electricity generation
                                                          0         20              40   60          80   100     120   140

                                                                                              mtoe
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         Figure 34: Potential to improve energy efficiency in electricity generation, by fuel type



                            Energy consumption 2005                                                                                       Natural Gas
                                                                                                                                          Petroleum
                                   Technical potential                                                                                    products

                                   Economic potential                                                                                     Coal
                                                                                                                                          Other solid
                                   Financial potential                                                                                    fuels
                                    (2007 fuel prices)
                                                          0                    50             100           150         200
                                                                                              mtoe
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         viable potential for Russia to improve energy efficiency in electricity generation. Figure 34 shows
                         the same information, categorized by fuel type.
                         Much of this technical potential is economically viable, but not financially viable. Roughly 90
                         percent of the technical potential is economically viable. Only 13 percent of the technical potential
                         is financially viable with domestic gas prices for 2007.

                         Russia would need to invest $106 billion to improve the efficiency of thermal power plants.71 Of
                         this total, $49.8 billion would be needed to improve the efficiency of condensation power plants.
                         $55.4 billion would be needed to improve the efficiency of CHPs. Most of the potential can be
                         captured by upgrading gas-fired condensing power plants and combined heat and power plants,
                         and most of the fuel savings is accordingly in gas consumption.

                         Condensing power plants
                         The efficiency of Russia’s condensing power plants is well below the average efficiency of similar
                         plants elsewhere in the world. Russia’s condensing power plants operate, on average, at 36 percent
                         efficiency with 345 gce/kWh average specific fuel consumption. Only two power stations
                         (Sochinskaya TES and Severozapadnaya GRES-2) are reported to operate at levels of efficiency
                         above 40 percent. Five other plants (Permskaya, Sredneuralskaya, Nizhnevartovskaya, Kostromskaya,
                         and Surgutskaya) run at slightly above 38 percent efficiency. The highest level of energy intensity

                         71
                              	 Each plant falling below the international efficiency benchmark was replaced at a level of capacity equivalent to its
                                loaded capacity in 2005.
  52
                                                                                                                                     4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




Figure 35: Distribution of Energy Efficiency at Russian Condensing Power Plants


                                                           1800
Specific Fuel Consumption in Power Generation (gce/kWh)




                                                           1600

                                                           1400

                                                           1200
                                                                                                                                                                      efficiency < 38%
                                                           1000
                                                                                                                                                                      efficiency > 38%
                                                            800                                                                                                       efficiency > 57%
                                                            600

                                                            400

                                                            200

                                                              0
                                                                  1   11      21      31        41        51        61        71       81       91       101

                                                                                     Power plants with condensed equipment (units)

Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



(lowest level of efficiency) for electricity generation is as high as 1.6 gce/kWh. Figure 35 shows the
distribution of efficiencies of kWh generated by Russia’s condensing power plants.
In contrast, coal- and oil-fired condensing power plants in OECD countries operate at an average
efficiency of 38 percent, and gas-fired condensing power plants in OECD countries operate at an
average of 41 percent efficiency. In some countries, combined-cycle gas plants achieve efficiencies
as high as 57 percent, and some coal plants (such as Denmark’s Nordjylland coal plant) achieve
efficiencies as high as 47 percent.72

The technical potential for reducing total final consumption of condensing power plants in Russia
is 22.5 mtoe. Of this, 79 percent come from savings in gas consumption. All of the technical
potential for improving natural gas-fired condensing power plants (17.9 mtoe) is achievable
through investments that are economically viable. Only 13 percent (2.4 mtoe) of that potential is
achievable through investments that are financially viable with 2007 gas prices. Figure 36 shows
this conclusion graphically. The potential for energy efficiency gains at liquid fuel-fired condensing




72	
                                                          Energy Technology Perspectives 2006. Scenarios and Strategies to 2050. OECD/IEA. 2006.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                53
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 36: Conservation supply curve for Natural Gas-Fired Power Plants in Russia


                                                                   Financial Viability       Economic Viability          2007 Natural Gas Price

                                       300

                                       250

                                       200
                          CSE, $/toe




                                       150

                                       100

                                        50

                                         0
                                             0    1           2          2           3   4            6           8       11          13          15   16   18

                                                                                         Cumulative fuel savings, mtoe

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         power plants and coal-fired condensing power plants were much smaller, in part because these
                         plants generate a much smaller proportion of Russia’s electricity than gas-fired plants.
                         In estimating the technical potential for efficiency gains, it was assumed that all plants below the
                         best international use would be replaced with the most advanced units of appropriate capacity. It
                         was assumed that only generators serving load in 2005 would be replaced; while idle plants would
                         not be replaced. Replacement capital costs were assumed to be $700/kW for gas-fired power plants;
                         $800/kW for plants fueled by liquid petroleum products; and $1,400/kW for coal-fired plants.73

                         Cogeneration (Combined Heat and Power Plants or CHPs)
                         Russia’s co-generation plants (also called combined heat and power plants, or CHPs) operate at a
                         level of energy efficiency well below that of most technologies used internationally. Gas-fired CHPs
                         abroad typically operate at 51 percent efficiency in condensing mode, and 46-48 percent for liquid-
                         and solid-fuel fired CHPs in condensing mode. Russia’s gas-fired CHPs currently operate at 39
                         percent efficiency in condensing mode. Liquid- and solid-fuel fired CHPs operate at 36 percent
                         efficiency in condensing mode. The efficiency advantages of Russian CHPs over condensing plants
                         are therefore minimal. Figure 37 shows the distribution of Russian CHPs by energy efficiency.

                         All of the technical potential for gas-fired CHPs (13.7 mtoe) are achievable through investments
                         that are economically viable. At 2007 gas prices, only 3.1 mtoe is achievable through investments
                         that are financial viable. As is the case with condensing power plants, most efficiency gains come
                         from upgrading gas-fired facilities. Upgrading these plants to 51 percent efficiency could bring




                         73
                                  	 In practice, the costs of new capacity in Russia are likely to be higher as these estimates exclude financing costs,
                                    licensing costs, and land acquisition costs.

  54
                                                                                                                                                            4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




Figure 37: Distribution of Russian CHPs by Energy Efficiency


                                                          3000
Specific Fuel Consumption in Power Generation (gce/kWh)




                                                          2500


                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                          > 300 gce/kWh
                                                          1500                                                                                                                                            240-300 gce/kWh
                                                                                                                                                                                                          < 240gce/kWh
                                                          1000


                                                           500


                                                             0
                                                                 1        51            101         151        201         251           301         351            401            451

                                                                                                                     CHP (units)

Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



Figure 38: Conservation supply curve for Natural Gas-Fired CHPS Plants in Russia

                                                            Financial Viability                     Economic Viability                     Opportunity cost*                                    2007 Natural Gas Price
                                                                                                                                           * Natural gas export price with CO2 trading
                                                          1000
                                                           900
                                                           800
                                                           700
                                                           600
     CSE, $/toe




                                                           500
                                                           400
                                                           300
                                                           200
                                                           100
                                                             0
                                                                 0     0.4        0.7         1.6     2.8      3.2       4.0       5.0     5.8        6.8         8.3        9.3         10.4     11.7     12.5    13.5     13.7

                                                                                                                           Cumulative fuel savings, mtoe
Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


about a 14 mtoe (17 bcm) reduction in natural gas consumption. Figure 38 shows this relationship
graphically.
Diesel power plants
Russia’s diesel power plants operate far below the efficiency of comparable plants abroad. These
plants operate at an average efficiency of 25 percent, with an average fuel consumption of 495 gce/

74
                                                  	 Data are taken from major equipment manufactures’ websites.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       55
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Figure 39: Distribution of Russia’s Diesel Plants by Energy Efficiency


                                                                                    3000
                          Specific Fuel Consumption in Power Generation (gce/kWh)




                                                                                    2500


                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                                                               efficiency < 30%
                                                                                    1500                                                                                       efficiency > 30%
                                                                                                                                                                               efficiency > 37%
                                                                                    1000


                                                                                     500


                                                                                       0
                                                                                           1   32   63   94   125    156     187      218        249   280   311   342   373

                                                                                                                    Diesel power plants (unit)
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


                         kWh. Efficiency levels of 37 percent are achievable elsewhere in the world.74 Figure 39 shows the
                         distribution of Russian diesel power plants by energy efficiency.
                         Upgrading Russian diesel power stations to 37 percent average efficiency would bring 0.59 mtoe in
                         savings of both diesel fuel and natural gas.75 Only 0.47 mtoe of the technical potential is achievable
                         through investments that are economically viable. Only 0.11 mtoe of the technical potential is
                         achievable through investments that are financially viable.

                         Transmission and distribution
                         Russia could also save substantial electricity by reducing losses on its electricity transmission and
                         distribution networks. Russia’s electricity transmission and distribution losses exceed levels achieved
                         elsewhere. In the OECD countries, distribution losses range from 6 to 7 percent of total power
                         production. In Finland, the total losses are as low as 4 percent. Average electricity distribution
                         losses in Russia were 12.2 percent in 2005. In 2004, distribution losses were 8.4 percent in Moscow,
                         14 percent in Sakhalinskaya Oblast, 18 percent in Moscow Oblast. In Astrakhanskaya Oblast,
                         losses exceeded 20 percent in 2004. The potential for reducing Russia’s electricity distribution losses
                         accounts for 3.4 mtoe, or roughly 35 percent, of actual levels in 2005 (9.69 mtoe).

                         4.5 By how much can Russia improve the energy efficiencies of its heat
                         supply systems?
                         Russian heat production and distribution are energy intensive relative to international practice. The
                         potential to improve the energy efficiency of CHPs was discussed in the preceding section. After
                         CHPs, the greatest potential energy savings come from investments to improve the efficiency of
                         heat generation at gas fired industrial boilers, and the efficiency of heat distribution in municipal
                         heating systems. Figure 40 shows the technical, economic and financial potential to improve heat



                         75
                                                                            	 Natural gas-fired diesels typically operate in those Russian provinces where gas is produced.
  56
                                                                              4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




Figure 40: Potential to improve energy efficiency in heat production and distribution



          Technical potential
                                                                                                                Heat generation
         Economic potential
                                                                                                                Heat distribution
          Financial potential

                                 0   5       10         15          20        25           30       35

                                                             mtoe
Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



generation and distribution. The use of CHPs can markedly improve overall energy efficiency in
the heating sector, but that potential has not been included here.

Boilers used to supply heat in Russia could cut their energy consumption by 10.4 mtoe, or 8.4
percent. The investment required to meet this potential would be roughly $7 billion. Roughly 90
percent of the technical potential is achievable through investments that are economically viable.
With 2007 domestic natural gas prices, only 25 percent of the technical potential is achievable
through investments that are financially viable.

Most of Russia’s boilers fall short of the best international energy intensities. This study uses 95
percent efficiency as the international benchmark for gas- and liquid-fuel boilers, and 85 percent
efficiency as the international benchmark for coal-fired boilers. These efficiencies are consistent with
the efficiency of boilers operating in Western Europe. Official reports on Russian boiler efficiency
show the efficiency of CHPs at 95.3 percent, industrial boilers at 68.6 percent; district heating
boilers at 80.3 percent, and small boilers at 81.6 percent.76 Russia’s boilers are likely less efficient
than official statistics suggest. Energy audits conducted by Russia’s Center for Energy Efficiency
(CENEf ) cast doubt on the accuracy of the official figures.

As Figure 41 shows, gas-fired industrial boilers show the largest potential for improvement.
Russia’s boilers consumed 123.2 mtoe in 2005, of which industrial boilers consumed 66 percent.
Installing gas-fired industrial boilers with the best international technology can bring 5.1 mtoe in

Figure 41: Technical potential for improving boiler efficiency



     Liquid fuel boiler plants
                                                                                                                Industrial boilers
           Coal boiler plants
                                                                                                                District boilers
            Gas boiler plants

                                 0       1        2           3           4            5            6

                                                             mtoe
Source: CENEf for the World Bank.


76
     	 Statistics report specific energy consumption to generate a unit of heat. As CENEf ’s experience in many energy
       audits shows, in practice small boilers are the least energy efficient. So statistical data do not mirror the real situation.
                                                                                                                                                         57
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         natural gas savings, much of which is through investments that are economically and financially
                         viable. Investments yielding 5.1 mtoe are economically viable. Investments yielding only 0.6 mtoe
                         of savings are financially viable with 2007 domestic gas prices.
                         Municipal heat distribution losses in Russia are also high relative to heating systems in other
                         countries. In Western European countries with well-developed heat supply systems, distribution
                         losses range from 2 to 10 percent of total heat generation. In Helsinki, distribution losses in the
                         district heating network are about 6 percent. Beyond 10 percent, district heating systems become
                         physically less energy efficient than distributed generation. In Russian municipal heating systems,
                         heat distribution losses are estimated at 20-25 percent of total heat generation, but available
                         statistics are very unreliable and typically understate real losses.

                         Figure 42 shows how the losses are distributed by heat network. The potential for reducing heat
                         losses was estimated at 17.3 mtoe, equivalent to 8.9 percent of total heat production. Of this
                         technical potential, 17.1 mtoe is achievable through investments that are economically viable.
                         Much of the potential is also achievable through investments that are financially viable: 15.9 mtoe

                         Figure 42: Distribution of heat networks by heat distribution losses

                                            100%
                                                                                                                                          Aging oh heat
                                            90%                                                                                           networks and low
                                                                                                                                          maintenance level
                                            80%
                                                                                                                                          Excessive centralization
                                            70%                                                                                           of heat supply

                                            60%
                          heat losses (%)




                                            50%

                                            40%

                                            30%

                                            20%

                                            10%                                                                                       Maximum admissible losses

                                               0
                                                   0   20   40       60         80       100      120       140     160   180   200

                                                                          number of municipal heat supply systems
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.




                         with 2007 fuel prices. The capital cost of achieving this potential is estimated at $18.6 billion. The
                         purchase of new pipes also helps reduce supply interruptions and repair costs, and extend heat
                         pipes service life.
                         4.6 By how much can Russia improve the energy efficiency of its
                         transport sector?
                         The Russian transport sector is the fifth largest energy consuming sector after heat and electricity
                         generation, manufacturing, and residential buildings. Russian transportation was responsible for 25
                         percent of final energy consumption (94.4 mtoe) in 2005. Russia can reduce energy consumption




  58
                                                                    4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




Figure 43: Potential to improve energy efficiency in transport (mtoe)



                  Road

          Gas pipelines
                                                                                                             Petroleum
               Aviation                                                                                      products

                    Rail                                                                                     Gas
                                                                                                             Electricity
           Oil pipelines
                                                                                                             Heat
                  Other

                 Water

                           0        5                 10                  15                    20

Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



in its transport sector by 38.3 mtoe, an amount equal to 41 percent of the transport sector’s
consumption in 2005. Figure 43 shows technical potential by transport mode and fuel type. Most
of this potential is economically and financially viable (36.2 mtoe and 32 mtoe, respectively).
Within the transportation sector, road transport is responsible for the largest consumption of
energy, followed by gas transport. The road transport sector is responsible for 48 percent of all
energy consumption in the transport sector, and has the largest potential for improvement. In
passenger transport (personal cars excluded), rail transport dominates, followed by buses and air
transport. Their combined potential of these transport modes, however, is responsible for only 9.2
percent of total transport sector potential. Transportation and distribution associated with Russia’s
large natural gas industry explains why the share of petroleum products in the Russian transport
energy mix is just 57 percent versus 97 percent in most OECD countries in 200577. Transportation
of energy (coal, crude oil and petroleum products, gas and other fuels) is responsible for 40-45
percent of overall energy consumption by the transportation sector and has as much as 42 percent
potential.

Russia’s systems of freight transportation are relatively efficient. Relatively limited improvement can
be achieved by structural changes in freight transportation. Much of the freight transported is fuel,
which is therefore transported by pipeline.78 As much as 54 percent of freight (in terms of km-
tons) is transported by pipelines followed by 42 percent by rail. Transportation by truck constitutes
only 0.9 percent. Only water transport, which is one of the most energy efficient and cost effective,
stands out as an area for possible improvement. Only 2.3 percent of freight is moved using water
transport in Russia.79

Road transport
Road transport is a fast-growing energy consumer, driven by dynamic personal fleet growth at the


77 	 Energy Balances for OECD countries. 2004-2005. OECD/IEA. 2007 Edition.
78	
     Transportation of energy (coal, crude oil and petroleum products, gas and other fuels) is responsible for 40-45
     percent of overall energy consumption by the transport sector.
79	 Transport in Russia, 2007, Rosstat.

                                                                                                                                               59
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         expense of public transport. During 1995-2006, private car ownership grew by 84 percent, and
                         will continue to grow steadily over the coming years as personal car ownership remains far below
                         levels in most developed countries. Unfortunately, data allocating fuel consumption by type of road
                         vehicles is limited, making it difficult to develop a full assessment of energy efficiency potential.
                         The increase in personal car ownership has been accompanied by a 23 percent decline in public
                         transportation during 1995-2006.80 The use of public transportation by sea and river decreased
                         10-fold and two-fold, respectively (see Figure 44). Public transportation by buses halved, while
                         the number of large city and inter-city buses in service fell by 43 percent during the same period.

                         Figure 44: Change in public transportation usage from 1995 to 2006


                                                            600


                                                            500
                          billion passengers per km




                                                            400
                                                                                                                                                             other
                                                            300                                                                                              air
                                                                                                                                                             metro
                                                            200                                                                                              bus
                                                                                                                                                             rail

                                                            100


                                                              0
                                                                     1995      2000      2001      2002      2003      2004      2005      2006

                         Source: Transport in Russia, 2007. Rosstat.


                         In 2005, road transportation consumed roughly 48 mtoe, equal to more than half of all energy
                         consumed by the transport sector. At 9.5 mtoe, diesel fuel accounted for roughly 20 percent of
                         road transport energy consumption.81
                         Russia could improve the energy efficiency of its petrol-driven light duty vehicles by 17 mtoe, or
                         roughly 18 percent of total 2005 energy consumption in the transport sector. Personal passenger cars
                         in Russia have estimated energy intensities of 10-12 liters/100 km; light trucks have energy intensities
                         of 29-33 liters/100 km; and buses have energy intensities of 41-55 liters/100 km.82  Russia’s KAMAZ
                         trucks typically use 38 liters/100 km, more than twice the fuel efficiency of comparable models
                         manufactured by Western companies like Caterpillar.83 Moreover, when importing cars, Russians
                         typically choose less efficient, second-hand cars because they are cheaper. In contrast, hybrid electric
                         drive vehicles have energy efficiencies of 5.5 liters/100 km. The IEA reports that energy intensities for


                         80	                          Transport in Russia, 2007. Rosstat.
                         81	
                                                      In Russia, like elsewhere, there is a shortage of both statistical information and special studies on energy use in
                                                      transport (especially personal) as well as contradictory information on some indicators, like transport vehicles stock,
                                                      freight turnover, and average mileage. This less than ideal data leads to estimates that are limited.
                         82	
                                                      As estimated by CENEf for the World Bank. The average nameplate intensity of Russian-made cars is about equal
                                                      to that of foreign models of similar class, but actual energy intensities of Russian cars is lower. The higher energy
                                                      intensity of Russian-made engines is offset by lower car power, lower comfort (no air conditioners), and fewer safety
                                                      features. The growing share of foreign-made cars or foreign car models assembled in Russia on the Russian roads
                                                      therefore does not significantly influence average car fleet energy intensity in Russia.
                         83	
                                                      Ibid.
                         84	
                                                      G. Aslanyan, Russia’s Energy Efficiency and Indicators, Introduction to Energy Indicators Workshop 26-28 April
  60                                                  2006, International Energy Agency, Paris.
                                                                                                        4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




advanced gasoline- and diesel-fired vehicles with progressive engine downsizing, efficient combustion,
and increased use of variable valve control reaches 5.4-9.7 and 4.2-7.5 l/100 km84. Figure 45 shows
how Russia compares to European countries in terms of energy intensity of automobile passenger
transport. This is a reflection of less efficient vehicles manufactured in Russia (average specific fuel

Figure 45: Comparative Energy Intensities of Passenger Cars, 2004

           12


           10


            8
I/100 km




            6


            4


            2


            0
                 Poland

                           Malta

                                    Ireland

                                              France

                                                       Italy

                                                                 United
                                                               Kingdom

                                                                            Austria

                                                                                      Norway

                                                                                               Greece

                                                                                                        Germany

                                                                                                                  Slovenia

                                                                                                                             Croatia

                                                                                                                                       Netherlands

                                                                                                                                                     Hungary

                                                                                                                                                               Sweden

                                                                                                                                                                        Russia
Source: ODYSSEE for all countries except Russia. Russian data from CENEf.



consumption by 1.3-1.5 litre engine VAZ or GAZ is at the minimum 1.5 times higher than that of
similar foreign cars), import of used and therefore less efficient cars, as well as growing preference for
large cars such as SUVs, in a contrast with European countries.
Most of the investments required to lower energy intensity of petrol-driven vehicles in Russia
are economically viable. The incremental cost of investing in hybrid cars is economically viable if
drivers travel on average 12,000 km per year (saving 660 liters versus driving the same distance in
a Russian car), and assuming the car has a 10-year lifetime. Roughly 40 percent of the technical
potential is estimated to be financially viable.

Investments in new heavy-duty diesel-powered trucks could bring savings of roughly 20 percent
of 2005 consumption. According to U.S. estimates, investing in new heavy-duty vehicles increases
efficiency by 18-24 percent. The incremental cost of achieving a 20 percent increase in efficiency
(through investment in new trucks) is economically and financially viable for trucks driven on
average 35,000 km per year.

Most of the potential is concentrated in cities and includes savings from increased fuel efficiency
of vehicles as well as savings from structural changes (e.g. more public transportation, less driving
of personal cars). While there are no reliable data for Russia, expert opinion and comparison with
other countries suggests that most road transport traffic, energy consumption and potential for
improvement is concentrated within urban areas. In the US, for example, vehicle-miles traveled on
urban highways is double that of rural highways.85 In Thailand, gas consumption in Bangkok is


85
       	 Bureau of Transportation Statistics. US Department of Transportation.
86	
         Asia Pacific Energy Research Center, Institute of Energy Economics, Japan. Urban Transport Energy Use in the
         Pacific Region. 2007.                                                                                                                                                     61
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         390 toe per 1,000 people greater than the average gas consumption for the entire country.86 The
                         consequences of such concentrated fuel consumption and vehicle use are congestion and potentially
                         serious consequences for air quality, human health, and general quality of life in cities.
                         Rail transport
                         There is considerable technical potential to improve the energy efficiency of Russia’s railroads. Most
                         of the investments are economically and financially viable, or can be achieved with no incremental
                         capital cost for energy efficiency. The technical potential to improve energy efficiency in railroad
                         transportation was assessed at 3.7-4.4 billion kWh of electricity and 0.4-0.5 million tons of diesel
                         fuel. Railroad transport accounts for roughly 7 mtoe of final energy consumption, of which 2.8
                         mtoe is diesel fuel and 3.9 mtoe electricity.

                         Much of the investments required to improve energy efficiency in railroads can be made at no
                         incremental capital cost. The replacement and renovation of rolling stock and other equipment is
                         essential for the railroads to continue service. All new railroad vehicles are more efficient than those
                         currently operating in Russia, and therefore none of the new investment would be required for
                         additional energy efficiency per se. Roughly 7,000 passenger cars and freight electric locomotives
                         would need to be replaced along with 2,800 diesel locomotives. However, the efficiency gains
                         would be part of, not incremental to these investments. Other investments, which ultimately
                         improve both energy efficiency and system productivity include: the installation of 4,000 IT
                         management systems, the replacement of diesel engines for 1,300 locomotives, the replacement of
                         injection systems for 800 engines, and the installation of fuel meters.87

                         Pipeline transport
                         Energy consumption by crude oil and refined petroleum product pipelines grew faster than overall
                         commodity throughput during 2000-2005. Official statistics report that the energy intensity of
                         crude oil transportation rose by 76 percent between 2000 and 2005. The energy intensity of refined
                         petroleum products rose by 22 percent during the same time period. Electricity provides most of
                         the energy consumed in transporting crude oil and refined petroleum products. Although losses
                         from natural gas transport were relatively stable during 2000-2005, estimates of Russia’s annual
                         natural gas transportation losses (which include losses from leaks, breakdowns, maintenance and
                         repairs, and compressors) range from 1 to 3 percent of all gas transported in Russia.

                         There is significant technical potential to improve energy efficiency in pipeline transport of Russia’s
                         oil, gas and refined petroleum products. Russia’s gas and oil pipelines consume 37 percent of all
                         energy consumed in the transportation sector.88 More than 9 percent of Russia’s domestic natural
                         gas consumption is used by gas compressor stations to move the gas to Russian businesses, homes
                         and export markets. Gas consumption by gas pipelines could be reduced by roughly 43 percent, or
                         15.0 million m3.89

                         Most investments required to reduce losses in gas pipelines are economically and financially viable.
                         Measures to reduce losses include the installation of systems to “catch” the leaking gas when the
                         compressors are not in operation, low gas emission pneumatic devices (for continuous pneumatic


                         87	
                               Assessed by CENEf based on A.V. Kotelnikov (VNIIZhT). Russia’s railroads energy strategy. OAO RZhD, 2007.
                               Moscow.
                         88	   Source: 11-TER” statistical form for 2005. Rosstat (2006).
                         89	   Gazprom’s estimates of technical potential energy savings are more conservative. Gazprom estimates the technical at 10
                               bcm, with potential for reduction of losses in the long-distance transportation network of 2.6 bcm, potential for reduc-
  62                           tion of losses in the mains of 1.08 bcm, and potential for reduction of losses in the distribution systems of 3.68 bcm.
                                                                       4 . By How M u c h Ca n R u s s i a R e d u ce i t s En e rg y I nte n s i t y ?




pumping systems), improved audits and maintenance of valves and pipeline surfaces, installation
of low gas emission pneumatic devices (for periodic pneumatic pumping systems), sealing rods on
alternate/reciprocal compressors, the installation of dry seals on rotary compressors, the installation
of separators on the associated gas reservoirs, and replacement of compressed air equipment of
compressor stations. According to US Environmental Protection Agency assessments based on US
practices, such measures may reduce losses by 50 percent.90

Energy savings in oil and refined petroleum product pipelines could be achieved by installing more
advanced pumps and improving the quality of internal pipe surfaces. According to industry energy
managers, a large part of the growth of transport losses in these industries resulted from a higher
velocity of oil and products pumping through the overloaded pipeline system. As evidence of this,
in 2006, after the pipeline system was expanded, energy intensities decreased by roughly 10 percent.
Merely returning to year 2000 energy intensity levels would bring significant energy savings (0.4
mtoe).

4.7 By how much can Russia improve the energy efficiency of fuel
production and transformation?
This study estimates the total technical potential for energy efficiency investments in oil production
and refining at 4.0-5.6 mtoe; a level of savings equal to roughly 26 to 37 percent of overall
petroleum refinery energy use. The combined activities of oil extraction and preparation and
petroleum refining are equal to 23.8 mtoe total energy consumption. Figure 46 shows these savings

Figure 46: Potential to improve energy efficiency in fuel production and transformation



          Oil extraction and
        petroleum refineries
                                                                                                  Technical Potential
      Natural gas production                                                                      (mtoe)
              and processing
                                                                                                  2005 Energy Consumption
                                                                                                  (mtoe)
        Coal production and
             transformation

                               0    5   10       15      20       25       30        35

                                                        mtoe
Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



potentials for oil extraction and petroleum refineries, natural gas production and processing, and
coal production and transformation. This estimate excludes any reductions in gas use achieved by
reducing associated gas flaring in the process of oil production.
Utilization of APG presently flared in the process of oil production provides enormous potential
for improving energy efficiency in Russia. Russian estimates of APG flared in 2006 range from 14
to over 20 bcm.91 The study sponsored by the World Bank has estimated APG flaring to be higher,
at roughly 38 bcm per year. There are several options available to utilize flared gas. These include:




90	   www.epa.gov/methane/pdfs/macc_analysis.pdf
91	   “Presidential gas.” Oil and gas. Kommersant. Business guide. 28.08.2007. Pp. 20-21.                                                         63
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         gas collection, drying and sale to gas pipelines, reinjection into the producing field to increase
                         oil recovery, using liquid fractions as petrochemical feedstock, use for onsite electricity and heat
                         generation, and generation of electricity for sale to the grid.
                         The investments required to utilize a large proportion of the flared gas may be economically viable,
                         but are not yet financially viable. Domestic Russian prices are approaching these levels and are
                         expected to exceed them by 2010. International prices for Russian gas are already far above these
                         levels. As Box 2.1 mentions, utilization of just one-third of current flared associated gas at current
                         prices could generate incremental annual revenues of up to $2.3 billion per year.

                         Coal production and transformation
                         The potential for reducing energy use in this sector is estimated at 0.26 mtoe, based on a simple
                         assumption that efficiency could be improved by 15 percent. Comparative data in the coal industry
                         are scarce and the ranges of energy efficiencies depend heavily on the characteristics of the deposit
                         being mined.

                         Natural gas production and processing
                         The potential for reducing energy consumption at gas fields is estimated at 20 percent, again based
                         on simple assumption. The natural gas supply sector is the largest energy consumer in the country,
                         consuming 42.4 mtoe, or roughly 6.5 percent of Russia’s total primary energy supply. Natural gas
                         production and processing consumes 6.8 mtoe energy per year. An additional 2.9 mtoe are lost in
                         transmission and distribution of gas, and 32.7 mtoe are used by gas pipelines. Section 4.6 contains
                         a more detailed analysis of the energy efficiency potential of gas pipelines.




  64
                                                                     5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




5. How can Russia Improve
its Energy Efficiency?



C
          hapter 4 showed many opportunities for the government and individual investors to save
          both money and energy by investing in energy efficiency. Yet investors, public and private
          alike, have yet to take full advantage of these cost-saving opportunities because of a number
of barriers.

This chapter begins by summarizing the principal barriers to energy efficiency in Russia, as well as
possible solutions. In Section 5.1 the focus is on cross-cutting, economy-wide barriers and solutions.
Subsequent sections focus on barriers and solutions in specific sectors.

5.1 What are the principal barriers to improved energy efficiency in
Russia?
As noted in Section 1, the Russian populous and Russian policymakers have not yet embraced the
concept of energy efficiency. As evidence of this fact, there exists no coordinated, defined national
energy efficiency strategy or policy, nor any authority responsible for improving energy efficiency.
International experience has shown clearly that, in the absence of any concerted national policy and
clear political leadership at the highest level, energy efficiency measures are unlikely to enjoy much
widespread success.

Russia has shown some intent to make energy efficiency more of a priority, but these efforts have
been scattered and without any clear path to implementation. The government has issued a law on
energy saving (Federal Law No. 28), included energy efficiency in its energy strategy, and established
a Federal Targeted Program on Energy Efficiency (Federal Target Program “Energy Efficient
Economy” for 2002-2005, with prospects to extend to 2010). The Federal Law and energy strategy
are largely declarative. The Federal Targeted Program focused its funding primarily on the oil, gas
and nuclear sectors. In addition, as a result of administrative reforms from 2003-2005, energy
efficiency has largely been omitted from the responsibilities of the federal government.

The absence of a cohesive, enforceable strategy for improving energy efficiency in Russia may not be
the root cause of energy efficiency in Russia, but it is the most important issue to address in order to
initiate and demonstrate the government’s commitment to energy efficiency. Without such a strategy,
none of the underlying barriers – described in more detail below – have much hope of disappearing.

Little appreciation of energy efficiency
Evidence of a lack of appreciation of the value of energy efficiency can be seen in the culture, values,
and social norms of all sectors in Russia. Russian industry managers consistently underestimate the
energy savings potential of prospective energy efficiency investments made by their companies and
tend to put a greater emphasis on increasing revenues than on cutting costs. Consumers expect                                           65
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         a higher rate of return on their energy efficiency investments than they do on other investments.
                         Russian banks rarely lend to energy efficiency projects because they perceive a higher risk. Russian
                         energy providers opt for building new generation capacity over saving energy. Russian regulators
                         do not value the intrinsic energy efficiency benefits of long-term investments in upgrades to utility
                         operations and equipment.

                         People need motivation and leadership to change their cultural perspective and daily habits. Energy
                         consumption is a passive and invisible process. Most consumers only interact with the costs of their
                         energy usage, and implicitly, the benefits of their energy savings, when they pay their monthly utility
                         bills. As such, consumers tend not to associate their behavior (i.e. their energy consumption) with
                         its relevant costs on a daily basis. Resistance to energy efficient actions is worse in a business, or
                         even public, environment. Many companies are hesitant to adopt practices unless they are generally
                         accepted in the business community and many professionals are hesitant to promote energy
                         efficiency projects without the support of company leaders.

                         Russian society has yet to reach its energy efficiency “tipping point”. People are more likely to follow
                         the lead of those around them. Even when an action, like the adoption of energy efficient measures,
                         has proven personal utility, studies have shown that individuals are more likely to act similarly if
                         they know their neighbors and peers are doing it as well. However, in Russia there is not yet a
                         critical majority that accepts and appreciates the value and benefits of energy efficiency. As a result,
                         the majority of individuals, companies, investors, and public officials are not willing to take the risk
                         of investing time, money, and will power in energy efficiency initiatives. This, however, is doubly
                         harmful to energy efficiency, as the lack of initiative at the individual level creates a society-wide
                         standstill in which there is no consensus that something needs to be done about energy efficiency.

                         Also pervasive in Russia is the perception that utility services are public goods. These beliefs are
                         neither good nor bad in a moral sense, but may prove impractical if Russia wants to harness its
                         potential for saving energy.

                         Lack of statistical data and general awareness
                         Without proper statistics on energy consumption and production at the local, regional, national,
                         and sectoral level, Russia will never be able to fully understand its energy efficiency challenges and
                         potential. Lack of data is a problem in every sector of the Russian economy. Yet realizing Russia’s
                         energy efficiency potential is not possible until companies, individuals, producers, and consumers
                         understand the role they play. For example, in Russia’s heating sector, no assessment of the heat
                         supply-demand balance exists for cities or regions. Information on heat use by sectors is not analyzed
                         systematically, or, in most cases, is the information even collected because the output of boilers is not
                         generally metered. Likewise, no system exists for gathering and processing the energy consumption
                         statistics of public organizations at either the regional or federal level in Russia. As a result, valuable
                         government budget expenditures are wasted on energy use in public organizations.92 Without
                         detailed and systematic data reporting, collection, and analysis, producers and end-users will not be
                         able to understand the full benefits they can achieve by saving energy.

                         A general lack of awareness about energy efficiency among firms and consumers is one of the greatest
                         obstacles to investments in energy efficiency in Russia and throughout the world. This lack of
                         awareness lies at the root of many of the behavioral obstacles described above. Industry professionals
                         and individual consumers alike lack the knowledge required to find and invest in energy efficiency.
                         Russian banks lack sufficient knowledge of energy efficiency investments to offer financing,

  66
                         92	
                               Public organizations are also often referred to as “budgetary institutions” in Russia.
                                                                              5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




or at least lack the time – relative to the time required to make other investments – required to
understand energy efficiency investments. Russian consumers lack the necessary information on
the efficiency of different types of equipment available to their households, and many industrial
companies lack the internal expertise necessary to create an energy efficiency investment plan. Even
when individuals are aware of the benefits of saving energy, they do not know how to achieve it or
where to go for advice. Easily accessible and user-friendly information is the key to increasing the
energy efficiency investments and initiatives of individual people and companies.

Dilute incentives or split-incentives
In many sectors, investors have no way to capture the savings from energy efficiency investments.
More specifically, incentives to reduce energy use are usually split between numerous actors and
those who have the ability or know-how to invest are often not the same as those who benefit from
the energy saving measures. Architects and builders pay little attention to energy efficiency because
they do not live in the buildings and therefore reap none of the benefits of more energy efficient
design and construction. Managers in government-owned utilities show no interest in adopting
energy efficiency measures because their performance within the company, and the company’s
performance within government, is evaluated on standards that inherently discourage measures to
improve energy efficiency, or, more generally, any measures which might improve the efficiency of
operations and maintenance. Individual apartment owners have no incentive (and often no capital)
to repair windows and doors in common areas, even though such measures would allow all owners
to reduce energy consumption within their apartments. These are examples only. Many other
examples of this “split-incentives” or “dilute incentives” problem can be found in nearly every sector.

Environmental externalities
Environmental pollution, including localized pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, offer a more
extreme, but no less relevant example of dilute incentives to improve energy efficiency. Russian
energy prices do not include the negative health effects of SOx, and NOx emissions released when
energy is consumed. By not accounting for the environmental and health costs associated with energy
production and consumption, Russia artificially lowers the cost of consuming energy. Without a system
(for example, taxation or a cap and trade system) to effectively capture these negative externalities,
Russia will fall short of realizing its full energy efficiency potential. As a signatory to the Kyoto
Protocol, Russia also clearly understands the value of reducing carbon emissions, but currently lacks an
internal mechanism to recognize the costs of such emissions to society.

To some extent, social values in Russia also present an obstacle to improving energy efficiency.
Environmental concerns do not have the same affect on behavior in Russia as they do in other
countries. Consumers in some European countries, for example, will implicitly price in the value of
environmental externalities. Environmentally-conscious consumers will curtail their consumption
even when the price they pay for energy is not the principal driver of this behavior.

Tariff methodologies and tariffs
The way in which tariffs are set, and the level, structure, and design of Russia’s utility tariffs
discourage energy efficient behavior by energy consumers and energy producers. As a recent
Economist article noted, “In the eyes of many consumers, electricity and fuel are often too cheap to
be worth saving, especially in countries where prices are subsidized.”93 In Russia, more specifically:
       n	    The current “cost plus” tariff methodology used in many sectors provides an incentive for
             utilities to increase rather than decrease operating and maintenance (O&M) expenditures.


93	                                                                                                                                              67
      “Energy Efficiency: The Elusive Negawatt.” The Economist. May 8 2008.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                         The tariff structure, in which customers pay a volumetric tariff, without a fixed cost
                                         component, further discourages utilities from reducing loads because they risk not
                                         recovering all of their fixed costs.
                                 n	      Customer tariff levels are below the long-term sustainable cost of production and delivery.
                                         Tariff structures allow for continued cross-subsidization of residential customers with
                                         revenues from larger customers. Moreover, tariff design, in some cases, remains based on
                                         norms (for example, the size of the customer’s dwelling served, or the number of residents
                                         in the customer’s dwelling served) rather than actual consumption.

                         Increasing the cost of energy to consumers is a politically and socially contentious policy move,
                         but continuing to subsidize energy prices for every consumer, across the board, is not a sustainable
                         practice for the Russian government in the long-run. The government is well aware of these issues,
                         and is taking steps to gradually raise the tariffs, and pilot alternative tariff methodologies.

                         High transaction costs
                         High transaction costs often hamper access to financing and project completion for many small energy
                         efficiency projects. Financial institutions evaluate transaction costs when deciding whether or not to
                         finance energy efficiency projects. Typically, transaction costs refer to the cost burden born as a result
                         of each financing operation, which can include the up-front costs incurred to get a program started
                         or the loan-by-loan administrative costs for a line of financing operations. Other transaction costs can
                         be associated with information processing and with structuring deals to control the transaction. High
                         transaction costs for financial institutions can eat away their profits. Hence, when energy efficiency
                         transactions are small and scattered, banks are not motivated to develop financing for such projects.
                         More generally, transaction costs hinder energy efficiency among all end-users due to the small-size of
                         improvements and small-returns of many energy efficiency investments. Irrespective of cost, the number
                         of improvements needed to realize substantial energy savings may require too much time, knowledge,
                         and effort to make energy efficiency investments “worth it” for many end-users.

                         Lack of competition
                         The exclusive rights of supply granted to Russia’s large energy suppliers undoubtedly stifle energy
                         efficiency in the country. As indicated in Section 1, Russia frequently receives recommendations on the
                         need for greater competition, enveloped in messages about energy efficiency. The message of this report
                         is more direct. Competition is not an end in itself, but a means to improving energy efficiency, and
                         with it, national welfare in Russia. Russia will not be able to reap the gains of energy efficiency without
                         allowing for greater competition in energy production and supply. Monopolies or oligopolies in the oil,
                         gas, and electricity sectors severely limit Russia’s ability to tap into its energy efficiency potential.

                         Moreover, some vestiges of Soviet central planning persist in Russia’s energy sector. The perceived
                         need for widespread government ownership and operation of energy companies is one example
                         of this heritage. Government ownership per se is not problematic if governance is good enough
                         to encourage efficiency and superior performance. Evidence suggests, however, that competition
                         is better at encouraging efficiency and performance, and that competition is more difficult to
                         implement when the government has a direct financial stake in a particular sector and is involved in
                         the management of companies.

                         5.2 What can Russia do to overcome these obstacles?
                         There are signs that substantial political leadership now exists in Russia to tackle the country’s energy
                         efficiency challenges. As noted in previous sections, Former President and current Prime Minister
  68                     Vladimir Putin has indicated that under Russia’s leadership of the G8, the summit will prioritize
                                                                                                                                     5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




the topic of energy efficiency. He has also clearly indicated the need to increase energy tariffs for
regulated services (electricity, gas, and heating) to full cost-recovery levels. Since his inauguration,
President Medvedev has also made several public statements identifying Russia’s inefficient use of
energy, and the associated economic and ecological consequences. If such high level leadership is
translated into policy, the policy implemented as law, and the laws implemented in the form of
funding or enforceable regulations, Russia may well be able to effectively reduce its energy intensity.

Concerted and coordinated action will be required on the part of Russian policymakers if Russia is
to achieve its energy savings potential. Experience from countries like Denmark (see Box 5.1) have,
in particular, shown the importance of political will and coordinated action in creating a national
ethos geared toward energy saving.

Box 5.1: The importance of political will and coordinated action in Denmark

       Denmark responded to the 1970s oil crises with a massive national initiative, and has, as a result, made impressive improvements in energy
       efficiency. Denmark has managed to double its GDP since the oil crisis, while keeping energy consumption relatively flat and significantly
       reducing energy intensity and CO2 emissions.

                         2.0E+11                                                                                                                    25000
                         1.8E+11
                         1.6E+11                                                                                                                    20000
                         1.4E+11
                         1.2E+11                                                                                                                    15000
        Real GDP, US $




                                                                                                                                                            kgoe

                         1.0E+11
                         8.0E+10                                                                                                                    10000
                         6.0E+10
                         4.0E+10                                                                                                                    5000           Real GDP
                         2.0E+10                                                                                                                                   Total Energy
                                                                                                                                                                   Supply
                         0.0E+00                                                                                                                    0
                                   1975
                                          1977
                                                 1979
                                                        1981
                                                               1983
                                                                      1985
                                                                             1987
                                                                                    1989
                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                         1995
                                                                                                                1997
                                                                                                                       1999
                                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                                                             2005




       At the time of the first oil embargo, Denmark was 99 percent dependent on foreign oil. The crisis led the country to develop a broad based
       strategy to reduce its dependence on fossil fuels. Taxes were increased on natural gas and petroleum to reduce consumption, and new initiatives
       helped develop new sources of energy. These efforts eventually allowed the country to lower the national debt, have a healthier environment, and
       be less oil dependent. Government policies have enabled homes and buildings to be warmed by surplus heat from power plants. Consumers do
       their part by heavily utilizing public transportation, buying energy efficient appliances, and building their homes with thick insulation.

       These efforts have made Denmark’s energy consumption per unit of gross domestic product the lowest in the European Union, as well as the
       country with the highest proportion of electricity generated by renewable sources.

Sources: Abboud, Leila. “How Denmark Paved Way to Energy Independence.” Wall Street Journal. 18 April 2007. Energy consumption data from the International Energy
Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set.


It is important that the Russian government enact certain policy measures first in order to most
effectively initiate coordinated and systematic action on energy efficiency. Specifically, establishing
a dedicated energy efficiency agency and improving energy data collection in all sectors must be
done before other policy measures can be implemented effectively. Many other government actions
will require sector-specific analysis and solutions. These solutions differ considerably in the time and
cost required to implement them and in the impact they can have in improving energy efficiency.
Sections 5.3 through 5.9 therefore prioritize the recommendations based on whether they are “quick
wins”, “essential”, or “high cost, high return”. These labels capture attributes of preparation time, cost
of implementation, and impact. More specifically:                                                                                                                                                       69
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Quick Wins are those interventions which can be introduced in less than a year and are likely to
                         produce significant impact at moderate cost, such as:
                             n	 Energy efficiency information awareness campaign
                             n	 Flexible budgeting and procurement rules in public organizations
                             n	 Transformation of municipal heat suppliers into commercial entities


                         Essentials are interventions which form the backbone of a comprehensive energy efficiency policy,
                         affecting the areas of greatest potential by raising standards and enabling investment, such as:
                                 n	      Energy efficiency standards in areas such as buildings, industrial equipment, fuel efficiency
                                 n	      Demand side management
                                 n	      Energy efficiency as a condition for subsidy in capital renovation
                                 n	      Coordinated heat supply plans
                                 n	      Facilitated financing through financial institutions

                         High Cost, High Return interventions carry a much higher initial cost to the economy, but most of
                         them have a high return in terms of energy savings and can increase the financial potential for many
                         energy efficiency investments that are currently financially unviable. In addition, these measures are
                         critical to ensuring long lasting impact and sustainability, such as:
                                 n	 Tariff reform
                                 n	 Liberalization of electricity and gas market
                                 n	 Integrated transport planning
                                 n	 Charging the full cost of vehicle usage.

                         Many of the solutions discussed in Sections 5.3 through 5.9 require sector-specific analysis and
                         implementation, but share an approach common to many sectors. These cross-sectoral approaches
                         are discussed briefly below, before proceeding to a detailed discussion of sector-specific barriers and
                         solutions.

                         Establishment of an energy efficiency champion
                         Dedicated government agencies for energy efficiency have become an increasingly common way to
                         coordinate government action on energy efficiency. At the federal level in Russia, the responsibility
                         for energy efficiency policy has been moving from one agency to another, resulting in a general lack
                         of ownership of the agenda. While the late 1990s saw several good-faith attempts to raise the profile
                         of energy efficiency, today Russia’s energy efficiency policy is once again fragmented and lacking
                         clear ownership. Russia may want to consider designating an energy efficiency champion, which may
                         include creating a separate office of energy efficiency within the country.

                         In a survey conducted by the World Energy Council, roughly two-thirds of countries surveyed have
                         a national energy efficiency agency and over 90 percent a Ministry department dedicated to energy
                         efficiency. Energy efficiency agencies aid in promoting energy efficiency policies by designing,
                         implementing and evaluating programs and measures that involve a range of stakeholders, including
                         companies, NGOs, and local authorities. Generally, these agencies are public institutions funded
                         through the federal budget, a tax on energy, or, in the case of some developing countries, overseas
                         technical assistance funds. Whether Russia chooses to organize an energy efficiency champion as a
                         separate agency, a department within a ministry, or through some other arrangement (i.e. a national
                         project), the functions of the program should include:
  70
                                                                                                      5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




        n	 Providing technical expertise to the government and consumers. This is primarily done by
           creating and supervising a system for certifying the quality of energy efficiency equipment
           and services.
        n	 Advising the government and sector regulators on legal and regulatory policy to improve
           energy efficiency.
        n	 Coordinating government initiatives in the field of energy efficiency. Dedicated agencies
           help to avoid scattered, uncoordinated, and overlapping efforts by multiple ministries.
        n	 Negotiating financial packages for energy efficiency with international financial institutions.
           Such agencies can serve as the arbiter between IFIs and the government to implement
           financial assistance and even develop new funding schemes for energy efficiency.94

Statistical data gathering
Systematic and comprehensive data gathering is crucial to the adoption of energy efficient practices
and investments in Russia. The statistics office and line ministries need to develop uniform and user-
friendly methods for recording, reporting, and aggregating individual, firm, sector-wide, and regional
data on energy production and consumption. Local government can also be instrumental in this
process by facilitating and managing data gathering in a more detailed manner. This information is
vital in developing benchmarking and best practices guidelines to demonstrate the potential benefits
of energy efficiency investments to end-users. IEAs planned cooperation with the Russia Statistical
office can be instrumental in putting in place a comprehensive data gathering system.

Information dissemination
Individual households, companies, and public organizations need to be equipped with the know-
how and provided the expertise to carry out energy efficiency investments. In addition, information
dissemination can raise general public awareness and acceptance of energy efficiency practices
as necessary and socially beneficial decisions. Information dissemination campaigns can come in
multiple forms, but need to be tailored to the end-user in order to be effective. Such campaigns can
include: advertising campaigns on energy efficiency, energy labeling of appliances and equipment,
advice on equipment and behavioral practices, education at schools, and interactive expert
advice through audits. Whether or not the government is directly involved in the information
dissemination, such campaigns are often funded with government support. Box 5.2 describes how
behavior towards environmental regulation and carbon taxes changed in Sweden.

Box 5.2: Changing behavior through information dissemination in Sweden

       Sustained policy efforts coupled with information campaigns that tap into the Swedish national identity have allowed Sweden to become
       a global frontrunner in reducing energy consumption and tackling climate change. Sweden introduced a CO2 tax that has been gradually
       raised since its introduction in 1991. The government estimates that CO2 emissions would be 20 percent higher had taxes remained at
       1990 levels. Swedish regulators met initial opposition from the business community; however, as the link between these taxes and the
       competitive edge gained from environmental progressiveness became clearer, the business community began to buy in. As Andreas Carlgren,
       the Swedish Minister for the Environment, describes, “they [the business community] said this is really a part of what gives us opportunities
       in competition and what really makes us strong in competitiveness… Today, the main experience is that the business community is really
       in favor of quite progressive environmental action.”

       Part of Sweden’s success in changing behavior comes from who the target audience is for many of their environment-friendly campaigns:
       Swedish youth. As Calgren explains, “Many of the Swedish preschools are engaged in taking children into nature, giving them experience of
       nature. I think that’s also part of the everyday life of most Swedes.” At Global College, a public upper secondary school in central Stockholm,
       teaching is focused on enhancing students understanding that their future must be built on sustainable development. Such support for
       creating environmentally conscious and concerned students is projected in the Swedish society at large. Progressive environmental action
       is now a part of the Swedish tradition and national identity.

Source: Yamamori, Yuka. Sweden Offers Glimpse of Sustainable Future. Jiji Press, Ltd. 27 May 2008.
                                                                                                                                                                         71
94	   Energy Efficiency Policies around the World: Review and Evaluation. World Energy Council: 2008. 38-40.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Energy efficiency standards
                         Many obstacles hindering the full adoption of energy efficiency initiatives can be overcome by the
                         creation and enforcement of mandatory standards. The development and enforcement of standards
                         provides end-users with reliable data that helps to guarantee the benefits of their energy efficiency
                         investment. Similarly, standards help to reduce the risk for financiers by assuring a certain quality level
                         for the investment. Standards also can alleviate the split-incentive problem by mandating certain criteria
                         for various actors in the product’s (e.g., appliance, equipment, or building) value chain.

                         Standards must be developed to allow flexibility for revision. Energy efficient technologies are
                         constantly being updated and standards should be continuously revised to reflect these changes.
                         Moreover, standards must enjoy widespread and systematic enforcement in order to be effective.
                         Voluntary standards do little to encourage widespread adoption of energy efficient practices and the
                         ambivalent perception of energy efficiency in Russia suggests that few individuals or companies will
                         take this initiative on their own. Sector-specific recommendations on standards will be elaborated in
                         the subsections to follow.

                         It is also important for Russia to recognize the limits of mandatory standards. If mandatory standards
                         allow for excessive intrusion into the economic decisions of private firms or households, they risk
                         simply becoming opportunities for the government to interfere. In such cases, the standards may prove
                         better at promoting rent seeking by government officials than promoting energy efficiency.

                         Promotion of energy performance contracts (EPCs)
                         Energy performance contracts (EPCs) can play a significant role in helping Russia to improve its
                         energy efficiency. EPCs allow specialist third party contractors to take on responsibility for helping
                         an organization – a private firm, public organization, or apartment building – save energy by taking
                         on some of the financing responsibility for capital repairs and providing the technical expertise to
                         achieve energy savings, in return for a fixed fee or a share of the money saved. The use of EPCs can
                         help solve many of the informational and split/dilute incentives obstacles to investing in energy
                         efficiency in Russia.

                         EPCs are commonly associated with Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) Box 5.3 summarizes how
                         ESCOs function. ESCOs can help stimulate energy efficiency investments, but have proven difficult
                         to establish without proper government support and regulation. ESCOs have been successful in
                         the US and Canada, but only with significant government support, and in China but only with
                         substantial World Bank and government backing. In contrast, ESCOs have enjoyed only limited
                         success in Europe with a few exceptions like Germany.

                         The use of EPCs does not need the relatively expensive institutional foundations created for ESCOs in
                         countries like the US and China. The use of EPCs, rather than the creation of an ESCO industry per
                         se, is a better idea for Russia. It is ultimately more important for the government to provide incentives
                         for organizations to strike EPC-like contracts with private firms, specialist non-profit organizations,
                         or even with their own employees. As will be discussed in more detail below, EPC contracts can be
                         particularly effective in addressing the barriers to energy efficiency in public organizations.




  72
                                                                                                                   5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Box 5.3: Overview of ESCOs

       Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) are firms that provide technical assistance and sometimes financial support in order to lower the
       transaction costs of energy efficiency investments. The companies use their expertise in the design and implementation of energy efficiency
       projects to guarantee energy savings for their clients from the investment. This guarantee is formalized in an energy performance contract
       (EPC). Benefits of ESCOs have been evident mainly in small projects and specific segments of the market where the technical expertise
       they provide is necessary. Taking on such roles as engineer, project manager, financier, and guarantor, ESCOs act as a catalyst for energy
       efficiency projects by removing barriers to investments.
       The parameters of the EPC depend on whether or not the ESCO is financing the project. Due to the small firm size and technical nature of
       many of these projects many financial institutions are wary of making loans. In these instances, the ESCO, which is a larger, more financially
       stable firm, procures a loan and funds the project itself. Repayment by the client to the ESCO is based on a share of the cost savings as a
       result of the energy efficiency investment. The ESCO in turn passes on a portion of this share to the bank in order to repay the loan. This
       agreement appeases the client because they are only obligated to pay for the project using the savings they achieve from its success, while
       also providing assurance that the ESCO will make a worthwhile investment.
       In other EPCs, the ESCO does not act as the financier. Instead, the client acquires funds directly from a financial institution and pays the
       ESCO for design and implementation of the project. As part of the EPC the ESCO guarantees cost savings over a defined period. If the cost
       savings are not reached the ESCO will refund all or part of the payments they have received. Even though the ESCO does not fund the project
       directly, as a guarantor of the project’s success they indirectly play a role in financing as both the financial institution and client enter into
       their agreement with an understanding of this insurance.
       ESCOs with financier-like capabilities are more feasible in countries still in the process of developing energy efficiency projects. This is
       primarily due to the ESCO’s greater ability to obtain loans. Often, however, ESCOs require government support since they represent a
       deviation from normal business practice and firms need incentives and assurance of the new market. The United States and Canada were
       successful in this endeavor by promoting programs in support of energy efficiency renovation, which created a market for ESCO services.
       Additionally, as ESCOs and energy efficient investment become more common, the availability of direct loans to end user clients increases.
       Consequently, with this transition the guarantee model EPC becomes the common agreement.
       It is important to note that ESCOs are not the sole solution to energy efficiency investment. These companies are susceptible to the same
       risk calculation by financial institutions as their clients. Even for ESCOs, a high level of technical knowledge and capital backing is necessary
       in order to qualify for loans. These standards limit entry into the ESCO market and can deem them a less than optimal solution without
       proper incentives and support.

Source: Taylor, Robert P., Chandrasekar Govindarajalu, Jeremy Levin, Anke S. Meyer and William A. Ward. “Financing Energy Efficiency: Lessons from Brazil, China, India, and
Beyond.” World Bank, 2008. p. 131-138.


Continuation of tariff reforms
The government is right to continue the electricity tariff reforms as it moves toward greater sector
liberalization. On May 8, 2008, former Russian President Vladimir Putin announced that by 2011
Russia will have transitioned to long-run marginal cost tariffs in energy networks in every region
in the country.95 Tariff reform is about recognizing a utility’s true cost of service. Measures that
ensure customers incur the full cost of the resources they consume are essential for bringing about
energy savings. Among American states, for every cent per kilowatt-hour by which prices exceed the
national average, energy consumption drops by about 7 percent off the average.96 For example, in
California, where electricity rates are eighth highest in the nation, consumption has stayed relative
flat over the past 30 years at about 7,000 kWh per year, while U.S. consumption per person climbed
50 percent and is now roughly 12,300 kWh per year.97

In Russia, this will mean not just higher tariffs but also the introduction of different tariff structures
and charges which specifically encourage energy efficiency:
        n	      Reforming how the utility recovers its cost of service through tariffs. The tariff level, tariff
                schedule (customer classification), and tariff design (for example, a “one part” or “two parts”
                tariff ) must reflect as closely as possible the costs as the utility incurs them. In Russia, this

95	
    Transcript of Meeting of the Russian Federation State Duma. Moscow. May 8, 2008. http://www.kremlin.ru/
96	 “Energy Efficiency: The Elusive Negawatt.” The Economist. May 8 2008.
97	 Lavelle, Marianne. “When Saving Power Means Higher Profits.” U.S. News & World Report. 28 April 2008. 48.                                                                         73
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                         means phasing out customer cross-subsidization, and introducing volumetric tariffs where
                                         consumption norms (for example, in the heating sector where consumption is determined
                                         by the size of the customer’s apartment) are still used. Widespread metering is obviously
                                         required in order for utilities to be able to implement this recommendation
                                 n	      Reforming how the cost of service is determined. The way in which cost-plus regulation
                                         is implemented in Russia discourages any improvements in operating and maintenance
                                         efficiency, and discourages capital investments even if those investments may yield cost
                                         savings for customers over time. More generally, utility regulation – in Russia as in most
                                         other parts of the world – historically gives energy utilities an inherent incentive to build
                                         more production capacity, and sell more energy, rather than save it. In the face of rising
                                         energy prices, many regulators are now looking for ways to change this incentive, by
                                         “decoupling” profits from energy sales
                                 n	      Elimination of across the board subsidies. The Russian government imparts tariff subsidies
                                         in order to maintain the affordability of energy for all members of society. However, due
                                         to higher levels of consumption among wealthier consumers, the non-poor tend to benefit
                                         much more from tariff subsidies than the poor. This is demonstrated by the fact that the
                                         poorest 20 percent of the Russian population consumes less than 10 percent of utilities
                                         while the wealthiest 30 percent consume roughly 48 percent of utilities. As a result, less
                                         than 10 percent of these subsidies go to the poorest and almost half go the wealthiest of
                                         the population. The same lack of discretion applies to industry where companies that do
                                         not need subsidies benefit as much as those that do need them.

                         Figure 47: Utilities Expenditures by Consumption Deciles

                                   25%
                                                                                                                                            22.1%
                                   20%

                                   15%
                                                                                                                                    14.7%
                                                                                                                         11.6%                      % of total
                                                                                                              10.4%                                 expenditures
                                   10%                                                   8.4%       9.1%
                                                                  6.6%         7.5%
                                                       5.7%
                                    5%      3.8%

                                    0%
                                               1          2          3          4          5             6        7          8        9      10
                                                                                               deciles
                         Source: Rosstat, Worldbank’s “Russian Economic Report” #16 and “Poverty Diagnostic” (2008, forthcoming).



                         Tariff reform is necessary in order for Russia to become energy efficient. However, a poorly managed
                         transition to higher energy prices could have severe political and social consequences. This should
                         not deter policymakers from making necessary reforms but suggests that caution should be used
                         so as to plan tariff reforms in a way that cushions the impact on households and poorer segments
                         of the population. Tariff reforms coupled by targeted subsidies will allow prices to transition to a
                         cost-recovery level, while ensuring that those who are least able to absorb the price increases are
                         compensated accordingly.

                         Demand Side Management
                         Demand Side Management (DSM) encompasses a range of measures designed to reduce customer
                         energy usage, or change the times when customers use energy. Such programs are typically executed
  74                     by utilities, government agencies, or third party organizations, under the force of government
                                                                                                                5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




regulation. DSM programs can take various routes towards encouraging efficient energy use among
customers. Programs that are designed to realize economically viable energy efficiency opportunities
for customers will, for example, pay customers to change out light bulbs or upgrade heating and air
conditioning systems. Other programs seek to understand barriers, many of which are discussed in
this report, to customer utilization of energy efficient devices, appliances, processes, or measures,
and use funds to permanently alter or remove those barriers. For example, a program designed to
encourage the distribution of efficient water heaters would keep highly efficient models on hand
and encourage their sales when customers call for replacement.98 More information on how Russia
might implement DSM is included in the discussion of solutions for the electricity sector, below.

Taxation or “cap-and-trade” scheme for pollutants
Russian producers and end-users alike need to be responsible for the negative consequences of their
energy production and consumption. Ultimately, someone has to bear these costs. If Russia does not
have a system in place for passing the costs of externalities on to responsible parties, the government
will likely have to bear the consequences in the form of greater long-term costs of energy in public
expenditure budgets, higher subsidies to energy efficiency investments, and decreased social welfare.

Carbon tax schemes and “cap-and-trade” schemes are the two most commonly used methods for
capturing the externalities of greenhouse gas emissions. Each has their advantages and disadvantages.
Cap-and-trade mechanisms have been particularly successful in limiting NOx and SOx pollution in
parts of the United States. Box 5.4 describes this experience.

Box 5.4: Cap-and-Trade Regime for NOx and SOx in the US

      In order to curb the harmful health and environmental effects of acid rain, which results from sulfur dioxide (SO 2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx)
      emissions, the U.S. Congress established the Acid Rain Program in the 1990 Clean Air Act. Under the program, the U.S. EPA implemented a
      market-based cap and trade mechanism in order to reduce SO2 emissions by 10 million tons, or roughly half of the amount of SO2 emitted
      in 1980. To achieve the reduction, the Act required a two-phase tightening of restrictions placed on fossil fuel-fired power plants. The Act
      also called for a two million ton reduction in NOx emission by the year 2000.
      The basic elements of the cap and trade program included:
      n	     Mandatory cap on emissions. The EPA set a limit on the total tons of emissions that could be emitted. This provided a standard by
             which progress could be measured and allocated market value to trading tons of pollution.
      n	     Fixed number of allowances. Each polluting entity was allocated a fixed number of allowances giving them the right to emit one
             ton of pollution at any time.
      n	     Banking and trading. By reducing emissions below allowance levels, polluting entities could sell their extra allowances. Conversely,
             a polluter that deemed a reduction in emissions too expensive could purchase allowances from another source. Buyers and sellers also
             had the ability to “bank” allowances for future use.
      n	     Monitoring. Accuracy, consistency and transparency of data gathering and reporting of emissions levels were vital to the success of
             the allowance trading system and achieving the targeted reduction.
      In 2002, The Economist deemed the Acid Rain Program “probably the greatest green success story of the past decade.” The program achieved
      100 percent compliance in reducing SO2 emissions below 1980 levels, and some power plants achieved reductions 22 percent below their
      mandated levels. Additionally, the program was much less costly than was originally anticipated. Before the launch of the program, SO2
      allowances were expected to cost in the range of $579-$1,935 per ton of SO2. As of January 2003 actual market prices for SO2 allowances
      were $150 per ton. Overall the program was estimated to cost between $3 and $25 billion per year, but after the first two years, costs were
      only $0.8 billion per year. Since 1994, over 222 million allowances have been transferred and over 43,000 transactions have taken place.
      Roughly 98 percent of those transfers took place online, resulting in very low transaction costs to participating entities.

Sources: 	     “The Cap and Trade Success Story.” The Environmental Defense Fund. September 17, 2007. http://www.edf.org/page.cfm?tagID=1085.
	              “Acid Rain Program: Basic Information.” U.S. EPA Clean Air Markets. http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/progsregs/arp/basic.html
	              McLean, Brian. Experience with Acid Rain and NOx Cap and Trade Programs. Office of Atmosphere Programs, U.S. EPA. February 27, 2007.


98	
      Harrington, Cheryl. “Who Should Deliver Ratepayer Funded Energy Efficiency?” The Regulatory Assistance Project.
      May 2003.                                                                                                                                                                    75
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Moreover, as Russia’s current emissions are considerably lower than Kyoto Protocol levels and will
                         likely remain so until and even after 2012, the country could be in a position to sell its surplus –
                         some 3 billion tons for the period 2008-2012 – on the international carbon market. Figure 48
                         shows Russia’s CO2 reduction potential. The revenues from these sales could be used to attract
                         much-needed investments in infrastructure and the energy sector, particularly in energy efficiency.
                         Box 5.5 describes how Russia could generate energy efficiency investment funds by selling its carbon
                         credit surplus.

                         Figure 48: Russia’s CO2 reduction potential



                                                  Heat generation

                                            Electricity generation

                                                        Transport




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   millions of T CO2
                                                   Manufacturing

                              Fuel production and Transformation

                                                       Residential

                                                             Other

                                                                     0           50              100                    150                     200                     250                     300
                                                                                                   * Emission reductions originated in different end-use sectors due to electricity and heat demand, as well as
                                                                                                   transmission and distribution losses reduction, are accounted for in electricity and heat generation sectors.

                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



                         Box 5.5: Selling surplus carbon credits in Russia

                                 The greenhouse gas emissions from Russia’s economy are today much lower (and will stay much lower for the next 10 years) than in 1991.
                                 The difference between the 1991 level and today’s level is called “headroom” and is measured in “Assigned Amount Units (AAU)”. There are
                                 several countries, notably Japan and Spain, which have expressed interest in buying surplus AAUs from Russia as long as these AAUs are
                                 “greened”. In order to “green” AAUs, the proceeds of the sale of the AAUs must be invested in emission reduction projects and programs.
                                 Ideally, Russia needs a mechanism in place in order to green these credits beyond 2012. One possible mechanism to oversee the process of
                                 “greening” AAUs is the Economy Modernization Fund (EMF). The EMF could be administered by the World Bank in order to provide comfort
                                 to buyers who want to ensure the “green integrity” of the Fund. The EMF would function as follows:
                                 n	   The Fund will have priority areas as well as mechanism for estimating the emissions reductions that could be achieved through the
                                      identified measures. Areas of support could be:
                                      –	 Modernization of public infrastructure like district heating systems in Russian cities and gas distribution;
                                      –	 Energy Efficiency measures in electricity generation and supply;
                                      –	 Coal mine modernization and usage of coal mine methane;
                                      –	 Development of alternative energies.
                                 n	   The World Bank, in close cooperation with its Russian counterparts, would identify and discuss the sale of AAUs with potential
                                      buyers.
                                 n	   The Russian government would make available 50-100 million AAUs and would place them in the Economy Modernization Fund. The
                                      50-100 million AAUs could have a value of some €500-1000 million.




  76
                                                                                  5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Transaction cost support to financial institutions
Several efforts can be made to mediate the effects of transaction costs on energy efficiency
investments. Similar projects can be aggregated and bundled into one financing package or can be
replicated in a large number of similar enterprises or situations. Another solution used by banks
in many countries is clustering. The cluster approach can bring specialized technical support and
outreach to smaller enterprises along with follow-up loan provision based on a standardized,
replicable model that can result in substantial reductions in transaction costs per loan. In addition,
there are a few simple “public goods” kinds of steps that can be taken by governments or by industry
groups, including the following:
       n	    Use of strong and credible expertise. Financiers and end users place a high value on
             having agents with good reputations from past experience provide technical expertise.
             Developing a cadre of agents certified by the government or another apex agency provides
             a certain level of comfort to the end users and financiers, and can reduce costs associated
             with verification of claimed savings from proposed projects.
       n	    Provision of concessional finance to subsidize initially high transaction costs during
             development phases, to buy down risks involved in program startup, to develop and pilot
             new approaches and products, and to develop the wide range of capacities needed for
             program implementation.
       n	    Assistance to the participating financial institutions in refining and standardizing
             loan applications/appraisal procedures. This requires specialized technical assistance to
             each individual bank and follow-up training assistance.
       n	    Intensive support to the local bank branches in marketing and refining their energy
             efficiency lending schemes. This work includes dissemination of information about
             schemes to energy efficiency project developers and client enterprises.99

5.3 What are the barriers and solutions to improving energy efficiency
in Russia’s residential buildings?
As the second largest end-user of energy in Russia, the residential housing sector has the greatest
energy savings potential. Energy savings as a result of investments in the housing sector are even
greater because of the multiplier effect discussed in Chapter 4.

Figure 49 shows some of the principal barriers in the residential sector, and solutions to those
barriers prioritized based on impact, preparation time and cost of implementation. These barriers
and solutions are discussed in more detail in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2, respectively. Some of the most
significant barriers to energy efficiency in the residential sector relate to the wide array of actors
involved in the construction, management, and use of buildings. All have the ability to influence
how energy is consumed within the buildings, but few have the incentive. Those that might have the
incentive are not well placed to know what investments might save energy, and if they did know, do
not have the means to pay for or finance those investments. These barriers, however, are inherent to
the residential housing sector nearly everywhere in the world. Significant barriers specific to Russia
are: (as mentioned in section 5.1) the low tariffs faced by household customers, a lack of enforcement
of existing federal standards for new construction, and a lack of awareness or appreciation for energy
efficiency among homeowners, which ultimately drives their behavior. To add to the complexity,
barriers and solutions often differ depending on the vintage of the building and whether the energy
efficiency measures involve new construction, reconstruction, or capital repairs.


99	                                                                                                                                                  77
      R. Taylor et al. Financing Energy Efficiency, Lessons from Brazil, China, India and Beyond. World Bank 2008.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Solutions for these barriers require, first and foremost, the enforcement of energy efficiency
                         standards where they exist, and the creation of standards where they do not exist. Additional
                         gains can be made through better collection of energy consumption data on residential buildings,
                         and better dissemination of information to homeowners. There may also be room to use EPCs in
                         conjunction with Homeowners Associations (HoAs) or building management companies.

                         Figure 49: Barriers and Solutions to Energy Efficiency in Residential Housing

                           Barriers                                            Solutions
                           n 	 Apartment owners or building                    Quick Wins   	 Disseminate information on energy efficiency
                                                                                            n
                               managers have little information                             	 Make existing energy efficiency standards mandatory for
                                                                                            n
                               on EE                                                          the construction and renovation of buildings and monitor
                           n 	 Construction and thermal                                       energy efficiency of buildings in use
                               insulation standards will become                Essentials   	 Require that energy efficiency improvements be made as a
                                                                                            n
                               voluntary in 2010                                              condition of government financial support for capital repairs
                           n 	 Developers and their contractors                             	 Provide incentives for more widespread metering
                                                                                            n
                               have no incentive to improve EE
                                                                                            	 Develop standardized performance-based management
                                                                                            n
                           n 	 Apartment owners have no                                       contracts for HOAs and building management companies
                               incentive to invest in EE
                                                                                            	 Establish a capital repairs loan guarantee facility
                                                                                            n
                           n 	 Apartment owners have limited
                               access to capital to make EE                                 	 Introduce energy efficiency standards and labeling for
                                                                                            n

                               investments                                                    lighting and household appliances


                         5.3.1 What is hindering energy efficiency investments in the residential sector?
                         The barriers and solutions for improving energy efficiency in residential buildings differ substantially
                         depending on the age of the building. The barriers for new construction and existing buildings are
                         therefore discussed separately below.

                         New buildings
                         For new buildings, the principal barriers to energy efficiency are that:
                                 n	      Developers and their contractors have no incentive to improve energy efficiency.
                                         Developers, their financiers and contractors (architects, builders, material and equipment
                                         suppliers) have control over the energy efficiency of the structures they build, but because
                                         they do not live in the building, and do not pay the energy bills, have no incentive to
                                         improve the structure’s energy efficiency
                                 n	      Thermal performance standards will become voluntary in 2010. The Federal Law
                                         on Technical Regulation of 2003 provided for all federal standards in Russia to become
                                         voluntary in 2010. Developers and their contractors will therefore face no requirement
                                         (and as described above, no incentive) to use techniques that improve a building’s energy
                                         efficiency. Furthermore, many regions are still lacking well-developed and transparent
                                         procedures to ensure compliance with the existing standards
                                 n	      Developers and their contractors have limited knowledge of energy efficiency. Studies
                                         in Russia have shown no correlation between higher costs and the use of energy efficient
                                         technologies.100 Many construction firms still do not utilize these technologies because
                                         they lack knowledge of new technologies and lack proper training to implement new
                                         technologies. Even when firms are aware of these technologies, many are unwilling to
                                         change business as usual and hesitant to adopt new technologies.
  78
                         100	
                                CENEf.
                                                                       5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Existing buildings
In existing buildings, the principle barriers to energy efficiency are that:
     n	   Energy efficiency is not monitored. At present there is no agency in Russia that monitors
          energy efficiency in residential buildings. As a result it is difficult to assess the need for
          energy efficiency retrofits and the specific measures that need to be undertaken during
          reconstruction, modernization or capital repairs of the buildings
     	    Lack of data and improper analysis proved particularly detrimental to a capital repairs
          project in Norilsk. The program financed insulation measures in a number of municipal
          buildings. However, a post-implementation assessment revealed that improper selection
          and design criteria led to investments in the wrong buildings. As a result of poor
          prioritization of buildings, technologies used and solutions provided, the capital repair
          investments were in many cases ineffective
     n	   Apartment owners or building managers have little information on energy efficiency.
          Apartment owners, homeowners associations, and local authorities lack the data and
          information they need to make energy efficiency investments. There is, specifically, a
          dearth of information on:
          –	 Household energy use. Metering of energy use, particularly of heat, is scarce. Very little
             metering exists at municipal boilers or at the buildings that receive heat supply. Most
             customers therefore pay for heat supply on a normative consumption basis (usually, per
             m2 of their apartment’s floor space, or per apartment inhabitant). Actual consumption
             of heat in a building tends to differ substantially from consumption estimated on a
             normative basis. Consumers also typically have no way to control their supply of heat
             (neither at the building nor apartment level), often because of the vertical, single pipe
             design of heating systems in many buildings. Because of this lack of control, and for
             other reasons discussed in Section 5.6, Russia’s apartment buildings are often over-
             heated, leaving ventilation (opening windows in mid-winter) as the only option for
             keeping rooms a comfortable temperature
          –	 The best measures or investments to improve energy efficiency, and the energy savings
             potential of such measures or investments. The majority of residents are unaware of
             the effectiveness of simple and affordable insulation measures, such as installation
             of heat-reflecting screens, adhesion of low-emission film on windows or the use of
             modern infiltration prevention materials. Weatherization of buildings and installation
             of triple-pane windows alone can reduce heating energy consumption by 40%.
     n	   Apartment owners have limited access to capital to make energy efficiency invest-
          ments. Consumer loans in Russia typically have short terms (1-2 years) and high inter-
          est rates. Often low-income households and pensioners do not qualify for these loans. In
          addition, households will typically prioritize investments they better understand, or with
          perceived higher returns (such as home mortgages or automobiles).
     n	   Apartment owners (rightly or wrongly) have no incentive to invest in energy
          efficiency. Households in Russia typically show little appreciation for energy efficiency
          measures because they perceive the savings from energy efficiency as being too small to
          bother. As Section 1.5 indicates, households are not alone. Common spaces in residential
          buildings, in particular, account for as much as 50 percent of the energy savings potential
          in residential buildings. Much of that savings could be enjoyed by apartment owners, as
          simple repairs to doors, windows and hallways in common areas yield substantial savings
          in heating costs. However, because these common areas belong to the municipality and
          not to apartment owners, and because very few municipalities have the funds to make the
          investments, the savings are never realized
                                                                                                                                          79
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                             	        In other countries, motives other than financial – such as concern for the environment,
                                                      for community, or for a neighbor’s wellbeing – help drive energy efficiency. In European
                                                      countries, for instance, individuals invest in energy efficiency largely because of an increased
                                                      social awareness of and concern for the environment. In the U.S. during the late 1970s,
                                                      energy efficiency became popular because of individuals’ concern with energy scarcity after
                                                      the oil crisis. In still other cases, energy conservation (such as driving a hybrid car in the US)
                                                      becomes a status symbol, or political statement. These non-financial motives obviously exist
                                                      in Russia but have not yet been effectively linked in the population’s mind to actions which
                                                      conserve energy. The population does not see any clear reason to conserve energy.

                         5.3.2 How can energy efficiency in the housing sector be improved?
                         In order to realize its energy efficiency in residential buildings, the government will need to:
                                             n	       Make existing energy efficiency standards mandatory for the construction and
                                                      renovation of buildings. Building codes have been a widely used instrument to promote
                                                      energy efficiency in other countries and are often mandatory. Such standards already exist
                                                      in Russia, like the Standards on Thermal Performance of Buildings (2003) or the Territorial
                                                      Construction Norms, which have been adopted in 52 Russian regions including Moscow.
                                                      However, as previously mentioned, the Standard on Thermal Performance of Buildings is
                                                      due to become voluntary in 2010. This can put at risk the sustainability of energy efficiency
                                                      improvements in new buildings. This risk can be addressed by making the C Class (“normal”)
                                                      of Russia’s Standard on Thermal Performance of Buildings a mandatory baseline requirement.
                                                      The required minimum standard level should however be raised over time.
                                             	        Mandating energy efficiency in new and renovated buildings is the most cost effective way
                                                      to ensure energy savings in the residential sector. However, it should not be a one-time
                                                      legislative policy endeavor. Technologies change with time. What were considered the most
                                                      energy efficient technologies 15 years ago are no longer the most energy efficient today. In
                                                      order to achieve and maintain energy savings in the housing sector, standards on the thermal
                                                      performance of buildings must be periodically reviewed and revised to allow performance
                                                      criteria to best reflect the most efficient technologies. Figure 50 demonstrates how Denmark
                                                      building energy performance criteria have been continuously revised since their introduction
                                                      in 1979. These building performance criteria have become increasingly strict to encourage
                                                      continued innovation in building energy consumption reduction. These revisions also show
                                                      how close building regulation will eventually come to passive house criteria.

                         Figure 50: Denmark’s evolving Building Regulations (BRs)

                                                 10

                                                  8

                                                  6
                          Litre oil per m2




                                                  4

                                                  2

                                                  0
                                                           Average      Average existing   BR-82   BR-95         BR-2006          BR-2010           BR-2015           Passive
                                                      existing buildings buildings –                                                                                  house
                                                           – Russia        Denmark

  80                     Source: Bach, Peter. Energy Efficiency in Denmark: What concepts seem to be most promising? Danish Energy Authority. 28 March 2008 and CENEf.
                                                                                                            5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




        n	      Monitor energy efficiency of buildings in use. The government can introduce mandatory
                energy efficiency monitoring and energy passports for buildings in order to ensure
                compliance with standards and identify potential savings. This would require developing
                standardized statistical reporting forms and carrying out regular energy assessments of
                buildings. Energy passports are needed to make energy efficiency a sign of quality for
                residential housing, as well as to stimulate innovation and efficiency investments. Energy
                passports can also serve the purpose of raising awareness of both buyers and sellers of houses.
        	       Such measures have been recently introduced in Germany where it will soon be required
                that an energy performance certificate, essentially the same as a passport, be made available
                when selling, renting, or leasing any building built before 1965. By mid-2009, certificates
                will be required for newer and non-residential buildings along with the requirement that
                the certificate be publicly displayed in buildings with more than 1,000 square meters
                of usable area. These certificates have been in effect for new buildings and all buildings
                undergoing major renovations since 2002. In Germany, the certificates contain three
                important pieces of information for the consumer: an energy indicator/rating, reference
                values for the rating, and any renovations that have already been undertaken.101
        n	      Require that energy efficiency improvements be made as a condition of federal or local
                financial support for capital repairs. According to the Housing Code of the Russian
                Federation, capital repairs to residential premises are the responsibility of apartment owners.
                A number of federal and municipal laws exist (for example, as provided in Federal Law #185
                of July 21, 2007 on Fund to Assist Reform of Housing and Communal Services) which
                provide for financial support to capital investments in existing buildings. The concept of
                energy efficiency has had limited acknowledgement in Russian legislation, and these laws
                are no different. Introducing and clearly defining the concept of energy efficiency in federal
                and municipal funding provisions would ensure that households include energy efficiency
                investments when making capital repairs. Box 5.6 shows an example of how Japan provides
                subsidies for capital repairs in residential housing.

Box 5.6: Government subsidies for capital repairs

       In Japan subsidies are offered for house renovation to meet thermal insulation standards required by the Energy Conservation Law, the
       installation of energy efficiency appliances, and efficient renewable energy systems. These apply to both newly constructed and existing
       houses. To qualify for the subsidies, energy consumption must be reduced by 15 percent for newly constructed houses and by 25 percent
       for renovated houses, compared to the standard energy consumption without energy efficiency improvement work. Homeowners are also
       required to report their energy consumption for three years after renovation or construction of houses. Expected savings calculations are
       submitted to the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO), which administers the subsidies. Homeowners
       are then required to report their actual energy savings by answering NEDO’s questionnaires.

Source: “Promoting Energy Efficiency Investments.” Case Studies in the Residential Sector. IEA, 2008. 62.


        n	      Establish a capital repairs loan guarantee facility. Many countries have created an insti-
                tution, which provides loan guarantees to owner associations for capital repairs. The task
                for such a facility would be to:
                 –	 Provide a loan guarantee, which would reduce banks’ perception of risk and prompt
                    local banks to begin working with home owners associations in financing energy
                    efficiency-related capital repairs; and
                 –	 Help shift owners’ attitudes from being dependent on municipalities for home
                    improvements to taking on the responsibility for their own property.

101	
       Jaensch, Volker. “German Energy Certificate for Buildings – Experience with Implementing the EU Building Directive
       in Germany.” DENA. 24 April 2006.                                                                                                                                       81
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Such facilities have been an especially important source of financing for capital repairs of residential
                         buildings in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltics. In Slovakia, for example,
                         guarantees for loans to owner associations, cooperatives, and managing organizations are issued
                         by the only state-owned bank in the country, the State Bank for Guarantees and Development. In
                         Lithuania and Estonia, specialized guarantee agencies were created with support from the state.
                         The agencies provide guarantees to home owners’ associations and managing companies for capital
                         repairs and renovation of multi-apartment buildings for up to 75 percent of the loan amount.
                         The fee charged for the guarantee is usually 1.5-2 percent of the guaranteed loan amount. Box 5.7
                         describes in more detail how loans to HOA-managed buildings were financed in Lithuania.

                         Subsidies have sometimes also been used to facilitate access to capital for home modernization.
                         For instance, in Slovakia a home owners association can obtain a subsidized loan from the State
                         Fund for Housing Development for improving energy efficiency of a multi-apartment building.
                         The loans can cover up to 80 percent of the cost of renovation project for up to 20 years (with a
                         limited amount per apartment) at a 3.3 percent annual interest rate if the project is included into
                         the Program for Renovation of Housing Stock. Projects that are not part of the Program can obtain
                         loans for 10 to 20 years at a 4.9-6.5 percent annual interest rate. To qualify for the subsidized loans
                         households must achieve at least a 20 percent reduction in energy use compared to their pre-project
                         consumption levels.

                         Box 5.7: Energy efficiency in Homeowners Association (HOA)-managed residential multifamily
                         buildings in Lithuania

                                 From 1996 to 2001, the Lithuania Energy Efficiency Housing Pilot Project, financed by the World Bank, took on the task of advising
                                 Homeowners Associations (HOAs), financing loans, and providing technical assistance and public information in an effort to increase the
                                 energy efficiency of multifamily residential buildings in Lithuania.

                                 Financially, the project included various components to assure that participants received market competitive rates while cushioning those
                                 participants who wanted to invest, but didn’t have the upfront capital resources necessary to do so. Specifically, the project provided:
                                 n	   Loans in local currency at an 11 percent fixed interest rate, minimum 10 percent down payment, no mortgage requirements for HOAs,
                                      and a maximum loan maturity of 10 years
                                 n	   Since January 1999, matching grants of 30 percent of the loan principal, not exceeding $12.5 per square meter, from the Lithuanian
                                      government

                                 The project stipulated that loan proceeds could only be use for energy efficiency investments. Loan repayments were shared between
                                 homeowners, typically based on apartment size, according to agreements made in HOA meetings. A portion of existing heat subsidies to
                                 low-income households were allowed to be used towards repaying the energy efficiency loans.

                                 Over the course of the project, 726 HOAs were advised on energy efficiency, 331 residential buildings were audited, and 229 energy efficiency
                                 projects were implemented. From 1996 to 2001, loans to HOAs totaled $7.2 million with an average loan per building of $31,500 and an
                                 average loan per apartment of $1,000.

                                 On average, homeowners registered energy savings of 17 percent per year. Based on a survey, 56 percent of homeowners reported a decrease
                                 in their heating bill and 48 percent reported improvement in housing quality.

                         Source: Taylor, Robert P. et. al. Financing Energy Efficiency: Lessons from Brazil, China, India, and Beyond. The World Bank: 2008. 206-109.


                                 n	       Develop standardized performance-based management contracts for Homeowners
                                          Associations (HOAs) and building management companies. HOAs or building
                                          management companies can help aggregate individual homeowner capital to make
                                          building-wide energy efficiency investments, or improvements in common areas. There
                                          are currently few functional HOAs in Russia, and the HOAs that do exist often lack the
                                          coordination to gain sufficient financial support for investments in common areas, and

  82
                                                                                                                5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




                lack any property to offer banks as collateral. Few building management companies are yet
                well-established, but this may change as recent legislation requires all buildings to appoint
                building managers. Their remuneration, moreover, is usually based on a fixed fee which
                does not provide incentives to promote energy efficiency.
        	       The government can help ensure that HOAs and building managers, as they do take on
                more important roles in Russia, include energy management as one of their roles. Building
                managers, whether individuals in an HOA or private firms, can fulfill the functions of an
                ESCO, for example, by guaranteeing building residents some level of “comfort” (in terms of
                temperature, and availability of lighting), rather than a specific level of energy consumption,
                in return for a fixed fee. The government can promote this concept by issuing standardized,
                “model” building management contracts, which include an energy management
                component, service quality (or “comfort”) indicators, and payment terms which offer
                the building manager some incentive to take on this role. Since individual meters can be
                expensive and allocators have not proven to be particularly cost-effective in many countries,
                simple formulas based on heated area, capacity of radiators, level of window insulation, and
                availability of thermostatic valves can be developed to allocate heating cost and encourage
                energy efficiency. Management companies shall also be motivated to invest in energy
                efficiency of common areas by being able to retain part of the savings.
        n	      Provide incentives for more widespread metering. Metering of gas and heating can
                produce significant savings in residential buildings. Customers can be given incentives
                to purchase their own meters by raising the normative tariff, so that their bills decrease
                substantially when consumption is measured and charged on a metered, instead of
                normative basis. The government may want to consider providing free or subsidized meters
                to low income customers, through a targeted program. In many cases, customers could
                already save money by moving to metered connections, without increasing normative
                tariffs. In Rostov, for example, there are more than 3,200 heat consumers in municipal
                housing connected to the centralized heating system. Heat meters were installed in
                357 houses.102 Actual heat consumption in the houses equipped with meters is 12-37
                percent lower than consumption norms. For hot water, it is 10-33 percent lower than the
                norms.103 To help facilitate the success of metering incentive programs, federal, regional,
                and municipal governments may also want to help disseminate information about the
                benefits and savings from metering.

Box 5.8: Water metering program in Yerevan, Armenia

       In order to overcome the two main inhibitors to widespread metering – the cost of installation and the process of transitioning customers
       to a new payment scheme – the municipal government of Yerevan enacted a law that provided partial forgiveness of debts to customers
       who installed water meters. As a result of the program, installation of meters increased from 1,000 in 1999 to 277,000 in 2005. Nearly 80
       percent of residential customers are now covered by meters, which includes approximately 90 percent of Yerevan’s multi-apartment build-
       ings. As a result of the metering, and the use of volumetric tariffs for water consumption, average daily residential per capita consumption
       decreased from 250 liters to 110 liters. Overall, consumption in all sectors has decreased from 112 million m3 in 2002 to 77 million m3 in
       2005, a reduction of nearly 30 percent.

Source: Mugabi, J., P. Marin, and J.Kamkwalala. Improving Urban Water Services through Delegated Management to a Private Operator: Case study of Yerevan, Armenia.



102	
       A. Kovalchuk, The state of municipal heat supply system and ways to improve it. Rostov-on-Don 2006.
103	   This study recommends apartment-level metering for gas and electricity, but not for heating. Apartment-level heat
       meters and heat allocators are prohibitively expensive (roughly 150,000 Russian rubles, or $6,000). Allocators are,
       moreover, easy to manipulate.


                                                                                                                                                                                   83
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 	       In addition to meters, which allow customers to monitor and control their consumption,
                                         buildings can be designed to more effectively facilitate regulation of heat supply at
                                         the individual level. Horizontally designed heating systems or two-pipe vertical heating
                                         systems can allow for individual control of heat consumption. However, due to the high
                                         costs of redesigning heating systems in existing buildings, application of more efficient
                                         heating system designs is only recommended in new buildings or those undergoing
                                         substantial renovations. Likewise, such systems must be coupled with individual meters,
                                         which provide an economic incentive to proactively control and reduce consumption at
                                         the apartment level.
                                 n	      Introduce energy efficiency standards and labeling for lighting and household
                                         appliances. Energy efficiency standards and labeling will encourage industries to produce
                                         efficient products and help inform consumers about which goods are most efficient.
                                         Similar standards have been extensively used with success throughout the world. Roughly
                                         60 percent of European countries have refrigerator standards. In OECD America and Asia
                                         over 80 percent of countries have appliance standards. In Europe refrigerator standards
                                         coupled with a labeling program increased sales of Class A refrigerators (the most energy
                                         efficient class) from 5 percent in 1995 to 23 percent in 2000 and 61 percent in 2005.
                                         In addition, studies have shown that increased use of more efficient appliances have not
                                         resulted in higher prices for consumers in these countries.104 Box 5.9 describes Australia’s
                                         Minimum Efficiency Standards Performance and labeling program.

                         Box 5.9: Efficiency Standards and Labeling for Household Appliances

                                 Many countries have introduced labeling programs and efficiency standards to promote the use
                                 of energy efficient household appliances. Labeling programs provide consumers with information
                                 to make purchases with energy efficiency in mind. Efficiency minimum standards improve the
                                 energy efficiency of new appliances and remove the least efficient appliances from the market.
                                 The two differ in that standards force removal of inefficient and usually inexpensive appliances
                                 from the market that labeling would only try to persuade consumers to avoid. In most cases, these
                                 two approaches used in conjunction with one another have successfully allowed manufacturers to
                                 adapt to the restrictions without raising the cost of the appliances to consumers.

                                 Australia’s Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS) and labeling program demonstrates
                                 the successful application of standards and labels to household appliances. In Australia, numerous
                                 household products have MEPS, meaning that they have a minimum energy efficiency level
                                 regulated by the Australian government. Approved energy labels are also mandatory for a
                                 number of electrical products including: refrigerators and freezers, clothes washers, clothes dryers,
                                 dishwashers, and air conditioners. These labels give the consumer a quick comparative assessment
                                 of the product’s energy efficiency and show the product’s typical energy consumption in a year.

                                 To be successful, these programs must be continually revised and upgraded to encourage improved
                                 technology and more efficient products.

                         Source: www.energyrating.gov.au


                                 n	      Consider how best to change behavior. The manner in which information is presented
                                         is a key determinant of whether or not individuals will change their behavior. Raising
                                         awareness about energy efficiency by linking it to environmental campaigns has been
                                         largely successful in Europe. However, a recent study in California showed that people
                                         are more influenced by social norms than information. The study monitored a campaign
                                         to get hotel guests to reuse their towels. The information was given to the guests in three


  84                     104	
                                Energy Efficiency Policies around the World: Review and Evaluation. World Energy Council 2008. 43-47.
                                                                                                     5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




                formats. One proposal said that reusing towels was good for the environment. A second
                proposal focused on cooperation by encouraging guests to partner with the hotel to save
                the environment. A third proposal – the most successful in getting guests to reuse their
                towels – suggested that guests should do as their fellow patrons have done and reuse
                their towels.105 This brief example has major implications for dissemination campaigns.
                In creating an energy efficiency information campaign in Russia, policymakers will need
                to focus on tactics that most effectively engender response and action on the part of
                individual households. Only when energy efficiency becomes a social norm will everyday
                consumption practices and energy use values shift in Russia.
        n	      Launch an information dissemination campaign about energy efficiency. As noted
                above in the discussion about behavior, an information dissemination campaign can be
                an effective tool to inform households about the multiple benefits and ease of investing
                in energy efficiency. Information dissemination is vital to increasing awareness of and
                appreciation for energy efficiency. Such a campaign might include information about:
                capital repairs, including financing opportunities, usage of apartment insulation materials,
                or the benefits from using more efficient lighting. Box 5.10 describes an innovative
                information and dissemination campaign run by a not-for-profit organization in the UK.

Box 5.10: Kirklees Energy Services: An Information Service Provider

       In the U.K., several energy savings organizations jointly created Kirklees Energy Services, a not-for-profit company designed to provide free
       and impartial energy advice to domestic households. The service is considered a “one-stop shop” for energy efficiency information and advice
       accessed via a free phone number. Specifically, the program:
       n	    Advises homeowners on energy efficiency measures by referring them to an approved installer who inspects their property and
             recommends appropriate energy efficiency work,
       n	    Provides a cash back payment to the household to reimburse the owner for the cost of the inspection,
       n	    Offers installation of energy efficiency measures (i.e. cavity wall insulation, loft insulation, draught-proofing of doors and windows,
             heating controls, hot-water tank insulation, floor insulation and condensing boilers) at discount prices due to network with installers
             set up by KES,
       n	    Provides information on preferential loan schemes and financial institutions willing to fund energy efficiency investments.

Source: PPPs for Energy. Danish Energy Authority. 28 March 2008.



5.4 What are the barriers and solutions to improving energy efficiency
in Russia’s public buildings?
In contrast with the other sectors discussed in this chapter, the government can directly remove
barriers to energy efficiency in Russia’s public organizations, and can directly receive the benefits
of removing these barriers. Public organizations (POs) are under the control of federal or local
governments, and activities to improve their energy efficiency can be implemented through existing
administrative measures. Moreover, improving energy efficiency frees up fiscal resources, particularly
for constrained regional and municipal budgets, that can be redirected to meeting other needs.

Supporting energy efficiency measures in POs is the fastest and easiest way that Russia can send a
strong signal to the private sector and the public about the government’s commitment to energy
efficiency. Since POs fall directly under the government’s control, they do not experience common
motivational barriers, like the split-incentive problem, that hamper energy efficiency improvements

105	
       Cialdini, Robert B. “Using Social Norms to Preserve the Environment.” Arizona State University, Department of                                                    85
       Psychology.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         in other sectors. As such, if the Russian government is dedicated to promoting energy efficiency, it
                         should not delay in introducing obligatory EE standards and other incentives to promote the energy
                         efficiency of public buildings.

                         The most significant barriers to energy efficiency in Russia’s public organizations relate to the laws
                         and rules for procurement, budgeting, and transferring funds to those institutions. Key solutions
                         include changing the budgeting rules and better enforcing existing standards. Figure 51 shows the
                         principal barriers and prioritized solutions to energy efficiency in public buildings. We discuss these
                         barriers in detail in Section 5.4.1 and Section 5.4.2.

                         Figure 51: Barriers and Solutions to Energy Efficiency in Public Organizations

                           Barriers                                            Solutions
                           n 	 Public organizations cannot retain any          Quick Wins   n	 Allow more budget flexibility
                               energy cost savings                                          n	 Change procurement legislation to allow for
                           n 	 Public organizations cannot enter into                          multi-year contracts
                               financing agreements, multi-year                             n	 Prioritize EE equipment procurement
                               contracts, or contracts that pay for the
                               investment through future savings               Essentials   n	 Set energy consumption targets based on
                                                                                               benchmarking
                           n 	 Procurement rules favor lowest cost of
                               bid, not the lowest lifetime cost                            n	 Introduce autonomous status of public
                                                                                               organizations
                           n 	 Very little statistical information or
                               awareness exists                                             n	 Disseminate information on energy efficiency



                         5.4.1 What is hindering energy efficiency in public organizations?
                         The principal barriers to energy efficiency in public organizations are the following:
                                 n	      Budgeting rules tend to give public organizations more incentives to use energy
                                         to excess, than to save it. The current method of budgeting for public organizations’
                                         communal expenses does not consider actual energy needs. Public organizations generally
                                         do not participate in local government budgeting processes. Instead, allocations for public
                                         organizations’ communal expenditures are determined by the Municipality, and driven
                                         largely by previous years’ consumption or a statistical average for public organizations of
                                         a similar type. Yet public organizations that serve one and the same social purpose may
                                         differ radically by their time in service, level of depreciation of equipment, characteristics
                                         of their building, and type of energy consumption.
                                 	       Under current budgeting rules, public organizations are not allowed to retain or reallocate
                                         any savings on communal expenses. For example, if a public organization within a
                                         municipality consumes below its limits, the municipal government will likely cut that
                                         organization’s limits for subsequent years. Public organizations therefore often consume
                                         just beyond their budget to ensure that they will not lose funding in the future. The same
                                         set of perverse incentives applies to regional and municipal governments themselves.
                                         If municipalities consistently fail to spend their budgets, they run the risk of having the
                                         regional government reduce allocations for years to come.




  86
                                                                                  5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




       n	   Public organizations cannot enter into financing agreements, multi-year contracts,
            or contracts that pay for the investment through future savings. Energy efficiency
            investments require medium- to long-term financing, but public organizations, by law,
            cannot enter into any sort of financing arrangement with third parties, nor could they
            (until recently) enter into contracts for periods longer than a year.106 Procurement
            legislation, moreover, does not allow public organizations to fund investments by sharing
            future savings on operating costs, nor does it consider life-cycle cost concepts. These
            restrictions collectively stifle the evolution of organizations like ESCOs, or companies
            providing ESCO-like functions, which could help public organizations save on energy
            consumption.
       n	   Energy-related standards are not enforced. Where energy-related sanitary and comfort
            standards do exist for public buildings, they are often not enforced. Because lighting
            systems in many Russian schools are 40-50 years old, lighting often falls well below the
            standard. Temperature levels may be either too high or too low, depending on the time
            of year and the building in question. In some of the regions of Far East of Russia, low
            temperatures in Public Organizations during winters still represent a serious problem.
            Paying for energy resources, which are often supplied in excess, public organizations do
            not receive the proper level of comfort. As a result, there is evidence of schoolchildren
            developing eyesight problems, and high rates of illness due to under- and over-heating.107
       n	   Very little statistical information or awareness exists. As is the case in other sectors,
            there is a dearth of information on energy consumption by public organizations, and
            how that consumption might be reduced. No system for gathering and processing data
            on public organizations’ energy consumption exists at any level of government. Public
            Organizations themselves are generally unaware of whether they need to improve energy
            efficiency, and what can be done to improve energy efficiency (which includes not just
            reducing energy consumption, but achieving more satisfactory levels of output, for
            example, better lighting and heating). For all of the reasons described above, they rarely
            adopt modern energy management techniques, and show a great deal of conservatism in
            their choice of equipment, technologies and service personnel (“zavhozes”).

5.4.2 How can energy efficiency in public organizations be improved?
Despite the ease of intervening to improve energy efficiency in public sector buildings, and its
advantages, little has yet been done in Russia. There have been only a few attempts in selected
regions (described in Box 5.11). These efforts have been largely related to introducing metering
which, while important, is limited in its effectiveness if other crucial energy efficiency improvements
have not been made. Metering can only achieve so much if, for example, tariffs remain below cost
recovery levels, or utility billing practices do not change. In a number of cases in which metering
has been introduced in public buildings, actual billing and payments are continued on the basis
of norms rather than actual consumption due to lack of management organizations’ awareness,
incentives or, in some cases, technological complications.




106	 Until recently, the budget code of the Russian Federation did not allow public organizations to enter into contracts
     for periods longer than a year. Since 2007, mid-term (three year) budgeting is being gradually introduced, but a three-
     year term remains too short to see payback from many energy efficiency investments.
107	 CENEf , Assistance to energy efficiency and energy resources saving in budget and communal sphere.


                                                                                                                                                     87
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Box 5.11: Efforts to Improve Metering in Russia’s Regions

                                 Many regions in Russia have recognized the need to install meters in order to take better stock of their fuel, energy, and water consumption.
                                 Installation of meters is an initial, crucial step towards realizing other energy efficiency measures, as it makes clear to consumers the
                                 relationship between their energy consumption and its cost.

                                 These measures have been shown to help oblasts save considerably on utility expenses. For example:
                                 n	   Chelyabinskaya oblast has installed more than 1,600 heat, electricity, and water meters in its public buildings. The meters allowed the
                                      oblast to save 170 million Russian rubles in communal expenses between 1997-2005, which constitutes around 3 percent of the oblast’s
                                      expenses on communal services in 2005.
                                 n	   In 2001-2002 Rostovskaya oblast spent 52 million Russian rubles from the public budget to install 893 heat meters, 355 water meters,
                                      30 gas meters, and 65 electricity meters in public buildings. Average monthly savings resulting from these investments reached
                                      20-40 percent. Total energy consumption by public institutions dropped, on average, by 10.7 percent between 2001 and 2002. More
                                      specifically, energy consumption dropped 30.5 percent in educational institutions, 13 percent in cultural institutions, and 5 percent in
                                      hospitals and healthcare facilities. The pay-back period after installation of these meters averaged 2-4 years
                                 n	   In Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, 100 heat meters were installed in 2006-2007 in city schools and kindergartens. The meters resulted in
                                      savings in utility expenses by 19 percent in 2007 and 13 percent during the heating season of 2006-2007.

                         Source: CENEf – regional benchmarking for World Bank Group.


                         In addition to increasing metering, the government can give public organizations a number of
                         powerful incentives to improve energy efficiency. The government can help public organizations by:
                                 n	      Allowing more flexibility in budgeting. Public organizations need more flexibility to
                                         retain some of their savings on energy consumption. The government can allow the
                                         savings to be shifted to other categories of expenditure, rather than simply saved for future
                                         energy consumption. With greater flexibility, public organizations could transfer the
                                         savings to other energy-related expenditures (for example, capital expenditure which will
                                         yield further energy savings), or may wish to allow the transfer of surplus funds to other
                                         categories of expenditure (for example, learning materials for schools, or pharmaceuticals
                                         for clinics).
                                 	       Ultimately, Russia could provide the greatest incentive for public organizations to
                                         improve their energy efficiency if it transferred budget funding as block grants, without
                                         any earmarking for any particular expenditure. Such budgeting is legally possible in Russia
                                         but is rarely used because public organizations are typically perceived as passive spenders
                                         of budget funds, and incapable of proper financial management. Some forms of block
                                         grants (normative per capita financing – a term used in Russia) are being introduced in
                                         Russia in a number of pilot regions, such as Chuvash Republic, Samarskaya Oblast, and
                                         Yakutia; but to a great extend the approach applies only to core expenditures, such as, in
                                         the case of schools, textbooks and teachers’ salaries, financed from the regional budget,
                                         with communal expenses remaining uncovered by the new system
                                 n	      Giving public organizations autonomous status. Russia could give public organizations
                                         a further boost toward financial autonomy by granting some organizations the status of
                                         autonomous organization. As with lump sum grants, budget funds are allocated to an
                                         autonomous organization without any specific provisions as to how to use them. The
                                         status of autonomous organization gives the public organization the additional ability to
                                         optimize not only budget-financed spending, but also off-budget money that they manage
                                         to earn themselves. Autonomous organizations will of course require an additional level of
                                         oversight (a Board of Directors or Trustees), as the government retains its ownership but
                                         has given the public organization the purview to operate more like a commercial entity.

  88
                                                                                 5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




              The Law on Autonomous Organizations was adopted in 2006. Since then 15 regions of
              Russia have introduced corresponding changes to their legislation and some of them have
              piloted the schemes, such as Tymenskaya, Krasnoyarskaya oblast, Tatarstan and other
              regions. Yet there is big resistance in many municipalities to the scheme because they fear
              losing control over funding.
        n	    Benchmarking. In order for the above recommendations to work, regional, federal
              and municipal governments will need to set a baseline level of expenditure on energy
              consumption, as well as targets or benchmarks against which a public organization’s
              progress in reducing energy consumption can be judged. The baseline can be fixed based
              on the public organization’s energy expenditure in the most recent year, or an average
              of recent years. Targets or benchmarks can be set based on comparisons with other
              public organizations with similar characteristics, such as the area occupied by a public
              organization, load characteristics, mix of fuels consumed, and number of individuals served
              (for example, in a school, the average number of pupils attending classes each year). The
              results of the benchmarking need to be made easily available to all public organizations, as
              should possible energy efficiency solutions, best practices, and success stories from other
              sectors in Russia and from comparable public organizations abroad. Such benchmarking
              will require that the government put in place some sort of standardized monitoring of
              data on communal expenses and energy consumption. No such data currently exist, but
              are essential for planning, designing, and implementing energy efficiency programs.
        n	    Setting targets. Setting target indicators (consumption allowances/limits) may be
              an effective tool especially since it is already quite a common approach in Russia. In
              Chelyabinskaya oblast, a twofold decrease in energy consumption has been achieved
              in 1999-2004 thanks to revising the limits. The approach has also proven to work well
              elsewhere. In the United States, the government has set a target to reduce energy
              consumption in public buildings by 3 percent annually during 2006-2015. The previous
              target of 2 percent was successfully met.108
        n	    Change procurement legislation to allow for multi-year contracts. In order to reap the
              benefit of energy efficiency investments, public organizations need to be able to enter into
              multi-year contracts. Budgeting principles, similarly, must be based on full life-cycle costing
              in order to capture the energy efficiency benefits of particular investments. The United
              States and Canada revised similarly rigid procurement rules, by revising their procurement
              legislation. In doing so, they helped drive the market for energy efficiency equipment, and
              help encourage the development of providers of companies with ESCO-type functions.
              Allowing entities with ESCO-like functions to enter the market can solve the problem of
              public organizations not being able to borrow. ESCOs or firms with ESCO-like functions,
              can enter into financing arrangements with the banks, and take the risk on the loan, while
              providing energy management services (under so-called Energy Performance Contracts, or
              EPCs) to public organizations for a fixed fee. Box 5.12 discusses the measures taken in the
              United States and Canada to promote ESCOS.




108	   “US Federal Government: Energy Efficiency and Market Leader”. Jeffrey Harris. Alliance to Save Energy.
	      Energy Efficiency Initiatives in the Public Sector, World Bank, BBL, June 2007.


                                                                                                                                                    89
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Box 5.12: Evolution of ESCOs in the United States and Canada

                                 In the United States and Canada, the success of ESCOs and EPCs to promote energy efficiency in public buildings relied heavily upon the
                                 successful navigation of public sector contracting requirements and extensive procurement processes. The two countries utilized different
                                 approaches to increase the development of EPC-based projects in public buildings.

                                 In the United States, where legislation and legislation enactment procedures differ from one level of government to the next, contracting
                                 and procurement requirements and barriers were overcome on a state-by-state and agency-by-agency basis. However, once one state
                                 had a functioning contracting and procurement system in place to promote EPCs and ESCOs, other states were more willing to adapt
                                 those models to their own circumstances. For example, Ohio, in 1985, enacted legislation allowing school districts to purchase energy
                                 conservation measures on a multi-year installment basis and to increase the portion of a district’s net indebtedness that could be used for
                                 energy conservation measures. In the first five years alone, the legislation led to ESCO projects in 167 school districts worth more than $131
                                 million. Now, over 40 US states have enacted legislation promoting the usage of EPC in schools and government facilities.

                                 At the federal level, the Comprehensive Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 encouraged federal agencies to implement energy
                                 efficiency retrofits through shared energy savings contracts. Subsequent legislation provided further incentives by allowing participating
                                 agencies to retain and use a portion of their foregone energy costs. When government agencies realized that energy savings could be
                                 reinvested in other areas of their programs, it provided a powerful incentive for staff members to work with ESCOs in identifying projects.
                                 The Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP), operated by the Department of Energy, coordinates federal agencies’ energy efficiency
                                 projects. FEMP maintains a list of approved ESCOs and has developed the Super ESPCs, which allows federal agencies to “bypass procurement
                                 procedures and deal directly with prequalified” ESCOs, who compete to win the contracts. By 2007, the Super ESPC concept had investments
                                 of $1.9 billion by 19 agencies in 46 states.

                                 In Canada, the development of EPCs and ESCOs for use with public buildings was implemented from the top down. Canada’s involvement
                                 with EPCs for public buildings began with Ontario Hydro’s Guaranteed Energy Performance Program in the late 1980s and received a boost
                                 in 1991, when the Canadian government created the Federal Buildings Initiative (FBI) to allow federal departments to contract with ESCOs
                                 to develop and implement energy efficiency retrofits through EPC in federal buildings. Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) promotes the
                                 FBI program to individual organizations by providing model contracts and bid packages. The FBI has retrofitted 7,500 federal buildings
                                 and other facilities, have resulted in 240 milllion Canadian dollars of private sector investment (through 2006) and annual savings of $33
                                 million Canadian dollars.

                         Source: ESCO Development in the United States and Canada. R. Taylor (2008). pp 224-238



                                 n	      Enforce energy efficiency in equipment procurement. The government may wish
                                         to impose technical standards related to, for example, procurement of energy efficient
                                         equipment for heating and lighting, or energy efficiency standards for rehabilitation
                                         and expansion of capital. Such standards are easier to impose on the public sector than
                                         private sector institutions or the population. The government, in its role as owner of these
                                         organizations, faces fewer obstacles to setting new standards, and has a relatively easier
                                         time monitoring and enforcing the standards since it may do so through existing, internal
                                         governance rather than – potentially difficult and expensive – external monitoring. Box
                                         5.13 shows how China has taken the initiative to heavily endorse energy efficient lighting
                                         in its provinces. Moreover, public organizations, because they are not profit oriented,
                                         generally have less to lose than private companies (or, more intuitively, less to gain from
                                         flouting) standards.


                         Box 5.13: Energy saving light bulb targets in China

                                 China recently announced that it will require provincial governments to replace 50 million traditional incandescent lamps with heavily-
                                 subsidized energy-efficient lights this year. As part of a campaign launched by the Ministry of Finance in January, the goal is to replace
                                 inefficient bulbs with 150 million energy efficient light bulbs over the next 5 years. Several provinces received specific targets of 2 or 3
                                 million bulbs, including a 2-million bulb target for Beijing. If all incandescent bulbs were replaced, China would save 60 billion kilowatt
                                 hours of power each year, or 22 million tons of coal equivalent each year, reducing emission of carbon dioxide by 60 million tons.

                         Source: “China sets energy-saving lightbulb target for provincial areas.” Xinhua News Agency. 14 May 2008.


  90
                                                                               5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




5.5 What are the barriers and solutions to energy efficiency in industry?
As Chapter 4 showed, industry has the second biggest potential for energy savings. Energy efficiency
potential exists for large, as well as small and medium enterprises. The potential of the top five
energy intensive sectors (41 percent of potential in industry) is almost equal to the potential of
less intensive industries (42 percent of potential in industry). Therefore, energy efficiency policy
should not be limited to one segment of the sector, but instead should address needs and barriers
throughout the industrial sector.

Figure 52 summarizes key barriers preventing energy efficiency in industry as well as prioritized
government solutions. The most significant barriers are related to industrial managers’ lack of
awareness about, and incentives to pursue energy efficiency, the availability of affordable financing,
and the fact that tariffs consistently lag inflation. The government should first focus on solutions
that combine a comprehensive awareness campaign with measures allowing easier access to capital
through local financial institutions. Additional fiscal incentives and continuation of energy sector
reforms can be next step measures to help stimulate investment in energy efficiency.

Figure 52: Barriers and Solutions to Energy Efficiency in Industry

 Barriers                               Solutions
 n	 A lack of awareness among           Quick Wins                 	 Disseminate information on energy efficiency
                                                                   n
    managers
                                        Essentials                 	 Facilitate financing for EE investments through
                                                                   n
 n	 Macroeconomic constraints on                                     Russian financial institutions
    banks
                                                                   	 Develop equipment standards and labels
                                                                   n
 n	 A failure of banks to understand
    energy efficiency investments                                  	 Provide subsidies for transaction support
                                                                   n


 n	 High transaction costs                                         	 Provide fiscal incentives
                                                                   n


 n	 Tariffs that lag producer prices                               	 Introduce taxation or ‘cap-and-trade’ schemes for
                                                                   n
                                                                     pollutants and/or emission
 n	 Inflexible electricity and gas supply
    contracts                             High Cost, High Return   	 Complete electricity sector reforms, and initiate gas
                                                                   n
                                                                     sector reforms



5.5.1 What is hindering energy efficiency investments in the industrial sector?
Great potential exists for energy savings in the industrial sector in Russia, but companies have yet to
realize this potential. Industry is not realizing its full energy potential in Russia because:
     n	    A lack of awareness among managers. Most managers are not fully aware of their
           companies’ energy efficiency potential, what investments might be required to reach that
           potential, and how to finance those investments. The bullets below discuss each of these
           barriers.
            –	 Managers of many Russian industrial companies are not fully aware of the energy
               efficiency potential their companies have. Managers tend to be overly conservative
               when assessing energy savings potentials. They believe they may only be able to save
               8-10 percent, when in fact they could reduce their energy consumption by 20-30
               percent. This phenomenon is demonstrated in Figure 53 below. Managers’ lack of
               awareness about energy efficiency is due both to a lack of equipment metering the use
               of energy at the production level, and to a lack of adequate access to information.

                                                                                                                                                  91
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                          	       The majority of enterprises in less intensive industries lack the ability to measure their
                                                  energy consumption. Only 40 percent of SMEs monitor their energy consumption at
                                                  the workshop level, and only one out of ten companies has an automated energy cost
                                                  control system. Others only have the energy cost data of the entire company. Without
                                                  accessible and reliable data demonstrating energy consumption, companies are unable
                                                  to see their cost reduction potential and will have more difficulty determining which
                                                  production units possess the greatest potential for energy savings.
                                          	       Heavy energy consumers report specific energy consumption to the Federal
                                                  Statistical Office, but this information is not shared publicly. Best practice guides and
                                                  benchmarks from international experience, which have been developed in a number of
                                                  countries, are not available in the Russian language.

                         Figure 53: Russian enterprise managers underestimate EE potential of their companies

                            By what percentage can a company reduce consumption of the energy resources listed below while maintaining current
                            production levels?

                                          Cooling

                                 Air compression
                                                                                                                               Companies’ estimates
                                                                                                                               of potential energy
                                          Heating                                                                              efficiency

                                              Water                                                                            Added potential (based
                                                                                                                               on international
                                        Electricity                                                                            practices)

                                                Gas

                                                      0                        10%         20%                     30%

                         Source: IFC.


                                          –	 Managers have limited awareness of how to improve energy efficiency. Companies
                                             often do not know well what measures exist to save energy at their facilities. Part of
                                             the problem may be due to the fact that traditional methods of spreading information
                                             about the benefits of energy efficiency have limited outreach to the target audience.
                                             Dissemination of information through energy saving exhibitions, which are carried out
                                             almost in every region, does not always reach decision-makers in industrial companies,
                                             especially SMEs. And, industrial customers are, in particular, generally averse to using
                                             a new technology which they may view as untested and potentially more expensive.
                                          –	 Managers do not know what opportunities exist for financing projects. Even when
                                             end-users can measure the amount of energy savings potential, they may not have
                                             easy access to information on how to finance the investments required to achieve
                                             this savings. Most energy efficiency projects carried out by industrial companies have
                                             a pay-back period of two to six years and therefore can be financed with currently
                                             available bank loans. Nevertheless, nearly two-thirds of enterprises consider their lack
                                             of existing financial resources to be the main barrier to carrying out energy efficiency-
                                             related projects. Figure 54 shows this result from an IFC survey. Moreover, only one
                                             out of every four companies citing insufficient funds actually sought outside financing,
                                             even though 90 percent of the companies that sought external financing received it.

  92
                                                                                                       5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Figure 54: Barriers to implementing EE projects in industrial companies

   What difficulties have you experienced in implementing energy efficiency projects?

                               Insufficient funds
         Difficulties in securing financing for
                    energy efficiency projects
      Lack of experience in developing these
                             types of projects
       Need to obtain permits/ consent from
                         government bodies
               Difficulty in assessing the effects
                                    of the project

     Reducing the energy consumption limit

                     Technical problems during
                               implementation

                                                     0     10%              20%     30%             40%          50%             60%          70%

                                                         financial difficulties   organizational difficulties        technical difficulties

Source: IFC.


        n	        No incentives for managers to adopt energy efficiency measures. Enterprises are often
                  not motivated to undertake energy efficiency measures, even if those measures have proven
                  to be successful elsewhere. Measures like energy efficient lighting and installation of variable
                  control drives are still not very popular in Russia. Many companies do not want to lead the
                  way in adopting a new product, technology or business culture. The corporate environment
                  within a company can also deter energy efficiency. Many individuals within a company are
                  hesitant to suggest energy efficient alternatives without the support of company leadership.
                  Moreover, companies do not fully utilize efficient organizational structures, giving managers
                  no motivation to endorse new ideas and new practices, like energy efficiency.
        n	        High transaction costs, especially for SMEs. Transaction costs are incurred during
                  the identification, design and savings appraisal of energy efficiency projects. Companies,
                  especially SMEs, often lack the capacity to carry out sufficient, in-depth analysis and
                  develop a tailored approach that is necessary to determine how they can cut energy costs.
                  As such, the benefits from energy savings are often considered insignificant compared to
                  the transaction costs of customized project development. In addition, companies often
                  think of financial gains in terms of projects that expand production, launch new products
                  or capture new markets, especially in rapidly growing economies. This assessment of costs
                  and benefits further inflates companies’ perception of the transaction costs of energy
                  efficiency projects.
        n	        Macroeconomic constraints on banks. Banks cannot offer attractive financing terms for
                  industrial modernization projects (which include energy efficiency investments) because
                  banks themselves have limited access to medium and long term funding. Banks’ shares of
                  long-term (more than three years) deposits is as low as 5 percent, and their shares of long-
                  term credits (not counting Sberbank) does not exceed 15 percent. The subprime crisis in
                  the US has, in particular, reduced the availability of international funding for local financial
                  institutions. The high cost of capital therefore prevents banks from offering lower interest
                  rates. In the first quarter of 2008, interest rates for medium to large companies were as high
                  as 12-15 percent, and rates for smaller companies now frequently exceed 18 percent.

                                                                                                                                                                          93
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 	          Due to these constraints of financial markets, few companies are willing to risk investing
                                            in energy efficiency for longer than two-three years. High interest rates remain a major
                                            obstacle for many enterprises. More than 40 percent of small and medium companies
                                            state that the high interest rate of bank loans is the main reason why they refuse to take
                                            advantage of external financing opportunities.
                                 n	         A failure of banks to understand energy efficiency investments. Few banks recognize
                                            energy efficiency lending as a mainstream market and lack the knowledge and tools to
                                            properly evaluate energy efficiency investments in industry. Financiers often lack basic
                                            knowledge about energy efficiency investments and don’t have the tools (for example,
                                            standardized evaluation criteria) that would allow them to lower their transaction costs.
                                            Currently fewer than 10 banks and leasing companies (out of more than 1,000) pursue
                                            any energy efficiency lending opportunities.
                                 n	         Tariffs that lag producer prices. Companies lack incentive to save because energy
                                            tariffs are growing slower than product prices. As presented in Figure 55, in 2007, prices
                                            on energy resources increased by 13-18 percent, while in many sectors product prices
                                            increased by more than 25 percent. Consequently, the share of energy in the cost of goods
                                            was diminished and became less important for enterprises in a number of sectors.

                         Figure 55: Price indices (December 07 to December 06), %


                                                   Coke

                                                Cement

                                                Timber

                                 Ammonia fertilizers

                                                Pig iron

                                             Electricity

                                                    Gas

                                                   Heat

                                            Rolled steel

                                                  Paper

                                            Steel pipes

                                                           0%              20%   40%            60%            80%           100%

                         Source: Rosstat.



                                 n	         Inflexible electricity and gas supply contracts. Municipal gas and electricity suppliers
                                            in Russia effectively pre-pay for gas or electricity. The contract requires that total contract
                                            payments are based on forecasted demand rather than actual consumption. These “take
                                            or pay” contracts have advantages for both long-term capital investments and supply
                                            certainty. However, they can also result in severe inefficiencies and overuse of energy if
                                            contract limits do not adequately reflect actual demand, and purchasers have no ability to
                                            resell their gas or power. Some Russian companies can spend as much as one-and-a-half
  94
                                                                     5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




          years securing contract limits. Moreover, due to gas deficits, securing sufficient contract
          limits is extremely competitive. A company that is unable to use all of the electricity or
          gas specified in its contract will receive a reduced supply limit for the following year, while
          still having to pay a delivery fee for the unconsumed resource. As such, many companies
          are more concerned with retaining their limits than saving electricity or gas. This practice
          greatly discourages efficient behavior and sometimes even forces companies into having
          idly functioning equipment in order to reach the limits. 13 percent of enterprises consider
          this a barrier to their willingness to reduce their energy consumption.

5.5.2 What can the Russian government do to help industry invest in energy efficiency?
While many lessons learned from international practice can be applied in Russia, there are some
measures that will clearly not work. In particular, voluntary agreements and requirements that
companies meet some specific level of energy intensity have worked well elsewhere but are likely to
fail in Russia. Russian industry lacks the culture of business responsibility found in other countries
and essential to the success of voluntary agreements. Moreover, no culture of trust exists within
industry or between government and industry. Without these elements, voluntary agreements are
likely to be of limited use. Mandatory standards, tied to penalties for non-compliance, are also
unlikely to succeed. Mandatory standards for specific energy consumption, or mandatory energy
audits with mandatory energy passports in industry, will be viewed by businesses as yet another
interference in business activities and another opportunity for rent seeking by government officials.
Meanwhile, monitoring compliance would prove difficult.

Given the existing barriers in Russia, certain measures will more effectively promote industrial
energy efficiency than voluntary agreements or mandatory standards. The barriers described above
can best be addressed by:
     n	   Better dissemination of information on energy efficiency. The Russian government can
          create a program, or help to implement a private sector operation that broadly and effectively
          disseminates information about energy efficiency. A program specifically designed to
          disseminate information will help Russian companies realize their energy savings potential.
          Dissemination campaigns make information about energy efficiency investments more
          readily accessible and useful to industrial companies. Important information to include in
          this program might include: benchmarking data to allow for sector-wide comparisons of
          specific energy consumption, best practices evaluation to allow companies to recognize their
          energy savings potential, model action plans and industrial equipment energy efficiency
          labeling information (if available) to show companies how they can best invest in energy
          efficiency, and proven financial opportunities for energy efficient investments to show
          companies that they can acquire outside financing for EE projects.
     	    Such a program would be responsible for gathering and organizing sector-wide information
          on energy consumption, disseminating results and analysis via various media, and
          potentially providing follow-up advice and services for companies interested in pursuing
          energy efficiency investments. Potential formats for information dissemination include:
          websites, benchmarking databases, best practice brochures, best equipment brochure/
          guidebook, individual consultations, and an advice helpline. Box 5.14 demonstrates how
          the U.K. initiated a program to disperse information about energy savings and carbon
          reduction investments.




                                                                                                                                        95
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Box 5.14: United Kingdom Energy Efficiency Best Practice Program (EEBPP)

                                 The United Kingdom EEBPP was designed to promote sustainable energy practices in UK companies through sector-wide information
                                 dissemination, implementation advice, and technical assistance. The EEBPP expected to cut the energy bills of UK companies by 10-20
                                 percent and help contribute to the government’s compliance with the EU initiative to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 12.5 percent
                                 below 1990 levels by 2008-2012. The program provided information on management and technologies with the intent of serving any
                                 public and private sector company for whom the program was deemed cost-effective.

                                 Initially, the program focused on compiling data that would provide information and assistance to companies with high energy savings
                                 potentials. The data provided all levels of decision-makers with information about:
                                 n	                   Benchmarking: Comparison, on the basis of anonymity, with sector wide norms in energy efficiency.
                                 n	                   Good Practice Guides and Case Studies: Examples of currently established techniques and technologies with further potential.
                                 n	                   New Practice Case Studies: Recently developed technologies and techniques.
                                 n	                   Future Practice: Collaborative research and development.

                                 EEBPP later focused on maintaining the information database and promoting companies’ adoption of best practices through publications,
                                 workshops, and seminars encouraging action and providing support and advice at every stage of the program. Additionally, the program
                                 offered information and advice through an Environment and Energy Helpline, a free service to businesses in the United Kingdom. The
                                 program also provided a service called “Action Energy” in which companies receive a free visit by an energy consultant who assesses their
                                 potential for energy savings, prepares an action plan to reduce unnecessary usage, and follows up to assist in implementation.

                                 The program, which was later subsumed under the UK’s Carbon Trust, resulted in verified energy cost savings of £650 million ($1 billion/
                                 year) and has saved 3.5 million tons of carbon emissions per year. The EEBPP was successful largely because:
                                 n	                   Information was provided in audience-appropriate formats,
                                 n	                   Anonymity and confidence in commercial security was guaranteed,
                                 n	                   Feedback, progress reporting, and target assessments guided the program’s management,
                                 n	                   Industry representatives and trade bodies were consulted in order to provide accessible and usable information.

                                 The figure below shows specific melting energy at glass furnaces before and after participation in the United Kingdom EEBPP.

                                 Glass Furnace – Melting Energy


                                                             12

                                                             10

                                                              8
                                 Number of furnaces




                                                                                                                                                                             1991
                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                              4

                                                              2

                                                              0
                                                                     4               5               6               7               8              9

                                                                                                   Specific melting energy (G J/t)


                         Source: Shock, Richard. UK Energy Efficiency Best Practice Program.




  96
                                                                                                                      5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




        n	       Simple project designs and packaged solutions. Simple project designs can help
                 minimize transaction costs and reduce risks. This can prove easy as, for many of the
                 technologies well proven in the market (such as efficient boilers, building energy
                 management systems, efficient lighting systems, and capacitors), project design is relatively
                 simple and the end users and financiers are reasonably well aware of the risks. Even for
                 certain industry-specific technologies and applications, such as waste heat recovery boilers
                 or natural gas cooling systems with cogeneration, it is relatively easy to follow a template
                 in the replication of design and appraisal of new projects. Sometimes, equipment vendors
                 offer template-oriented energy efficiency project schemes that can be customized to fit the
                 end user needs.109
        	        Employing a so-called “packaging agent” can also help keep transaction costs reasonable.
                 Packaging agents are companies with technical expertise and up-to-date knowledge
                 about possible projects in various areas of energy efficiency. By maximizing their project
                 portfolio, these companies can replicate similar projects and, thus, keep their transaction
                 costs down. Such functions can be performed by an ESCO, DSM specialist firm, or
                 another entity well-suited to accumulate information, knowledge, and project development
                 capacity. Programs that provide such informational, logistical, and assessment support are
                 often run by organizations with public funding. In addition, the government can aid in
                 reducing transaction costs for industry by providing partial or full-cost subsidies for energy
                 audits or disseminating relevant information, as described above.
        n	       Facilitation of financing for energy efficiency investments through Russian financial
                 institutions. The Russian government can play a more active role in ensuring access to
                 long term capital through development institutions. Development banks can allocate
                 long-term credit lines dedicated to energy efficiency investments to Russian financial
                 institutions. This model has been tested in a number of countries, including Russia, by IFC
                 and the EBRD, and has proven to be successful. The Russian Development Bank currently
                 provides credit lines to local financial institutions aimed at SME development. This
                 practice can be expanded to include dedicated funding for energy efficiency investments.
                 Box 5.15 shows how dedicated funding helped encourage energy efficiency in Hungary.

Box 5.15: Hungary’s Energy Efficiency Guarantee Fund

        Begun in 1997, the Hungary Energy Efficiency Co-Financing Program is an IFC and GEF financed loan guarantee program in partnership
        with local financial institutions. The program offers a partial risk guarantee to financial institutions that provide loans for energy efficient
        investments as well as technical assistance for both the lenders and project developers. These elements reduce the risk of financing energy
        efficient investment while also reducing the transaction costs of projects by providing necessary technical knowledge to both parties. By
        the end of 2006, the $55 million loan portfolio supported with $17 million of guarantees fostered $93 million worth of energy efficiency
        investments.

Source: Taylor, Robert et. al. Financing Energy Efficiency, Lessons from Brazil, China, India and Beyond. World Bank. 2008.



        n	       Development of energy performance standards and labels for industrial equipment.
                 The development of energy performance standards and labels for industrial equipment
                 will help companies know how to most effectively invest and will promote the use of more
                 efficient equipment.



109	
       Taylor, Robert P., et al. Financing Energy Efficiency, Lessons from Brazil, China, India and Beyond. World Bank. 2008.

                                                                                                                                                                                         97
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 	       In other countries, one of the most cost-effective methods for increasing energy efficiency
                                         at industrial companies has been to establish energy efficiency standards for industrial
                                         motors, power pumps, compressors, fans, and other generic machinery. Currently energy
                                         performance standards for motors have been adopted in over 30 countries.
                                 	       It is essential to make a clear distinction between energy efficiency standard for equipment
                                         and a standard or a norm for specific energy consumption. Equipment standards have
                                         proved to be an effective instrument in promoting energy efficiency in many countries and
                                         can be valuable in the Russian context.
                                 	       On the contrary, mandatory standard for specific energy consumption is likely to be
                                         a complicated measure with limited effect. Due to objective factors, specific energy
                                         consumption can vary significantly even for generic products. Many enterprises produce
                                         multiple products using the same equipment, and will not be able to attribute the
                                         consumed energy across variety of products. In addition, energy consumption standard
                                         will not give an incentive to improve beyond the established norm.
                                 n	      Continuation of electricity sector reforms, and initiation of gas sector reforms. Electricity
                                         sector reforms in Russia are aimed at improving the efficiency of electricity markets by
                                         increasing competition in the sector. More efficient markets mean more efficient resource
                                         use, and hence greater energy efficiency. With competition greater product differentiation,
                                         and more liquidity in energy markets. Supply contracts will eventually become more flexible
                                         than the take-or-pay model currently used in Russia. An increased number of participants
                                         will bring more liquidity, and therefore more opportunities to buy energy in the event of
                                         an energy shortfall in their contract and sell energy in the event of a surplus. Reforms in
                                         the gas sector which mirror reforms in the electricity sector would have similar benefits for
                                         improving the efficiency of the gas supply sector.
                                 n	      Fiscal incentives. Fiscal incentives in the form of tax relief can be an effective long-term
                                         measure to increase the attractiveness of energy efficiency investments. It is important to
                                         emphasize, however, the difficulties and risks of implementing tax incentives in a country
                                         like Russia where tax collections remain relatively low, and tax evasion and fraud remain
                                         problematic. There are three main forms of providing tax relief for purchase of energy
                                         efficient equipment:
                                         –	 Accelerated depreciation improves companies’ cash flows by allowing for a faster write
                                            off of the cost of equipment against their taxable profit.
                                         –	 Tax rebates allow investors to deduct a part of the equipment costs from profits.
                                         –	 Tax exemptions typically reduce or eliminate custom taxes on energy efficient
                                            equipment.
                                 	       The tax relief approach has frequently been criticized for three reasons. First, it doesn’t
                                         stimulate small investments that can be the most cost-effective energy savings measures.
                                         Second, it doesn’t encourage changes in energy consumption behavior that can lead to
                                         substantial energy savings. As a result, additional government intervention is required to
                                         stimulate these “no cost-low cost” measures. Third, a substantial number of investors might
                                         have implemented the project anyway without any subsidy. For example, evaluation of the
                                         Dutch Energy Investment Deduction program concluded that 45 percent of surveyed
                                         participants would have made a purchase without a subsidy. Therefore, it is recommended
                                         that the list of eligible technologies be carefully selected based upon stringent eligibility
                                         criteria so that incentives are only provided to the most efficient equipment. Box 5.16
                                         demonstrates how eligibility criteria are developed in coordination with performance
                                         criteria to receive government fiscal support in the U.K.
  98
                                                                                                                            5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Box 5.16: United Kingdom’s Enhanced Capital Allowance: Eligibility Criteria for Hot Water Boilers
over 400kW

       To be eligible for an enhanced capital allowance in the United Kingdom, products must:
       n	     Be gas and/or oil fired
       n	     Use a forced draught burner (or burners)
       n	     Have a nominal rated output in excess of 400kW at an average boiler-water temperature of 70ºC
       n	     Automatically respond to changes in hot water demand by modulating their output in a continuous manner across the turndown ratio,
              as set out in the performance criteria below, without initiating a purge cycle
       n	     Conform to the requirements of the Pressure Equipment Directive 97/23/EC with respect to their design, manufacturer and testing
              procedures
       n	     Exceed the minimum performance set out below

       Minimum Performance criteria
       Products must have a minimum net thermal efficiency of 93 percent at full and partial load conditions as set out in the table below.
       Turndown ratios will depend on the type of fuel used.

            Fuel                          Turndown ratio                                 Test point %                                                      Net thermal
                                                                                         MCR                                                               efficiency %
            Gas fired or dual                               3.33:1                                                    30                                          >=93.0
            fuelled
                                                                                                                      50                                          >=93.0
                                                                                                                      100                                         >=93.0
            Oil fired                                         2:1                                                     50                                          >=93.0
                                                                                                                      100                                         >=93.0

       Products must also have a standby loss of less than 0.02 kW per kW of the thermal rating. Required test procedures should be described
       in detail as well.

Source: Energy Technology Criteria List – July 2007. Crown: 2007. 23-24.



        	           International experience shows that tax relief for specific energy efficient equipment
                    creates incentives for all relevant market participants. These programs typically reach
                    a large number of entities and are less likely to unfairly discriminate between potential
                    participants. Box 5.17 shows examples of successful tax relief policies in other countries.


Box 5.17: International results from tax relief policies

       United Kingdom: The British government introduced the 100 percent first-year Enhanced Capital Allowances program in 2001. This
       measure has resulted in energy efficient and environmentally friendly investments in 7,000 equipment units totaling over £3 billion.

       Japan: The Energy Conservation and Recycling Assistance Law established accelerated depreciation for energy efficient equipment and led
       to installation of approximately 25,000 pieces of equipments each year from 1996 to 98.

       The Netherlands: The Danish government introduced the Energy Investment Deduction program in 1997. Firms investing in energy
       savings could apply for tax deductions for eligible technology. Over 10,000 applicants benefited from €430 million of investments during
       the first year of the program implementation. Participation in the program peaked in 2001, when over 28,000 applications representing
       over €1 billion in claims were filed.

Sources: 	         Tax and Fiscal Policies for Promotion of Industrial Energy Efficiency: A Survey of International Experience. Lynn Price, Christina Galitsky, Jonathan Sinton Ernest 		
	                  Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley, 2005.
	                  Payable enhanced capital allowances HM Treasury, 2007.
	                  Effectiveness of Subsidizing Energy Saving Technologies: Evidence from Dutch Panel Data. Aalbers, R.F.T., de Groot, H.L.F., Vollebergh, H.R.J., 2004.
                                                                                                                                                                                               99
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 	       Tax relief provided for the purchase of energy efficient equipment is an objective
                                         mechanism available to all market participants. Factors critical to the success of tax relief
                                         mechanisms include:
                                         –	 A list of technologies with qualifying detailed technical criteria (see example in Box
                                            5.16)
                                         –	 Regular updates of the lists (in most countries – on annual basis)
                                         –	 An extensive communication campaign targeted at relevant vendors and industrial
                                            end-users.
                                 	       In Russia, it may be beneficial to use tax relief mechanisms for select types of energy
                                         efficient equipment like industrial boilers, infrared heaters, compressors, motors, and
                                         drives. For example, the modernization of inefficient industrial boilers is currently
                                         beneficial for the Russian economy, but not attractive for market participants. Market
                                         energy efficiency potential increases along with gas price growth. Tax relief incentives for
                                         the most efficient boilers can help to increase the financial viability of these investments for
                                         market participants and foster the replacement of old equipment with the best available
                                         technologies.

                         5.6 What are the barriers and solutions to energy efficiency in the heat
                         supply sector?
                         Heat generation and distribution have great energy savings potential in Russia. Chapter 4 discussed
                         the possibility of increasing energy efficiency of generation via investments in boiler efficiency, by
                         reducing distribution losses through pipeline investments, and by further developing municipal
                         heating systems.

                         Figure 56 shows some of the principal barriers in the heating sector, and prioritized solutions to
                         those barriers. These barriers and solutions are discussed in more detail in sections 5.6.1 and 5.6.2,
                         respectively. Some of the most significant barriers to energy efficiency in the heat supply sector
                         relate to the application of tariff methodologies, the legal structure of Municipal Unitary Enterprises
                         (MUPs), and a lack of sectoral coordination and information. The government should first focus on
                         solutions that provide flexibility for MUPs to become commercial entities, improve the collection of
                         statistical information, and develop municipal heat supply plans. Substantially reforming how tariffs
                         are set will also benefit energy efficiency in the sector.

                         Figure 56: Barriers and Solutions to Energy Efficiency in Heating Supply

                           Barriers                                            Solutions
                           n	   Inappropriate tariff methodology               Quick Wins    n	 Reform tariff methodologies
                           n	   Political interference                                       n	 Price cap system
                           n	   Cost plus method                                             n	 Full cost recovery
                           n	   Tariff period is too short                                   n	 Transform municipal heat suppliers into
                           n 	 Legal structure and governance of                                commercial entities or PPP
                               municipal heat suppliers                        Essentials    n	 Coordinate municipal heat supply development
                           n 	 Lack of information and sectoral                                 plans
                               coordination


 100
                                                                          5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




5.6.1 What is hindering energy efficiency investments in heating supply?
Russia faces a number of challenges in achieving the energy efficiency potential described in
Chapter 4. Along with regulatory, split-incentive, and informational barriers that tend to hinder
energy efficiency investments in multiple sectors, the heat supply sector faces additional obstacles
due to its complex, yet regionally decentralized nature. Sector-wide disorganization, poor
management, and lack of coordination further impede the overall efficiency of Russia’s heat supply
systems. Barriers to energy efficiency in Russia’s heating sector include:
        n	    Lack of information. A lack of information prevents Russia from running its heat supply
              systems efficiently, and deters investments in projects necessary to improve efficiency.
              More specifically, information is lacking on heat production and consumption. Russia has
              no data on the supply-demand balance in the heating sector. Very little metering exists
              at local boilers, within buildings or within apartments. For example, in 2006 only 8.7
              percent of municipal boilers of heating suppliers in Rostov-on-Don were equipped with
              heat meters.110 Without meters at the local boilers, there is no way to measure actual
              production. Without metering in buildings or apartments, there is no way to measure
              actual consumption. Without data on both consumption and production, there is no way
              to assess heating distribution losses. Without this data, neither producers nor consumers
              can have any knowledge of how much energy is being wasted and how much potential
              exists for saving energy. Supply and demand forecasts used to plan new construction can
              be nothing but spurious
        n	    Inappropriate application of tariff methodologies. The way in which regulators set
              tariffs in the heating sector dissuades companies from making investments that would
              reduce the operating costs of heat production. More specifically:
              –	 There continues to be political interference in tariff setting. Political interference in the
                 tariff setting process is both formal and informal. Recent federal legislation limits until
                 2010 the extent to which tariffs can increase. The government presumably sees these
                 limits as a way to protect low income customers and, possibly, cushion the effects of
                 price inflation. More generally, regulators are under constant informal (and implicit,
                 if not explicit) political pressure to consider the negative social and political possible
                 backlash of raising tariffs. This political interference keeps tariffs below their full cost-
                 recovery levels, which dampens consumers’ incentives to invest in energy efficiency. In
                 a number of municipalities the level of residential tariff cost recovery is still low. For
                 example, in Nizhnevartovsk, it is about 80 percent
              –	 The cost-plus tariff methodology used in Russia discourages heating suppliers from
                 investing in any measures that save operating and maintenance costs (which include
                 energy costs). With the cost-plus method used currently in Russia, the greater the cost
                 base, the greater the profit margin earned by heat suppliers. As such, the producers’
                 goal of maximizing profit contradicts with the objective of improving their efficiency
              –	 Any reduction in costs can (and nearly always is) passed through to customers each year
                 as a reduction in tariffs, despite legislation to the contrary. According to Government
                 Ordinance #109, tariffs for public suppliers who make investments to reduce their
                 operational costs shall be allowed to keep the savings associated with their investment for



110	
       Kovalchuk, ibid.


                                                                                                                                             101
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                                two years after the payback period calculated for the investment. However, observance of
                                                this provision remains at the discretion of the local authorities, and they rarely observe it.
                                                The intention of Ordinance #109 is good, but the approach is, in practice, very difficult
                                                to implement and is far from being the best way to set tariffs
                                         –	 As in most other utility service sectors, tariffs do not yet reflect the full cost of
                                            distribution losses. Normally the allowed rate of distribution losses, which is used
                                            for calculation of distribution costs, is far below actual losses. For example, actual
                                            heat distribution system losses could average 20 percent and can reach as high as 36
                                            percent, while only 13% losses are allowed by the regulators. As a result, if end-use is
                                            (at the building level) not metered, suppliers will produce less heat than required, as
                                            a way of recouping the costs of their higher-than-mandated distribution loss levels. If
                                            heat supplies are metered (again, at the building level), they will increase production
                                            beyond what is required as a way of recouping their losses (because they earn a margin
                                            on each unit of heat produced). These regulatory factors collectively reduce the
                                            economic attractiveness of investments in distribution pipeline renovation and lead to
                                            over-consumption of, or overpayment for heat.
                                         –	 Short periods between tariff revisions. The time between tariff revisions is too short to
                                            allow for sufficient investment planning. Local authorities cannot set tariff levels for
                                            any longer than three years, but generally prefer to revise tariffs every year. In contrast,
                                            in Russia the revisions tend to introduce unpredictability thus discouraging long
                                            time capital expenditure, even if that capital expenditure would yield savings for the
                                            customer over time.
                                 n	      No ability to control consumption. Customers in the heating sector typically have
                                         no way to control their comfort levels, short of opening their windows to control over-
                                         heating, or finding other heating sources (for example, by buying individual electric
                                         heaters) to control for under-heating. Apartment-level thermostats are typically expensive
                                         and require other rehabilitation of the heating system
                                 n	      Ownership, legal status, and organizational structure. Many heating utilities are owned
                                         and operated by municipal governments (Municipal Unitary Enterprises or MUPs), and
                                         therefore lack the incentives and flexibility they need to improve performance. MUPs
                                         have no incentive to reduce costs, and therefore no incentive to improve energy efficiency.
                                         MUP’s also have little autonomy in determining how retained earnings are used or cash
                                         flows are managed, cannot pay competitive salaries, and generally rely on municipal
                                         funding to accomplish any type of project requiring investment capital. Heating companies
                                         therefore have trouble attracting quality management and external financing.
                                 n	      Lack of inter- and intra-sectoral coordination. There are 17,000 heat suppliers in Russia,
                                         with rarely any systematic intra-sectoral or inter-sectoral development and organization by
                                         local government authorities. Local and regional heat suppliers rarely coordinate with one
                                         another in planning rehabilitation or new investments, nor do local authorities coordinate
                                         with electricity, gas, or heat suppliers to ensure residents are being supplied with energy
                                         most efficiently and at lowest cost. For example, systems with low load density have higher
                                         distribution losses, but heat load density is rarely used to determine optimal investment
                                         decisions in heating infrastructure. In Moscow and other large cities, local boilers and
                                         individual heaters are being installed even though the cities already have well-developed
                                         district heating infrastructure. Increased installation of individual heaters is likely due to
                                         the poor quality of district heating or because individuals seek greater autonomy in their
                                         heat supply. Nevertheless, factors, such as quality of service and individual preference, can
                                         have a negative impact on the overall efficiency and costs of a district heating system.
 102
                                                                    5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




5.6.2 What can the Russian government do to increase the energy efficiency of heating
supply?
Improving energy efficiency in the heating sector will require a number of solutions. For Russia,
approaches that are most likely to produce a significant impact include:
    n	   Tariff reform. Tariff reform can do the most to improve energy efficiency in the heating
         sector. Steps toward tariff reform will require:
         –	 Raising base level tariffs to a level that reflects the full efficient costs of heat supply.
            Knowing what levels of costs are “efficient” can be difficult. If comparable cost data
            are available for a range of heat suppliers, regulators can benchmark one heat supplier’s
            performance against another. If no such comparable data are available, regulators may
            therefore wish to set tariffs, initially, based on each heat supplier’s actual costs for
            some historic year or average of years, but begin to collect data on other heat suppliers
            operating costs as a way of having comparators
         –	 Preventing political interference in the tariff-setting process. One possible, albeit
            not foolproof deterrent against political interference is widespread dissemination of
            information about costs, and the basis for decisions to raise or lower tariffs. Regulators
            are better placed to defend their positions if they publish data on costs, their analysis,
            and open their decision-making process to the public through public hearings
         –	 Methods for setting tariffs need to allow for the appropriate inclusion of investments
            costs in overall cost assessment. The risk that regulators will disapprove capital
            expenditures is preventing investments that may yield savings over the longer term.
            One possible solution to this problem is to extend the time between tariff revisions.
         	   A tariff cap or “price cap” regulatory regime is just one appropriate solution that can
             help to improve overall operational efficiency, and with it, energy efficiency in the
             heating sector. Tariff caps focus on outputs rather than inputs. Caps are usually set
             for a period of five years or longer, linked to service quality, and adjusted according to
             inflation and fuel prices. Tariff caps provide heat suppliers with incentives to cut their
             cost, and hence improve efficiency, in order to maximize profit. Regulators would
             not need to review the cost structure on an annual basis. After the end of cap period
             the regulator would review the cost structure and would share appropriate benefits
             with consumers. The main challenge of a cap system is that it requires sophisticated
             monitoring of service quality.
         	   As a transitional arrangement the cap method could be used for operating and
             maintenance costs only and combined with return on assets for investment costs.
             Section 5.7 contains additional recommendations on how the tariff setting process
             could be reformed. The recommendations contained here, and in Section 5.7, hold for
             all energy services in Russia: heat, electricity, and gas alike.
    n	   Transforming MUPs into commercial entities. Transparency of operations and clear
         delineation of obligations will increase incentives for energy efficiency in MUPs. This can
         be done by either transforming MUPs into joint stock companies, engaging the private
         sector in the management, operation and financing of PPPs, or both. Granting the MUPs
         autonomous status creates the subsequent need for mechanisms to ensure transparency
         and good governance. Such mechanisms include the creation of independent boards of
         directors, the imposition of independent audits, and the creation of performance contracts
         defining the respective responsibilities of municipalities and heat supply companies. All
         of these requirements help to clarify the role of both the company and the municipality
                                                                                                                                       103
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                         in the business relationship and hold each party accountable for their respective roles in
                                         capital investment.
                                 	       Increasing the transparency and clarifying the parameters of these operations will increase
                                         the potential for outside financing, or the involvement or private operators. Increased
                                         transparency can help justify tariff increases, and put pressure on heat suppliers to improve
                                         efficiency. Involving the private sector through concessions or other forms of public-private
                                         partnerships may be an attractive option for increasing the efficiency of MUP operations.
                                         However, it is of paramount importance that the PPP process is transparent and
                                         competitive in order to effectively balance the interests of private investors and consumers
                                         alike. Early PPPs in the heating and water sectors in Russia were largely unsuccessful due
                                         to lack of transparency and competition. At the time, municipal governments did not have
                                         the necessary knowledge and capacity to prepare and manage these contracts. Often the
                                         private sector operator drafted lease/concession agreements which resulted in very biased
                                         risk allocation. Box 5.18 shows how private sector participation was introduced in the
                                         urban heating sector in Poland and Estonia.

                         Box 5.18: Some Successful Experiences with Early Attempts with District Heating Private Sector
                         Participation

                                 Poland: Poland has one of the richest experiences in introducing private sector participation in the urban heating sector. The systems
                                 in the cities of Kalisz and Walbrzych are two noteworthy examples. In both cases, the municipal DH utilities were transformed into joint
                                 stock companies, and long term (10-15 years) lease and performance contracts were signed with competitively selected contractors.
                                 Modernization plans included fuel switching, replacement of old boilers with new, efficient automated HOBs, replacement of pipes, etc.
                                 The large scale investments resulted in: significant improvement of the system efficiency (8 percent in Kalisz), doubling or even tripling
                                 of the value of the companies’ assets, lower than average prices for the country, improved quality and reliability of service, and continued
                                 profit growth for the companies. Similar examples are available in many other Polish cities, in some cases through leasing or performance/
                                 operation contracts, while in others through partial sale of DH company shares to foreign companies to attract investment. Introduction
                                 of private management, rather than the change of ownership over DH assets, was the key to the effective modernization and improved
                                 economic operation of these companies.

                                 Estonia: In Estonia the sale of shares and 30-year concession of the Tallinn Heating Co was organized through a tender, the evaluation
                                 criteria of which favored high concession payments, limited price growth, improved economic and financial operations, and experienced
                                 business management. The selected Dalkia subsidiary, Tallinna Küte, took over all assets, rights, liabilities, employees, and agreements of the
                                 Tallinn Heating Co under a so-called enterprise transfer concept for the concession period. In addition, the company committed to comply
                                 with the service features, environmental, safety and security requirements, monitoring rights, and extensive reporting requirements for the
                                 concessionaire; as well as set tariff caps defined by the city administration. As a result, the city received 210 million Estonian kroon as an
                                 initial payment and is receiving annual concession payments. The lack of cash for investments was solved well, losses have been reduced,
                                 profitability has increased, and the service quality has improved significantly. A significant portion of money from consumers goes to the
                                 city budget and can be used for other purposes.

                         Source: Pasoyan, Astghine. Regional Urban Heating Policy Assessment Part 1. Alliance to Save Energy. July, 2007.


                                 n	      Development and coordination of municipal heat supply plans. Municipal heat supply
                                         development plans should be developed regularly and become the basis for development
                                         of the heating sector. Sector development programs should aim to redistribute heat loads,
                                         optimize the use of centralized and decentralized heating, and reduce pipeline distribution
                                         losses. As such, they will need to be able to accurately account for heat load density, heat
                                         generation capacity, heating consumption needs, electricity generation needs (in order to
                                         determine the appropriateness of CHPs), and other efficiency parameters. In some Russian
                                         regions, development program goals include: optimization of heat supply systems (e.g.
                                         Housing Modernization Program in the Republic of Karelia), heat load redistribution,
                                         improvement of efficiency of heat supply companies, loss reduction, balancing centralized
                                         and de-centralized heating, CHP development and metering (e.g. Energy Efficiency in
                                         Fuel and Energy Complex Program of the Yaroslavl oblast). Box 5.19 shows how Denmark
 104
                                         planned the expansion of its public heating network
                                                                                                         5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Box 5.19: Public Heating Plans in Denmark

       With the passing of Denmark’s first heat supply law in 1979 came the onset of the first framework for the country’s public heat planning.
       The planning was divided into three phases. In the first phase, local authorities collected data regarding their heat requirements, the heating
       methods used, and the amounts of energy consumed. In addition, they assessed heat needs and heating possibilities and compiled reports of
       their findings. These were passed on to the county councils who, in the second phase of planning, prepared regional heat supply summaries.
       In this phase, local authorities also prepared a draft outlining their future heat supply. In the third phase, a definitive regional heat plan
       was developed that included local and regional recommendations. Specifically, the final plans showed the areas in which various forms of
       heat supply should be prioritized and where future heat supply installations and pipelines should be located. All the final plans produced
       by each authority had to be approved by the Ministry of Energy before they could be implemented.

       As a result of public heat planning, the share of district heating in Denmark has increased from 29 percent in 1972 to 55 percent in 1988.
       This was partially due to the initiation of the 1986 Co-generated Heat and Electricity Agreement, which decentralized co-generated heat
       and electricity and the 1988 ban on the installation of electric heat in new buildings. The creation of the heating plans in 1979 led to such
       an increased awareness of energy efficiency that it created additional bans, reforms, and obligations for energy producers, distributors,
       and consumers.

Sources: Heat Supply in Denmark – Who What Where and Why. Denmark Energy Authority. January, 2005. http://www.ens.dk


       n	      Improved information collection. Heat supply development plans must be based on
               credible information in order to be effective. Credibility of such information will rely
               upon:
               –	 Sector-wide metering of boilers and end consumers;
               –	 Creation of consistent, comprehensive and user-friendly forms for recording and
                  reporting statistics. The Federal Tariff Authority would be well placed to develop
                  standardized reporting forms which capture this information;
               –	 Periodic review of methodology for calculating distribution heat loss indicators in
                  order to keep pace with technology development;
               –	 Development of an inventory of all heat loads and heating consumption needs by
                  zones of heat distribution.
       	       The World Bank financed Housing and Communal Services project intends to develop
               and pilot such a monitoring system in 14 Russian regions.
       	       In addition to the improved collection and credibility of data at the local level, a federal
               level monitoring system should be in place to collect local and regional data and compile
               it for nationwide statistical purposes. Such an effort will be crucial to the success of the
               service quality benchmarking approach and tariff methodology recommended above.

5.7 What are the barriers and solutions to energy efficiency in the
electricity sector?
The Russian electricity sector is in the process of undergoing extensive restructuring and privatization
reforms. A number of positive changes have already been made including the introduction of new
generating companies through privatization or RAO-UES’ assets, the establishment of a spot
market, the increase of unregulated power supply agreements, the continued increase of tariffs to
move the electric utilities closer to full cost recovery, and the commitment of the government to
pilot a new tariff methodology. These reforms will all help Russia to improve its energy efficiency.
Figure 57 shows many of these solutions and the barriers they are meant to address.




                                                                                                                                                                            105
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Other barriers not currently on the government’s radar include the general bias in the electricity
                         industry to build traditional, new generation capacity rather than invest in energy efficiency,
                         perpetuated by exaggerated demand growth projections. These barriers can best be removed by
                         encouraging reduced consumption through demand side management. Barriers also remain to the
                         most efficient siting of new generation plants in areas that remove grid constraints, and the most
                         efficient selection of technologies (with CHPs as possible options). These barriers can be removed by
                         standardizing and simplifying the rules for siting new plants and connecting those plants to the grid.

                         Figure 57: Barriers and Solutions to Energy Efficiency in Electricity

                           Barriers                                      Solutions
                           n 	 Inappropriate tariff                      Quick Wins               n	 Reform tariff methodologies
                               methodology                                                        n	 Regulated Assert Based tariffs
                           n 	 Bias toward new capacity                                           n	 “Two part” tariff
                           n 	 Exaggerated demand growth                                          n	 Remove cross-subsidy
                               projection
                           n 	 Lack of coordination between Essentials                            n	 Demand side management or rate payer funded
                               energy service providers                                              energy efficiency programs
                           n 	 Uncertainty over sector                                            n	 Clarify and standardize requirements and
                               reforms                                                               procedures for siting new plants and connecting to
                                                                                                     the grids
                                                                         High Cost, High Return   n	 Complete electricity sector liberalisation


                         5.7.1 What is hindering energy efficiency in the electricity sector?
                         Existing regulatory procedures, projected demand, and remaining uncertainties about the
                         completion of sector reforms pose a threat to the continuation of Russia’s transition to a competitive
                         market, and with that transition, better electricity sector efficiency. More specifically, barriers to
                         improving energy efficiency in the electricity sector include:
                                 n	      An inappropriate tariff methodology. Electricity sector tariff-setting in Russia
                                         discourages companies from making long-term investments in energy efficiency. The
                                         tariff methodology used in the electricity sector is the same as in the heating sector, and
                                         therefore presents the same barriers for energy efficiency. The cost-plus tariff methodology,
                                         short period between tariff revisions, and continued political interference in the way tariff
                                         levels are set all discourage investments in energy efficiency. More generally, as mentioned
                                         in the introduction to this chapter, electric utilities around the world are often regulated
                                         in such a way that encourages more, rather than less, capital investment and sales to
                                         customers
                                 n	      Bias toward building new production capacity. Russia’s electric companies are not
                                         unique in this regard. Investing in energy efficiency is three times less expensive than the
                                         introduction of new capacity. Nevertheless, energy savings alternatives are consistently
                                         undervalued by electric utilities. Most energy companies around the world have an
                                         inherent bias to building new production rather than reducing consumption, and for
                                         good reason. This bias exists because these energy companies (whether in competitive or
                                         regulated environments) often earn more when they sell more, or earn more when they
                                         expand their asset base.111 The returns on energy efficiency investments, in contrast, often
                                         accrue to individual consumers, and not to the electric utility, at least in the short term.

 106
                         111	
                                The utility’s incentives will vary considerably depending on how tariffs are set.
                                                                                                       5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




        n	      Exaggerated demand growth projections in Russia further encourages investment in new
                capacity over investments in energy efficiency. This is particularly true when capacity needs
                are drastic as RAO’s recent projections have made them seem. RAO-UES has projected that
                electricity demand in Russia will grow by nearly 5 percent per year, but RAO’s projection is
                based on the extremely cold winter of 2005/06 in which electricity consumption leapt to
                4.2 percent (from an average of 2.4 percent), and therefore may be overstated. Figure 58
                shows annual consumption statistics for 2000 to 2007. The investment plans of the newly
                privatized generation companies accordingly include commitments, agreed with RAO and
                the Ministry of Economy, to introduce new capacity. Energy efficiency investments are
                (however incorrectly) viewed as inappropriate for meeting such large increases in demand.

Figure 58: Annual electricity consumption growth rates, 2000-2007, %


          5

                                                                                                                   4.2
          4           3.8


          3                                                                 2.8
                                                                                             2.4                                  2.3
          2                                                                                          1.8
                                        1.4
          1
                                                          0.3
          0
                     2000              2001              2002              2003              2004    2005         2006*           2007

Source: RAO UES and Institute of Energy Policy, “Economic Results of 2006 in energy sector,” 2007.



        n	      Extreme segmentation of electricity markets. Segmented and poorly coordinated
                electricity transmission systems prevent competition in Russia, limiting opportunities to
                improve energy efficiency. The design of the electricity network in Russia does not allow
                companies to fully realize the advantages of cross-regional power trading. The location of
                generation capacity was based on the structure of Soviet economy, which does not match the
                now more concentrated areas of consumer demand in Russia. The Russian electricity system
                is divided into seven separate service areas (Far East, Siberia, Central, North-West, North
                Caucuses, the Volga, the Urals) with almost no transmission inter-connections between the
                European, Siberian, and Far Eastern Energy systems in particular. Within each electricity
                system, transmission bottlenecks exist due to the grid’s limited carrying capacity. These
                bottlenecks effectively create separate zones, each with their own, uncompetitive energy
                prices. Currently, there are more than 6,000 price zones in the power market in Russia.
        n	      Lack of coordination with other energy service providers. When planning to build
                new generating capacity, electric utilities do not consider heat demand or centralized
                heating plans. Although this is partially due to the fact that the electricity sector is more
                advanced than the heating sector in terms of reforms and quality of management, without
                coordinating their energy services, the two sectors can never realize their full energy
                savings potential. Federal, regional, or municipal governments could play a role in helping
                to plan the most efficient means of delivering energy in particular areas, but they do not

                                                                                                                                                                          107
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                         currently. The potential for distributed CHPs, for example, which could efficiently serve
                                         both heating and electricity demand while relieving transmission constraints in certain
                                         areas, is overlooked. RAO UES’s General Scheme of Electric Power Objects Distribution
                                         to 2020 projects that CHP’s share in total heat generation will increase only slightly above
                                         projected increases in heat demand.
                                 n	      Cumbersome rules for new plant siting and interconnection. Industrial boilers could also
                                         potentially be replaced with CHPs, allowing factory owners to sell surplus electricity into
                                         the market. However, complicated rules for construction approval, grid interconnection,
                                         equipment certification, ecological standards, and noise level standards further hamper
                                         companies’ abilities to invest in CHPs. These same rules prevent the efficient siting of any
                                         new generation not owned by incumbent electricity service providers. Incumbents typically
                                         avoid many of these rules because they build on existing sites and simply upgrade (rather
                                         than install new) connections to the grid.
                                 n	      Risk of slowing electricity sector reforms. Some investors and experts see a risk that
                                         electricity liberalization reforms could be delayed and may not reach completion. The
                                         electricity sector reform was initiated and subsequently driven by a group of leaders
                                         mainly from the top management of RAO UES who were strongly committed to change
                                         in the sector. With RAO-UES’ liquidation pending, sector reforms may not continue
                                         at their present rate. As recently as May 2008, the government again delayed the rules
                                         for wholesale and retail electricity markets, from the fourth quarter of 2008, to the
                                         first quarter of 2010. Reforms could continue to stall, especially under the influence of
                                         government-owned generation companies and other generators under the control of large
                                         energy and financial companies. There is also a risk that unbundled generation companies
                                         could establish oligopolistic arrangements that the government may not be able to control,
                                         further jeopardizing the success of the reforms.

                         5.7.2 What can the Russian government do to increase the energy efficiency of the
                         electricity sector?
                         In addition to completing the reforms necessary to liberalize the electricity market in Russia, the
                         government can continue to promote sound electricity sector regulation, including proper tariff
                         setting for those segments of the electricity sectors that remain regulated, a relaxation of new
                         plant siting and interconnection standards, and incorporation of DSM measures. As noted in the
                         introduction to this chapter, a coordinated approach is likely to be more effective than piecemeal
                         measures to improve energy efficiency. Box 5.20 shows how the state of Maryland intends to reduce
                         electricity demand through a range of energy efficiency and DSM measures.




 108
                                                                                                                  5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Box 5.20: Comprehensive electricity legislation in Maryland

       The US state of Maryland faces growing demand for electricity in very much the same way as Russia. During the next 17 years, the base level
       scenario of projected demand is growth of roughly 20 percent. However, instead of building new generation and transmission capacities,
       the Maryland government chose to mobilize energy efficiency and demand response resources in order to forestall the prospect of power
       curtailment in future. In addition, Maryland set a goal to reduce per capita electricity usage 15 percent by 2015 and 29 percent by 2025.
       Maryland has proposed numerous energy efficiency policies, which are expected to be enough to achieve their stated reduction goals and
       have been proven as the least cost resource to meeting the state’s future energy needs. Among the policy recommendations are: electricity
       savings targets, implementation of most recent federal and state appliances standards, stringent residential and commercial building energy
       codes, clean energy R&D, combined heat and power systems, and DSM programs.
       By implementing the various measures of this comprehensive legislation, Maryland expects to: reduce customer electricity bills, increase
       energy security, ensure a cleaner environment, and create a clean energy economy in the state. The figure below shows how each measure
       is intended to reduce Maryland’s electricity demand in the coming 17 years.


                                   80,000

                                   70,000

                                   60,000
                                                                                  15% reduction in
        Electricity demand (GWh)




                                                                                  forecasted consumption                                CHP
                                   50,000                                         by 2015                                               Building Codes
                                                                                                                                        RD&D Initiative
                                   40,000
                                                                                                                                        Appliance Standards
                                   30,000                                                                                               State and Utility
                                                                                                                                        Programs
                                   20,000

                                   10,000

                                        -
                                        2007   2009   2011   2013     2015        2017       2019       2021       2023      2025


Sources: Energy Efficiency: The First Fuel for a Clean Energy Future. Report Number E082. ACEEE. February 2008.



Solutions to the barriers described above include:
        n	                         Clearly commit to continued electricity sector reform. The government can only
                                   ease investor concerns about the progress of electricity market reforms by sticking to its
                                   declared timetables. There may be very good reasons for delaying reform, but if there are,
                                   these reasons must be made clear to investors, with subsequent clarity on the length of
                                   delays. In order to promote energy efficiency, the Russian government should ensure the
                                   continuation and completion of the market liberalization reforms already underway
        n	                         Reform tariff methodologies. As recommended with respect to Russia’s heating sector,
                                   the current methodology for revising tariffs discourages energy service providers from
                                   making investments in energy efficiency (or, for that matter, any investments that save
                                   on operating and maintenance expenditure). The current “cost plus” tariff methodology,
                                   used in Russia’s electricity as well as heating sectors, is a harmful distortion of regulatory
                                   practice elsewhere in the world. The cost plus methodology discourages any savings on
                                   operating and maintenance expenditure because the electric utility earns a markup on each
                                   unit of energy sold.




                                                                                                                                                                                     109
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 	          As noted in the introduction to this chapter, the government could further improve
                                            energy efficiency by:
                                            –	 Adhering to the timetable it has set to raise average electricity tariffs to levels that
                                               allow distribution utilities to recover their costs, including the full cost of energy owed
                                               to (newly competitive) generators;
                                            –	 Continuing to gradually reduce cross subsidization between customer classes. Where
                                               subsidies are still needed to protect low income customers, the government can
                                               consider using life-line tariffs or targeted subsidies (see Box 5.22).
                                 	          Requiring that tariffs reflect volumetric consumption and not norms based on
                                            dwelling size or other characteristics. Where customers are not metered, the government
                                            will need to find ways to encourage the utilities or customers to install meters. Customers
                                            can easily be given incentives to install meters, as their bills under normative tariffs are
                                            often higher than under volumetric tariffs.112 A further, albeit typically more expensive
                                            refinement to volumetric metering, is to implement time of use metering in conjunction
                                            with “smart meters”. Box 5.21 shows an example of how time-of-use metering and smart
                                            meters have been used in Canada.

                         Box 5.21: Smart metering and time of use (TOU) tariffs in Canada

                                 In June 2006, the Ontario Energy Board initiated a price pilot project to test the reactions and impacts on consumer behavior of Ontario’s
                                 Regulated Price Plan TOU prices. The table below shows the pricing structure of the time and season-sensitive prices.

                                     Time         Summer Hours                                  Price (in Canadian          Winter Hours (Nov 1 – Feb 28)            Price (in Canadian
                                                  (Aug 1 – Oct 31)                              dollars)/kWh                                                         dollars)/kWh
                                     Off-Peak     10 pm - 7 am weekdays; all day on                       3.5¢              10 pm - 7 am weekdays; all day on               3.4¢
                                                  weekends and holidays                                                     weekends and holidays
                                     Mid-Peak     7 am - 11 am and 5 pm - 10 pm weekdays                  7.5¢              11 am - 5 pm and 8 pm - 10 pm weekdays          7.1¢
                                     On-Peak      11 am - 5 pm weekdays                                  10.5¢              7 am - 11 am and 5 pm - 8 pm weekdays           9.7¢

                                 Time of use tariffs require specialized meters, known as smart meters, that can remotely and automatically access information on customers’
                                 daily and hourly electricity consumption.
                                 The installation and use of smart meters in conjunction with consumer awareness of the variation in time of use prices (via monthly usage
                                 statements and pricing schedule refrigerator magnet) yielded the following results:
                                 n	    6 percent reduction in total electricity use
                                 n	    Average customer savings of 2.74 Canadian dollars per month from reduced electricity consumption (at an average price of 5.9¢/kWh)
                                 n	    Customers saved an additional 1.44 Canadian dollars per month from shifting energy use during critical load periods
                                 Based on these results, 93 percent of customers would pay less with an RPP TOU pricing structure (versus the current two-tiered seasonal
                                 structure). The majority of customers (78 percent) involved in the pilot project said they would recommend a time of use pricing plan to
                                 friends and family. Awareness of how to reduce their bill, greater control over electricity costs, and environmental benefits were cited as
                                 the top three reasons for their satisfaction. 71 percent of customers involved felt that the difference in price points was large enough to
                                 encourage a shift in electricity consumption. Additionally, customers noted the value of the monthly usage statement and the refrigerator
                                 magnet in helping them monitor and reduce their monthly usage.

                         Source: Ontario Energy Board Smart Price Pilot Final Report. IBM Global Business Services and eMeter Strategic Consulting. July 2007.




                         112	   Further innovations on tariff design are also recommended. These recommendations are presented below under the
                                discussion of demand response.
 110
                                                                                                                   5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




        n	       Consider regulatory mechanisms for decoupling an electric utility’s profits from its
                 sales. Currently, four states in the U.S. have decoupled utilities’ profits from consumption
                 and eleven states use a partial decoupling mechanism.
        n	       Implementing DSM programs that encourage the utility to invest in energy efficiency.
                 For example:
                 –	 Some governments further encourage utilities to invest in energy efficiency by adding
                    an extra sum to electricity bills to finance DSM energy efficiency investments. In North
                    and South Carolina, for example, regulators are considering allowing Duke Energy, a
                    regional power provider, to charge customers as much as 90 percent of the cost of an
                    unbuilt plant in order to invest in measures like smart grid and meter technology.113
                 –	 Other governments specify a certain amount of energy that the utility must save each
                    year. France, for example, requires gas and electricity suppliers to invest enough over
                    three years to reduce projected demand by 54TWh.114
        	        In the electricity sector, Russia seems to already have in mind an improvement to the current
                 cost-plus methodology. The Ministry for Economic Development (MED) intends to pilot
                 a Regulated Asset Base (RAB) methodology tariffs in a number of pilot regions of Russia
                 starting from July, 1st, 2008. This pilot will expand to a larger portion of Russia in 2009.
                 Under the new methodology, tariffs will be fixed for three-five years, and the regulator
                 will allow for a 6 percent return on assets growing to 10 percent in 2011.115 Expenses will
                 be passed through directly to customers, without any mark-up (as is currently the case).
                 The initiative is expected to stimulate more investment in transmission and distribution.
                 Moreover, the three-five year or even longer fixed period for RAB tariffs will encourage
                 distribution companies to cut costs and increase revenues.

Box 5.22: More efficient subsidization of low income customers

       As a country implements electricity sector reform, tariff increases may place relatively more of a burden on lower income customers. Cross
       subsidies between customer classes are often of more benefit to middle- and upper-income customers than lower-income customers, and
       lead to inefficient levels of consumption among the customer classes receiving the cross subsidy, as well as those paying for it. Governments
       undertaking power sector reform often use targeted subsidies and lifeline tariffs as more effective mechanisms to help make electricity
       consumption affordable for lower-income customers.

       Targeted subsidies: Problems with this method are that it is difficult to agree on the exact qualifications of categorizing the poor. Possible
       criteria are income, location of household (since poor tend to live in specific areas), or households without service. A well implemented
       targeted subsidy provides assistance to only the specific people who qualify while also sustaining incentives for efficient use. An
       administration that oversees and identifies eligibility for the program is a requirement for the subsidy to be targeted. Another qualification
       for implementation is that it should be financially viable for the state to not only support the subsidy but to fund the institution behind it.
       In fact, targeted housing subsidies have already been proven successful in Russia.

       Lifeline tariffs: Most of the poor require only the most basic amount of electricity. Lifeline tariffs offer a chance for poor low volume
       electricity users to receive this small block of electricity at a reduced rate. These tariffs set a limit to the amount of electricity subsidized,
       usually 50–100 kWh per month, and all additional units are sold at a slightly increased rate in order to offset the lost revenue. The general
       idea behind these tariffs is to make the bare minimum of energy necessity available to everyone. Proper implementation of the limit has
       to reflect this premise: if it is set too high the program would be supporting more than basic energy needs and a free rider problem of
       average users benefiting from reduced rates would exist.

Source: The World Bank. Energy and Development Report 2000: Energy Services for the World’s Poor. Ch. 7: The Role of Energy Subsidies, p.60-66.




113	
     Lavelle, Marianne. “When saving power means higher profits.” U.S. News and World Report. 28 April 2008. 47.
114	
     “Energy Efficiency: The Elusive Negawatt.” The Economist. May 8 2008.
115	 www.kommersant.ru
                                                                                                                                                                                      111
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 n	      Clarify and standardize requirements and procedures for siting new plants and
                                         connecting to the grid. Russia can thereby encourage the private sector to build the
                                         most efficient type of generation, and in the areas where it is most needed to relieve
                                         transmission constraints, by clarifying and standardizing regulatory requirements for siting
                                         new plants and connecting to the grid. Co-generation is, as shown in Chapter 4, often the
                                         most efficient means of generating energy. Distributed generating facilities, when located
                                         near isolated pockets of load, can help to remove transmission bottlenecks and improve
                                         overall reliability. Without a more liberal regime for siting and connecting new generating
                                         resources, Russia’s electricity system will get only what the incumbent electric utilities want
                                         to build, which may not always be what the system actually needs

                         5.8 What are the barriers and solutions to energy efficiency in the
                         transport sector?
                         With rising economic growth and per capita income, reliance on road transport is increasing rapidly
                         in Russia. As shown in Chapter 4, personal vehicle use is increasing, and with it, fuel consumption.
                         This tendency is likely to persist in the future and if it does, will worsen, not improve, Russia’s energy
                         efficiency in the transport sector. Negative effects from increases in road transport may be further
                         compounded by the fact that the majority of road transportation takes place in urban areas. Hence,
                         fundamental structural and modal shifts in the sector and progressive metropolitan area reshaping
                         promoted by comprehensive policy measures and political will are indispensable to prevent negative
                         effects brought about by those changes. Figure 59 summarizes these barriers and prioritizes their
                         solutions.

                         Figure 59: Barriers and Solutions to Energy Efficiency in the Transport Sector

                           Barriers                                            Solutions
                           n 	 No incentives to travel efficiently             Quick Wins               	 Tighten fuel efficiency and emissions standards
                                                                                                        n

                           n 	 Consumer preferences for less                                            	 Reward drivers who opt for more energy efficient
                                                                                                        n
                               efficient transport                                                        transport options
                           n 	 A lack of information                                                    	 Encourage changes in behavior through
                                                                                                        n

                           n 	 Poor quality of public transport                                           information dissemination
                           n 	 Lack of financing for public                                             	 Introduce fuel efficiency labeling for new cars
                                                                                                        n

                               transport                                       High Cost, High Return   	 Take an integrated approach to transport planning
                                                                                                        n

                           n 	 No integrated policy on                                                  	 Offer better quality of service on public transport
                                                                                                        n
                               sustainable transport                                                    	 Charge users the full cost of private vehicle usage
                                                                                                        n

                                                                                                        	 Tax drivers for private vehicle usage
                                                                                                        n




 112
                                                                                     5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




5.8.1 What is hindering energy efficiency improvement in the transport sector?
The principal barriers to energy efficiency in the transport sector are:
        n	    A lack of information. A shortage of statistical data and studies on energy use in
              transport prevents the government from having a clear understanding of trends in energy
              use, and therefore prevents sound policy decisions to promote energy efficiency. Some
              information on vehicle stock, passenger and freight turnover, average mileage traveled, and
              specific fuel consumption exists, but is often contradictory. The shortage of information is
              especially acute with respect to privately owned vehicles.
        n	    No integrated policy on sustainable transport. The government has yet to develop a
              consistent policy on sustainable transport, which typically integrates land use, urban
              planning, traffic management, and intelligent transport systems. Efforts are seldom made
              to link urban, land-use and transport planning policies. The government has generally
              focused its efforts on providing more space and roadways for use by private vehicles, rather
              than developing public transport or fostering the development of “sustainable cities” with
              improved access to places of work, goods, and services.
        	     The government has similarly paid little attention to improving freight transport
              management. Infrastructure for large-capacity long-distance carriers leaves much to be
              desired in Russia. Very often distribution centers are located within metropolitan areas
              and there are no spatial and temporal truck restrictions. Similarly, little has been done
              to promote a shift towards sea and river transportation which are generally more energy
              efficient than road or rail transport.
        n	    No policy incentives to travel more efficiently. Private vehicle owners are not charged
              the true cost of infrastructure usage, congestion, pollution, and climate change. The
              ineffective use of transport tax policy significantly adds to the problem of the sector bias in
              favor of private vehicles. Those who contribute more to pollution and traffic and use fuel
              less efficiently, bear the same cost of infrastructure usage as those who travel less, during
              off-peak periods, or have more energy efficient and less polluting cars.
        	     Policy measures that might recoup some of these costs, and simultaneously influence
              vehicle purchasing and usage habits are used ineffectively in Russia. Regional governments
              do apply an annual transport tax, linked to the horsepower of the vehicle, but collection
              rates are low. The tax itself, moreover, is too low to have much of an impact on vehicle
              ownership or choice of vehicle.116 Some fuel consumption norms also exist (Norms on
              Fuel and Lubricant Consumption in Motor Transport), but these are primarily to provide
              a basis for companies’ financial reporting, rather than to encourage energy efficiency. In
              January 2008, Russia adopted Euro 3 emissions standards for imported cars, but these
              standards apply only to new imports and newly produced cars. In addition, enforcing
              Euro 3 emissions standards will prove difficult as many car engines do not even comply
              with Euro 1 standards and fuel quality, especially in remote regions of Russia, often does
              not meet this new standard and can deteriorate the high quality engines of newer cars
              mandated by the standard.




116	
       Tax rates differ by region. In Moscow, where tax rates tend to be the highest, the tax for vehicles of 250 horsepower or
       greater is only 100 Russian rubles , or $ 4.22 per horse power, and will increase to only 150 Russian rubles, or $ 6.33,
       in 2009. For vehicles with 200-250 horsepower, the rate is even lower at 50 Russian rubles ($ 2.11) per horse power
       currently and 75 Russian rubles ($ 3.16) in 2009.
                                                                                                                                                        113
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                 n	      Poor quality of public transport service. The public’s preference for private cars is not
                                         without reason. City buses, suburban electric trains, and metro are not user-friendly: they
                                         are mostly overcrowded, uncomfortable, unreliable, and slow. Door-to-door connectivity
                                         is also poor. Main mass transit routes are often not complemented by feeder bus and para-
                                         transit routes, and inter-city transport systems are not integrated with suburban ones
                                 n	      Lack of available financing. The lack of access to financing affects regional and municipal
                                         governments as well as individuals.
                                         –	 For regional and municipal governments, with whom responsibility for infrastructure
                                            construction resides, lack of access to financing appears to be a serious impediment
                                            to investing in infrastructure that promotes efficient energy transport. As has been
                                            described in discussions of barriers in other sectors, municipalities typically have
                                            no access to medium- and long-term financing. Municipalities also typically have
                                            difficulty entering into long term contracts that might allow for Public Private
                                            Partnerships to help finance public transport or other sustainable transport projects.
                                         –	 For individual consumers, the less efficient vehicles are typically the cheapest. Whereas
                                            a consumer might prefer a more efficient vehicle, the upfront costs of these more
                                            efficient cars are more than they can afford.
                                 n	      Consumer preferences for less efficient means of transport. In shopping for cars
                                         – if Russian consumers consider a car’s energy efficiency characteristics at all – they
                                         are generally unwilling to sacrifice power, size, and luxury for energy efficiency. This
                                         tendency contrasts with the one observed in European countries, where petrol prices are
                                         considerably higher and people are more concerned with environmental issues.

                         5.8.2 How can Russia improve energy efficiency in the transport sector?
                         Removing barriers to energy efficiency in the transport sector will require a combined approach
                         focused on integrated transport planning and promoting behavioral changes towards wanting to
                         use efficient transport among the population, while giving incentives to individuals to cut back on
                         fuel consumption and the use of inefficient vehicles. New York City provides a successful example
                         of a sustained and strategic approach to transportation efficiency. Former Mayor Guliani put a lot
                         of emphasis on promoting the use of public transport among the middle- and upper-class. This
                         targeted behavioral/informational campaign was combined with significant improvements to public
                         transport, including increased frequency of routes, better punctuality, etc. Now, New Yorkers find
                         public transport more efficient, quick, and comfortable. Efforts have been so successful that the
                         new mayor Bloomberg now intends to further increase efficient use of transport by introducing
                         congestion pricing schemes.

                         Russia can remove barriers to energy efficiency in the transport sector by:
                                 n	      Collecting better information. Any solution the government chooses to pursue will
                                         depend on the development of better systems for collecting and analyzing data on the
                                         transport sector. A system of consistent transport sector development indicators needs
                                         be to applied at federal, regional, and local levels to evaluate the progress of urban and
                                         transport changes
                                 n	      Taking an integrated transport planning approach. One-off policy measures to improve
                                         energy efficiency in transport are unlikely to yield as much improvement in energy
                                         efficiency as measures that are closely integrated with policies on urban development, land-
                                         use, and environmental preservation. Such integrated policies should emphasize an urban
                                         planning component, in particular, as most of the related problems (energy inefficiency as
                                         well as environmental degradation, poor air quality, congestion, etc.) and resulting benefits
 114
                                         more acutely affect the urban population.
                                                                               5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




       	    It is vitally important that municipalities elaborate and follow metropolitan area
            development strategies promoting citizen-friendly and sustainable urban designs that
            reduce the need to travel. Better integration of residential, business, commercial, and
            cultural areas, as well as optimized public transport access to mostly visited urban
            developments should be ensured. Many European countries managed to achieve this:
            More than 30 percent of car trips are less than 3 km long and 50 percent of car trips are
            less than 5 km long.117 One may say that geography and country area is important here;
            however, policy plays a major role.
       n	   Offering a better quality of service on public transport, and better intermodal
            solutions (e.g., private to public and vice versa). Most transport policy measures will also
            fail unless such measures are accompanied by improvements in the safety, reliability, and
            quality of public transport alternatives. For example, Moscow is now building new roads,
            or expanding the capacity of existing roads. However, international experience has shown
            that more roads mean more traffic, and more congestion over time, not less. Any efforts to
            reduce congestion in Moscow, such as congestion pricing or vehicle restrictions, are likely
            to backfire. The Moscow subway is already at nearly full capacity. Moreover, existing rail
            stations outside the city are few, and those that do exist are unsafe and offer no parking.
            In order to solve these problems, the government will need to look at a broad range of
            possibilities for strengthening links among major mass transit routes, and improving inter-
            modal transport.
       	    The restriction from entry into Moscow of trucks with emission levels below Euro-2
            standards, which will become effective September 2008, is also likely to cause a wave of
            criticism, since many important distribution centers are located in metropolitan area and
            many essential trucking routes run through the capital center.
       n	   Charging users the full cost of private vehicle usage. Only by charging the full cost of
            private vehicle usage will the government (or, to the extent that concession-type PPPs are
            used in Russia’s transport sector, the private sector concessionaire) have sufficient revenues
            to maintain and rehabilitate infrastructure, and ease congestion through infrastructure
            expansion. Debilitated, congested infrastructure leads to significant energy inefficiency in
            the transport sector.118 There are about 3.5 million cars in Moscow. According to some
            estimates each of these cars spends on average 40-45 hours per month in traffic jams.
            Assuming a car consumes one liter of fuel during an hour of idling, car owners waste more
            than $ 1.85 billion in Moscow during the course of a year.119
       	    Government or private operators can reduce reliance on private vehicles and ease
            congestion by charging road tolls, peak-hour fees, or parking pricing. Box 5.23 shows two
            examples of good integrated transport system planning through road price and improved
            quality of public transportation in Singapore and London. Congestion charges may, for
            example, make good sense in Moscow and St. Petersburg. Charges can be levied on the
            use of not only individual roads, but also local road networks and even wider areas with
            the emphasis shifting to charging the distance traveled rather than targeted bottlenecks.
            Toll roads might be a partial solution where traffic is high. A fuel tax is also a reasonable
            substitute for such a travel charge.



117	
     IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report.
118	 The Asian Development Bank estimates that the cost of traffic congestion alone constitutes as much as three percent
     of GDP in OECD countries and reaches six percent in some Asian countries.
119	 http://www.smilink.ru/                                                                                                                       115
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Box 5.23: Managing congestion in Singapore and London

                                 Singapore: In 1975, Singapore introduced a scheme that levied a charge for the right to enter a 6 km2 zone covering the central area during
                                 morning peak hours, unless the vehicle had four or more passengers (€1/day or €20/month). In 1998, this was replaced by an electronic
                                 system with smart cards in the vehicles. The pricing is based on a per-trip-system with highest tolls in the peak hours. Taxis were equipped
                                 with transponders which allowed them to avoid traffic congestions. In addition, Singapore introduced one of the highest import duties and
                                 purchase taxes on cars. The government also introduced individual working hours for various groups of public institutions to avoid creating
                                 rush hours. With the introduction of this scheme in 1975 there was a reduction of car peak traffic by 45 percent - and in the last 30 years it
                                 stayed on this low level without any major increases. The use of public transport by commuters rose from 46 percent to 65 percent.

                                 London: Since 2003 motorists driving in central London on weekdays between 7:00 am and 6:30 pm are required to pay £5, increasing
                                 to £8 in July 2005. The cost of the system was £200 million which seemed too high but just in the first year the city already received
                                 £80million from users. The outcomes of the initiative were impressive. During the program’s first few months automobile traffic declined
                                 about 20 percent (a reduction of about 20,000 vehicles per day), resulting in a 10 percent automobile mode share. Most people change
                                 their travel patterns due to the charge transfer to public transport, particularly bus. Some motorists who would otherwise drive through
                                 Central London during peak periods shift their route, travel time, or destination. Others shift mode to taxis, motorcycles, pedal cycles,
                                 or to walking This has significantly increased traffic speeds within the zone. Average traffic speed during charging days (including time
                                 stopped at intersections) increased 37 percent, from 8 miles-per-hour (13 km/hr) prior to the charge up to 11 miles-per-hour (17 kms/
                                 hr) after pricing was introduced. Number of cars decreased by 40 percent. Peak period congestion delays declined about 30 percent, and
                                 bus congestion delays declined 50%. Bus ridership increased 14 percent and subway ridership about 1 percent. The introduction of the
                                 system was combined with significant improvements in public transport such as dedicated bus lanes, more frequency, upgrade of metro,
                                 and other measures.

                         Source: World Energy Council and Victoria Transport Policy Institute. “London Congestion Pricing: Implications for other cities, 2006.” Harvard Business Review-Russia, May 2008.



                                  n	      Taxing drivers for private vehicle usage. Increased private vehicle usage accelerates
                                          wear and tear on road and transport infrastructure, and causes costly congestion and
                                          pollution. Where the government cannot recover the full costs of private vehicle usage
                                          through tolls or other charges, it can use fiscal policy tools. Governments often use fuel
                                          and vehicle taxation, vehicle registration fees, or vehicle purchase taxes to recoup the costs
                                          of private vehicle usage to infrastructure, and to society (as negative externalities), while
                                          simultaneously discouraging less efficient means of transport by making such use more
                                          expensive. Russia’s current annual vehicle tax is a reasonable idea, but would need to be
                                          increased and made more progressive in terms of taxing more powerful cars to have much
                                          of an effect on vehicle purchasing habits
                                  	       Some countries use a specific tax on car purchases which stimulates consumers to buy more
                                          efficient and environmentally friendly cars. As Figure 60 shows, the highest car purchase
                                          taxes are observed in Singapore, Denmark, Finland, and Norway. Denmark and Norway
                                          also have high annual tax on cars, reaching as high as €300-450 per year.120 Annual car
                                          ownership taxes complement vehicle purchase taxes and in most countries are linked
                                          to fuel consumption by the car in question, often including environmental and energy
                                          efficiency aspects. This tool is widely used in the EU.121 Fuel taxes may ultimately be a
                                          better tool for Russia as they link payments to automobile usage rather than ownership.




                         120	
                                WEC EE policies around the world: Review and Evaluation, 2008.
                         121	
                                Instead of a tax, some Asian countries use purchase limitations, which are based on an open bidding process for
                                certificates of entitlement to own a vehicle, combined with high initial registration cost and annual road tax.
 116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Figure 60: Average car purchase taxes around the World

       35 000

       30 000

       25 000

       20 000
€




       15 000

       10 000

        5 000

             0
                   Sweden
                            Lithuania
                                        Germany
                                                  Czech
                                                          Luxembourg
                                                                       Slovakia
                                                                                  Great Britain
                                                                                                  Estonia
                                                                                                            France
                                                                                                                     Brazil
                                                                                                                              Switzerland
                                                                                                                                            Hungary
                                                                                                                                                      Italy
                                                                                                                                                              Korea
                                                                                                                                                                      Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                               Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                        Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Malta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Singapore
Source: World Energy Council.




       	         A number of countries also make use of motor fuel taxes. In European countries these taxes
                 are much higher than in the rest of the world. They are an essential source of government
                 income: 10-15 percent of total state revenues are ensured by fuel taxation.
       n	        Rewarding drivers who opt for more energy efficient transport options. In addition
                 to discouraging energy inefficient behavior, the government will want to consider how
                 to directly encourage energy efficient behavior. The city of Moscow offers an excellent
                 example of thinking in this direction. The mayor has proposed that buyers of small cars
                 and hybrid vehicles be exempt from transport tax, and be offered parking free of charge.
                 Similar incentives are offered in cities throughout the U.S. In San Jose, California, for
                 example, owners of hybrid electric vehicles and zero emission vehicles qualify for free
                 meter parking downtown. Similarly, the state of California grants high occupancy vehicle
                 lane access to hybrid vehicles regardless of the number of occupants of the vehicle.
       n	        Tightening fuel efficiency and emissions standards. Russia could further improve
                 energy efficiency in transport by imposing more rigorous energy efficiency and vehicle
                 emission standards on domestically produced and imported cars. The less efficient fleet
                 should be phased out and its replacement with a new, more energy efficient fleet be
                 encouraged. This process is actually ongoing in Russia, as people are replacing their less
                 efficient domestically manufactured cars with more efficient imported ones. Nevertheless,
                 the combined market share of Russian brands remains around 60 percent, which indicates
                 significant remaining potential for improvement. Box 5.24 describes China’s experience
                 with the recent introduction of fuel efficiency standards.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     117
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Box 5.24: Vehicle Fuel Efficiency Standards in China

                                 In 2005 the first fuel efficiency standard – Fuel Consumption Limits for Light Duty Passenger Vehicles – was introduced in China. The main
                                 goal of this regulation was to help control the national total oil consumption to less than 400 million metric tons per year. The components
                                 of the vehicle fuel efficiency standard were (i) the development of weight-class based maximum fuel consumption standard; (ii) an overall
                                 per-distance fuel consumption reduction of 15 percent; and (iii) a more stringent standard for heavier vehicle classes to prevent a shift to
                                 heavier vehicles and to encourage the use of economic compact cars.

                                 The first phase of the standard, targeting a reduction of 5 percent in per-distance fuel consumption was implemented in 2005, and a second
                                 phase, with a goal of 10 percent reduction in fuel consumption for each weight category in 2008.

                                 With the implementation of this fuel economy standard, it is forecast that 13 million tons of fuel will be saved in 2020 and 31 million tons
                                 in 2030. However more stringent fuel economy standards need to be put into force after 2009. A further reduction of 25 percent in vehicle
                                 fuel consumption to 5.6 L/100km (the European requirement for 2008) should be established by 2012 for light-duty passenger cars and
                                 a fuel consumption level of about 4.8 L/100 km should be developed to catch up with Europe and Japan by around 2016. If this were
                                 implemented, an additional 19 million tons oil would be saved in 2020 and 60 million tons in 2030.

                         Source: Asian Development Bank EE and Climate Change Considerations for On-road Transport in Asia.


                                 n	      Introduction of new car labeling. Mandatory new car labeling could be used to
                                         complement the introduction of standards. Such labels would include mandatory data
                                         on CO2 emissions and fuel consumption. In some countries, such labels even include an
                                         efficiency rating system and additional data like noise level, emissions standards, taxes, and
                                         other technical data. Car labeling is widely used by the EU and Australia. In fact, the EU
                                         Directive (1999/94/EC) requires manufacturers and distributors to display information
                                         on fuel economy and CO2 emissions on new passenger cars in showrooms. European
                                         countries’ experience shows that fuel consumption can be reduced by 4-5 percent by
                                         means of labeling and raising consumer awareness.122
                                 n	      Encourage changes in behavior. Better information, tax policies, and financial incentives
                                         can all help to initiate changes in behavior, but ultimately, if Russia wants to catch up to some
                                         of its European neighbors in terms of energy efficiency, improving energy efficiency will re-
                                         quire a change in consumer values and preferences. The preference for larger, more luxuri-
                                         ous vehicles reflects, in many countries, the importance of personal vehicles as a status sym-
                                         bol. The government can encourage the change of behavioral patterns that make people buy
                                         larger, more powerful, and more luxurious cars. The government can help to lead a change
                                         in public values, emphasizing, perhaps that cities are meant and designed for people, not for
                                         cars. This can be done by raising people’s awareness of the fact that their health and quality
                                         of life is actually damaged by the rising number of private cars, or increase in air pollution,
                                         or involving local community groups or interest groups in the change process. Consumer
                                         preferences can be changed, and there is proof in Europe and the United States that smaller,
                                         more efficient vehicles have now become status symbols among some consumer groups.
                                 n	      Establishment of car scrapping schemes. Governments in other countries have tried to
                                         help speed up the renewal of the car fleet by providing fiscal incentives for scrapping old
                                         cars. Other countries’ experience show that in most cases the positive environmental effects
                                         achieved through the removal of the old fleet from operation outweighs additional energy use
                                         in car production and recycling. Individuals can be rewarded for actual scrapping regardless
                                         of the subsequent replacement decision, or for replacement with bonuses depending on a
                                         kind of replacement. The benefits of a scrapping scheme in Russia may be limited as incomes
                                         are still relatively low and older, used cars are therefore preferred to newer, more efficient cars
                                         simply because of cost.


 118                     122	
                                WEC EE policies around the world: Review and Evaluation, 2008
                                                                                5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




5.9 Gas Flaring
As described in Chapter 2, roughly one third of the flared Associated Petroleum Gas (APG) in
Russia could be utilized at current APG prices, potentially generating incremental annual revenues
of up to $2.3 billion per year. The regions of Khanty Mansiysk, has actively promoted flare reduction
for some time, but Russia still has significant progress to make in addressing the issue. Figure 61
shows the principal barriers to energy efficiency in gas flaring and prioritizes possible government
solutions.

Figure 61: Barriers and Solutions in Gas Flaring

 Barriers                                  Solutions
 n	 Remoteness of potential markets        Quick Wins                 	 Improved monitoring and enforcement of
                                                                      n

 n	 Market structure that prevents                                      utilization requirements, possibly through an
    third party access to spare pipeline                                independent regulatory body
    capacity                               Essentials                 	 Enact Federal legislation requiring APG
                                                                      n
 n	 Low price of dry natural gas and APG                                utilization, including heavier fines and possible
 n	 Insufficient information on volumes                                 loss of operating licenses
    of APG flaring and utilization                                    	 Allow third-party access to Gazprom pipelines
                                                                      n

 n	 Soft penalties for excessive gas flaring High Cost, High Return   	 Continuing liberalization of gas prices
                                                                      n




A recent study by PFC Energy, commissioned by the World Bank/Global Gas Flaring Reduction
Partnership, demonstrated the financial viability of several different options for the utilization of
APG depending on size and location of the fields. Nevertheless, a number of regulatory, geographic,
and structural conditions prevent Russia from utilizing APG. These include:
     n	    Remoteness of potential markets.
     n	    The current market structure, under which Gazprom, as a monopoly, controls access to gas
           transport infrastructure, prevents many producers from bringing APG to market. Although
           the Russian government requires that Gazprom give third parties’ non-discriminatory access
           to spare pipeline capacity, if Gazprom has no spare capacity, or claims to have no spare
           capacity, then independent producers are prevented from utilizing their APG.
     n	    Low prices for dry natural gas and for APG bought by gas processing plants. With such
           low prices, producers have little incentive to make investments to collect and sell the gas.
     n	    Insufficient accurate information on the volumes of APG flaring and utilization.
     n	    Existing penalties are not high enough to discourage gas flaring. Regulators can charge
           an emissions fee to producers exceeding their flaring limits, but that fee is only $0.77 per
           Mcm and cannot exceed $1,540 per year.




                                                                                                                                                   119
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         The Russian government is starting to take steps to limit gas flaring and increase the utilization of
                         APG. The following highlights the measures the government has already implemented:
                                 n	      A 1997 decree (No. 858) giving third party’s non-discriminatory access rights to spare
                                         pipeline capacity, providing their gas meets pipeline quality standards.
                                 n	      An audit of all existing gas flaring systems by the industrial inspectorate by March 1, 2008.
                                 n	      Increased fees for methane emissions, including flaring. Operators must pay 50 Russian
                                         rubles per ton for emissions below the permitted limits and 250 Russian rubles per ton for
                                         emissions above the approved limit.
                                 n	      The price of APG has been de-regulated and the price of gas delivered to industrial users
                                         in Russia is being steadily increased.

                         In addition, the following measures, which may or may not be implemented and enforced, have been
                         proposed by Russian policymakers:
                                 n	      Plans to introduce legislation requiring oil producers to increase their utilization of APG
                                         to 95 percent by 2011.
                                 n	      Plans, announced by the Ministry of Natural Resources, to increase flaring fines five-fold
                                         starting in 2009.
                                 n	      Draft legislation requiring oil companies that use less than 95 percent of their APG to pay
                                         a mineral extraction tax.
                                 n	      A 2007 proposal by the Ministry of Industry and Energy to give APG priority access to
                                         Gazprom’s pipelines.

                         The Russian government has made progress in addressing the negative environmental and economic
                         impact of gas flaring. However, it has yet to develop a comprehensive plan for incentivizing the use
                         of and penalizing the flaring of APG. No one policy mechanism or legislative measure alone will
                         be enough to fully realize Russia’s APG utilization potential. Without an overarching plan that
                         legislates, monitors, and enforces gas flaring limits while providing both rewards for compliance
                         and penalties where appropriate, the Russian government will not reach its target for 95 percent
                         utilization by 2011, or even by a significantly later date. Box 5.25 provides a discussion on various
                         international approaches to this problem. Such a plan might include the following:
                                 n	      Federal legislation requiring APG utilization or limiting gas flaring, and possibly including
                                         APG utilization requirements in all oil production licenses;
                                 n	      Heavier fines for gas flaring with respect to field size and location, including a possible loss
                                         of operation licenses;
                                 n	      Improved monitoring and enforcement of utilization requirements, including a clear and
                                         transparent distinction between regional and federal inspection responsibilities;
                                 n	      Enforcement of third-party access to Gazprom pipelines;
                                 n	      Creation of an independent regulatory body to oversee pipeline access and tariffs;
                                 n	      Continued liberalization of APG and natural gas prices ;
                                 n	      Priority access for APG in gas transmission networks;
                                 n	      Identification of unused gas transmission capacity.


 120
                                                                                                                 5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Box 5.25: Best practices abroad for APG utilization

       Several countries, including Norway, the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, have developed comprehensive plans to increase
       APG utilization in oil production. These countries have employed several policy mechanisms that have led to successful reductions in gas
       flaring. These best practices include: legal flaring limits, government agency reviews of new field development, rigorous monitoring and
       reporting requirements, and escalating penalties, including license termination. Additionally, introduction of a policy mechanisms meant
       to capture climate change and environmental externalities increases incentives for APG utilization. The following example demonstrates
       the specifics of Norway’s successful efforts to reduce gas flaring.

       Norway: Since 1971, Norway has had policies restricting gas flaring from Norway’s oil fields. The scope of these policies has developed
       substantially since then. Under the legislative authority of Norway’s Petroleum Act and under the supervision of Norwegian Petroleum
       Directorate (NPD) and the Norwegian Pollution Control Authority, the country has developed a comprehensive approach to increase APG
       utilization. Specific conditions that have led to reduced levels of gas flaring include:
       n	   Direct government regulation of emissions and environmental impact assessments
       n	   Transparent process for reporting and monitoring
       n	   Open-access gas transport infrastructure for all producers, replacing the previous system in which Statoil maintained sole control of the
            transport infrastructure
       n	   CO2 tax

       Flaring restrictions have been credited for successfully creating incentives for the development of gas transport and processing infrastructure,
       enhanced recovery, as well as new technologies for utilization. Since the 1970s, oil production in Norway has increased significantly, but
       gas flaring volumes have remained stable or declined. In 2004, Norway producers only flared 0.16 percent of the total associated gas
       produced in the year.

Source: PFC Energy. 2007. Using Russia’s Associated Gas. Prepared for the Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership and the World Bank. 18-45.




                                                                                                                                                                                    121
122
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    kgoe/US $ Gross Value Added (PPP)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kgoe/US $ Gross Value Added (PPP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hotels




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0,10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0,20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0,30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0,40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0,60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0,70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2,50
                                                                                                                                                                                            Namibia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Botstwana
                                                                                                                                                                                             Ethiopia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Eritrea
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Togo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bangladesh
                                                                                                                                                                                           Paraguay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peru                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                         El Salvador                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                        Kazakhstan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                               Yemen                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                                              Nigeria                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                                            Armenia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                                                                                           Tajikistan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Haiti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                            Pakistan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             China
                                                                                                                                                                                            Lebanon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nicaragua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                                                                                                                                                                               Greece                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            China
                                                                                                                                                                                           Sri Lanka                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                          Costa Rica                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Korea
                                                                                                                                                                                                Nepal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                       Luxembourg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                                Malta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                           Colombia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                              Albania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                               Gabon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Poland




      conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       conversion factor. Data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.
                                                                                                                                                                                            Uruguay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                            Slovenia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              India
                                                                                                                                                                                             Ukraine                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                             Ecuador                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                   United Kingdom                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Italy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cote d’Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Albania
                                                                                                                                                                                              Angola                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                China                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                            Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                       South Africa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pakistan
                                                                                                                                                                                             Panama                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                               Eritrea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Macedonia
                                                                                                                                                                                            Romania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Canada
                                                                                                                                                                                              Croatia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jordan
                                                                                                                                                                                           Germany                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tajikistan
                                                                                                                                                                                             Bahrain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 62: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities of Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                                        Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                                               France                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                              Ireland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Moldova
                                                                                                                                                                                       Netherlands                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Azerbaijan
                                                                                                                                                                                          Venezuela                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bolivia
                                                                                                                                                                                      United States                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lebanon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Russia




                                                                                                                                                                               United Arab Emirates                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                              Estonia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kyrgyzstan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                               Russia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Iran
                                                                                                                                                                                            Bulgaria                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gabon
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sweden                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Uzbekistan
                                                                                                                                                                                                Benin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix A: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities by Sector




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yemen
                                                                                                                                                                                       Saudi Arabia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bahrain
                                                                                                                                                                                         Zimbabwe                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               United Arab Emirates
                                                                                                                                                                                                Korea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                                              Kuwait                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Syria
                                                                                                                                                                                               Sudan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 63: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities in Wholesale, Retail Trade, Restaurants and


                                                                                                                                                                                           Mongolia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mongolia




      Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set. PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set. PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                             kgoe/US $ Gross Value Added (PPP)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          kgoe/US $ Gross Value Added (PPP)




                                                                                                                                                                                               0,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0,05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0,10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0,15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0,20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0,25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0,30
                                                                                                                                                                                 Bangladesh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                                         Nepal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                Mozambique                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              United States
                                                                                                                                                                                   Cambodia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pakistan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                        Eritrea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                       Tunisia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gabon
                                                                                                                                                                                           Peru                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                     Romania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Korea
                                                                                                                                                                                      Panama                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                     Armenia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                    Lithuania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                       Algeria                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Georgia
                                                                                                                                                                                         Egypt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                                     Tanzania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                   Argentina                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                         China                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Israel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                          Israel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                         Latvia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                      Georgia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                      Senegal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                                 South Africa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Core d’Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                                                       Bolivia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kazakhstan
                                                                                                                                                                                         Malta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nicaragua




      conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Macedonia
                                                                                                                                                                                       Estonia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Macedonia
                                                                                                                                                                                       Belarus                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Czech Repiblic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tajikistan
                                                                                                                                                                               Czech Repiblic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                    Paraguay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                   Indonesia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                        Jordan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   France
                                                                                                                                                                                     Moldova                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                      Norway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                                       Poland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                                           Togo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         New Zealand
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cote d’Ivoire                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Belarus
                                                                                                                                                                                        Sudan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     China
                                                                                                                                                                                      Sweden                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Albania
                                                                                                                                                                                     Hungary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                                 Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 64: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities in Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                        France                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                        Congo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                    Germany                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Botswana
                                                                                                                                                                                  Kyrgyzstan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                     Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Canada
                                                                                                                                                                                         Korea                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Angola
                                                                                                                                                                                      Jamaica                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Estonia
                                                                                                                                                                                  Azerbaijan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                New Zealand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Azerbaijan
                                                                                                                                                                                   Botswana                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                    Mongolia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                        Russia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                           Haiti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bolivia
                                                                                                                                                                                     Malaysia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Namibia
                                                                                                                                                                                       Yemen                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                  Uzbekistan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jamaica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Croatia
                                                                                                                                                                                            Iran                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                       Angola                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Uzbekistan
                                                                                                                                                                                   Venezuela                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Iceland
                                                                                                                                                                                       Nigeria                                                                 Figure 65: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities in Transport, Storage and Communication                                                                                                                                                                                       Algeria
                                                                                                                                                                                Saudi Arabia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Moldova




      Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set. PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set. PPP




123
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?
124
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 kgoe/US $ Gross Value Added (PPP)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         kgoe/US $ Gross Value Added (PPP)




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0,00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0,10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0,20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0,30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0,40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0,50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0,60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0,70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0,80
                                                                                                                                                                                Kazakhstan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                    Namibia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                                  Singapore                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                               Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                  Costa Rica                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nepal
                                                                                                                                                                                   Colombia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                                        Brazil                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                                      Mexico                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cambodia
                                                                                                                                                                                       Greece                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                                        Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                    Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pakistan
                                                                                                                                                                                         Italy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gabon
                                                                                                                                                                                    Uruguay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Romania
                                                                                                                                                                               Netherlands                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Syria
                                                                                                                                                                                Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                                                                                                                                                                   Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                     Bahrain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Panama
                                                                                                                                                                                  Argentina                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Armenia
                                                                                                                                                                                     Sweden                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Saudi Arabia
                                                                                                                                                                                         Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       India
                                                                                                                                                                                    Slovenia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Albania
                                                                                                                                                                                    Armenia
                                                                                                                                                                               South Africa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                      Finland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mongolia




      conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   conversion factor data from the World Bank Development Indicators Database.
                                                                                                                                                                                    Lebanon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                                     Ecuador                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Peru
                                                                                                                                                                               Saudi Arabia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Botswana
                                                                                                                                                                                  Venezuela
                                                                                                                                                                                       Jordan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Israel
                                                                                                                                                                                      Canada                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                                 El Salvador                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                      Poland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moldova
                                                                                                                                                                                Bangladesh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                   Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                     Jamaica                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Argentina
                                                                                                                                                                                     Senegal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                      Iceland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                      Estonia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                 Macedonia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                        Latvia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 67: Comparison of Global Energy Intensity in Other Sectors
                                                                                                                                                                                   Paraguay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                   Honduras                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                   Sri Lanka                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                       Yemen                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                  Indonesia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                     Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                     Georgia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                    Pakistan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                South Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                       Russia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Russia
                                                                                                                                                                               Cote d’Ivoire                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kazakhstan
                                                                                                                                                                                         Haiti                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jordan
                                                                                                                                                                                    Moldova
                                                                                                                                                                                    Vietnam                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Uzbekistan
                                                                                                                                                                                        Kenia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 66: Comparison of Global Energy Intensities in Agriculture, Hunting and Fishing




                                                                                                                                                                                       Sudan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tajikistan
                                                                                                                                                                                        Nepal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                         Togo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                      Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                               Mozambique                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                                                                    Tanzania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jamaica




      Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set. PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: Energy consumption data from the International Energy Agency (IEA), Energy Balances data set. Gross Value Added data from UNDP National Accounts data set. PPP
                                                                                                   5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Appendix B: Methodology for Estimating Potential for Energy Efficiency
Gains in Russia
B.1 Estimating the Russian Energy Balance
An Integrated Fuel and Energy Balance (IFEB), estimated by CENEf serves as the foundation
for the calculation of energy efficiency potential in this study. The IFEB for 2005 is shown below.
The Russian IFEB format used in this paper is similar to the one used by the IEA (with some
modifications), but accounting for the Russian energy statistics formats and specifics. The table
below shows the IFEB for Russia.

Table B.1: Integrated Fuel and Energy Balance for Russia




                                                                                                            Renewables
                                                                                 Other solid
                                                           Petroleum




                                                                                                                         Electricity
                                               Crude oil



                                                           products




                                                                                               Nuclear




                                                                                                                                                   Total
                                                                                 fuels




                                                                                                                                        Heat
                                     Coal




                                                                        Gas



 Production                         134.97    470.14                   517.13      14.36       39.72        15.05                                1191.37

 Import                              11.05         2.38        0.28       6.22                                                0.87                  20.80
 Export                             -39.23    -252.59       -97.10     -167.27                                              -1.94                 -558.13
 Stock changes                       -1.26         0.07        0.77                                                                                 -0.42
 TPES                               105.52    220.00       -96.05      356.08      14.36       39.72        15.05         -1.06                   653.62
 Statistical diff.                               -7.10        -0.11      -2.00                                              -0.09         1.00      -8.30
 Electricity generation             -34.19                   -3.73      -91.60      -3.35      -38.82      -15.05        81.98                   -104.77
 Fossil fuels electricity plants    -21.28                    -0.91     -45.61       -0.27                                 25.78                   -42.29
 CHP                                -12.91                    -2.46     -44.70       -3.07                                 27.36                   -35.79
 Diesel power                                                 -0.36      -1.29       -0.01                                    0.43                  -1.23
 Other                                                                                          -38.8         -15.1           28.4                 -25.47
 Heat generation                    -41.25      -0.79      -12.48      -129.40      -6.26       -0.90                     -3.52        161.63     -32.97
 Fossil fuels electricity plants     -1.69                    -0.07      -3.63       -0.02                                 -0.15          5.11      -0.46
 CHP                                -12.58                    -2.39     -43.55       -2.99                                 -1.68        58.65       -4.55
 Diesel power                                                            -0.01        0.00      -0.90                                     0.30      -0.60
 Industrial boilers                 -13.99       -0.76        -6.95     -58.11       -2.04                                 -0.82        56.18      -26.48
 District heating boilers             -3.12      -0.03        -1.22     -10.15       -0.11                                 -0.15        11.76       -3.03
 Small boilers                        -9.87                   -1.85     -13.95       -1.10                                 -0.72        21.84       -5.64
 Secondary heat utilization units                                                                                                         7.80       7.80
 Fuel production and transform.      -3.37    -211.80      200.49       -17.80      -0.42        0.00          0.00      -19.79        -32.53     -85.21
 Coal and peat production and        -0.26         0.00       -0.17                                                        -0.67         -0.73      -1.83
 transformation
 Oil production                                  -0.07        -0.37      -2.73                                             -4.09         -1.44      -8.69
 Oil refinery                        -0.10    -208.01       201.03       -7.61       -0.42                                 -0.89        -4.58      -20.60
 Gas production and processing                   -0.02                   -4.56                                             -0.68        -1.54       -6.79
 Own use                                                                                                                   -3.76                    -3.76
 Distribution losses                 -3.00       -3.71                   -2.90                                             -9.69       -24.25     -43.54
 TFC                                26.71         0.31      88.12      115.28        4.33        0.00          0.00      57.52         130.11    422.38
 Agriculture and forestry             0.09       0.01         3.06       0.38        0.21                                   1.45         1.01       6.21
 Fishing                              0.00                    0.00       0.01        0.00                                       0.0                 0.04
 Mining                               0.00       0.02         0.92       0.00        0.00                                   2.40         3.85       7.19
 Manufacturing                      22.74        0.02         3.04      24.52        2.72        0.00          0.00      17.05          39.45    109.54

                                                                                                                                                                      125
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                                                                                                                                        Renewables
                                                                                                               Other solid
                                                                                           Petroleum




                                                                                                                                                     Electricity
                                                                               Crude oil



                                                                                           products




                                                                                                                             Nuclear




                                                                                                                                                                            Total
                                                                                                               fuels




                                                                                                                                                                   Heat
                                                                  Coal




                                                                                                       Gas
                           Coke                                     2.53                       0.00     0.04                                               0.13      0.92     3.62
                           Oxygen                                                                                                                          0.57      0.56     1.12
                           Compressed air                           0.05                       0.00     0.12                                               0.53      0.06     0.75
                           Water pumping and treatment for          0.00                       0.01     0.02         0.00                                  1.68      0.11     1.82
                           industrial use
                           Pig iron                               15.40                                 3.87                                               0.06      0.22    19.55
                           Open hearth furnace steel                                           0.38     1.07         0.04                                  0.03      0.07     1.58
                           Basic oxygen furnace steel               0.01                                0.19                                               0.12      0.03     0.35
                           EAF steel                                0.00                       0.00     0.23                                               0.72      0.06     1.01
                           Rolled steel                             1.31                       0.05     2.80                                               0.65      0.40     5.20
                           Steel pipes                                                         0.00     0.49                                               0.13      0.10     0.72
                           Electroferroalloys                       0.41                                0.01         0.07                                  0.56      0.01     1.05
                           Synthetic ammonia                                                            0.30                                               0.18      0.25     0.73
                           Furtilizers and carbamide                                           0.03     0.32                                               0.38      1.42     2.15
                           Synthetic caoutchouc                                                0.19     0.33                                               0.27      2.09     2.88
                           Casting and metal works                  0.07            0.00       0.03     0.69         0.00                                  0.18      0.11     1.08
                           Pulp                                                                0.07                  2.41                                  0.31      2.16     4.96
                           Paper                                                                        0.00                                               0.38      0.80     1.18
                           Cardboard                                0.00                                0.00                                               0.17      0.59     0.76
                           Cement and clinker                       0.47                       0.06     4.62         0.00                                  0.55      0.02     5.72
                           Meat                                     0.00            0.00       0.01     0.03         0.00                                  0.11      0.33     0.48
                           Bread                                    0.04            0.00       0.03     0.39         0.04                                  0.10      0.23     0.84
                           Other manufacture                        2.46            0.01       2.19     8.99         0.17                                  9.22     28.93    51.97
                           Construction                             0.02            0.03       0.67     0.02         0.02                                  0.82      0.13     1.70
                           Transport and communication              0.21            0.00      52.75    33.16         0.01        0.00        0.00          6.82      1.44    94.40
                           Rail                                     0.20                       2.85     0.03         0.01                                  3.88               6.97
                           Other                                    0.01            0.00       0.07     0.05         0.00                                  0.70      1.10     1.94
                           Oil pipelines                                            0.00       0.04     0.32                                               1.17      0.00     1.54
                           Gas pipelines                                                               32.65                                               1.06      0.34    34.06
                           Water                                    0.00                       0.87                                                                           0.87
                           Road                                                               44.83     0.11                                                                 44.94
                           Aviation                                 0.00                       4.09                                                                           4.09
                           Municipal utilities                      0.01                       0.06     0.02         0.00                                  1.80      1.72     3.61
                           Services sector                          0.06            0.00       0.08    11.43         0.04                                  9.20     15.50    36.31
                           Residential                              2.83                       0.91    27.18         0.94                                  9.37     67.02   108.24
                           Non-specified                            0.13            0.00       0.40     0.15         0.06                                                     0.75
                           Non-energy use                           0.65            0.20      26.15    18.41         0.32                                                    45.73
                         Source: CENEf for the World Bank.



                         The table consists of three blocks: Energy resources, resource transformation in the energy sector,
                         and energy end-use. The resources block includes primary energy production, export and import,
                         and stock changes. The transformation block includes fuel balances of the power and heat sectors,
                         energy resources of mining and extraction, oil refineries, coal enrichments, own energy use by energy
                         sector, and distribution losses. The energy end-use block describes energy consumption by 35 end-
                         use sectors and activities.
 126
                                                                                                    5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




There are several standard forms in the Russian statistical reporting system available for the
compilation of a database to piece together an energy balance for Russia:
        n	      “11 TER” (fuel, heat, and power use);
        n	      “6-TP” (heat and power plant operation);
        n	      “1-ТЕР” (information on heat supply);
        n	      “6-TP (hydro)” (data on hydropower plant operation);
        n	      “6-TP (KES)” (data on electricity network operation);
        n	      Electricity balance forms – “E-1”, “E-2”, and “E-3”;
        n	      “PE” (data on the operation of thermal power plants owned by non-industrial organizations);
        n	      “4-fuel” (data on the fuel stock changes, fuel supply and consumption, waste petroleum
                products collection and use);
        n	      “22 ZhKH” (data on utilities’ performance during the reform period, also containing
                partial information on heat-, natural gas-, and power consumption);
        n	      Forms on heat distribution systems’ performance, which provide data on heat consumption
                and on fuel consumption by boiler-houses:
        n	      Foreign energy trade data.

It should be noted that data from these different forms may be contradictory. Not all institutions
are required to submit data for the entire set of forms. For example, Form “11 TER” is mandatory
only for companies with annual fuel and energy consumption above two tce123. Therefore, some
sources allow only for a basic, rather than a comprehensive, picture of energy use, and additional
data and data verification are required. As another example: “11 TER” only reflects transportation
heat losses in heat transmission lines, and continuously tends to underestimate losses in distribution
systems which are reported in the form “1-TEP”. In spite of its incompleteness, “11 TER” was used
as the primary data source for the IFEB development. It serves as the basis for publicly available fuel
consumption statistics and is used in the analysis.

B.2 Estimates of energy efficiency potential
Technical potential for energy efficiency improvements was estimated for this study by comparing
the energy efficiency of equipment used in each energy consuming sector in Russia to the energy
efficiency of equipment used in the same sectors elsewhere in the world. All equipment is
categorized as shown in Box 5.26.

Box 5.26: Energy Efficiency Categories for Equipment

       n	    “Theoretical minimum” – specific energy consumption required by thermodynamic laws to perform necessary work or material
             transformation.
       n	    “Practical minimum” – the best practically achieved specific energy consumption worldwide with application of proven technologies.124
       n	    “Actual use abroad” – average or the most wide spread specific energy consumption in other countries.
       n	    “Russian best” – the best practically achieved specific energy consumption in Russia.
       n	    “Russian average” – average specific energy consumption statistically observed and reported for Russia. It was used to assess the
             energy efficiency potential.
       n	    “Russian worst” – the least energy efficient unit statistically observed and reported for Russia.


123	   1 toe = 1,43 tce.
124	
       Major most recent sources are: E. Worrell, M. Neelis, L. Price, et al. World best practice energy intensity values for
       selected industrial sectors. LBNL-62808. June 2007, and Energy Technology Perspectives 2006, Scenarios and Strat-                                               127
       egies to 2050. OECD/IEA. 2006.
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         Of the possible universe of energy efficiency investments with technical potential, only some will be
                         financially and economically viable. This study differentiates between economically and financially
                         viable projects in order to determine how Russia can best capture potential savings from energy
                         efficiency investments. The difference between economically and financially viable investments is
                         modeled by differentiating between: i) the opportunity cost of capital used for public and private
                         investors, ii) the inclusion of indirect benefits of energy savings, and iii) the inclusion of externalities.

                         Economically and financially viable energy efficiency investments are those investments with
                         technical potential which also yield a positive return on investment for Russian society as a whole,
                         for private investors (companies, organizations, or individuals), or both. Economically viable projects
                         yield a positive return on investment for Russia as a whole, and hence for the government as a public
                         investor, but not necessarily for private investors, companies, or organizations. Financially viable
                         projects yield a positive return for the private investors who make those investments.

                         Economically and financially viable investments are identified from the pool of technically viable
                         investments by comparing the cost of an energy efficiency investment to the value of that investment.
                         The “cost of saved energy” (CSE) approach is used to determine the cost of the energy efficiency
                         investment. The costs of an energy efficiency investment include: i) the incremental capital cost of
                         the energy efficiency investment, and ii) any additional costs or benefits of the energy efficiency
                         investment. Box 5.27 shows the CSE formula and describes each variable in the formula.

                         Box 5.27: Cost of Saved Energy (CSE) Formula

                                 The cost of saved energy (CSE) is an indicator of the cost of saving energy through a given type of energy efficiency investment. CSE
                                 is calculated by dividing the incremental (instead of full) cost of the energy efficiency investment by the energy savings the efficiency
                                 investment produces. CSE is expressed as:
                                                                                               CRF * CC + Cop
                                                                                    CSE =
                                                                                                     ASE             ,
                                 Where:
                                 Cc 	 = capital costs of the energy efficiency technology
                                 Cop	= the variation of current costs or if there are other costs associated with the energy efficiency investment (if there are additional savings
                                     as a result of the energy efficiency investment, for example, increased output or greater reliability, this component is negative)
                                 ASE = annual savings of energy, expressed in terms of volumes of energy saved
                                 CRF = capital recovery factor, which is calculated as follows:
                                                                                                      dr
                                                                                    CRF =
                                                                                                1 – (1 + dr)-n ,
                                 Where dr = the discount rate used by the party considering the energy efficiency investment.



                         The incremental capital costs (Cc) of an investment are estimated as the difference between the costs
                         of i) an investment which improves energy efficiency to Actual Use Abroad or Practical Minimum
                         (depending on the sector and available data on different types of technologies), and ii) a new
                         investment with a level of energy efficiency comparable to that of equipment currently operating in
                         Russia. Capital costs of different technologies were taken from a variety of sources cited in the main
                         text of this report.


 128
                                                                     5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




The capital cost of the energy efficiency investment must be weighted by a factor (the capital
recovery factor or CRF) which specifies what percentage of the capital cost the investor is willing to
bear during each year of the investment’s useful life. The value of the CRF in turn depends on the
investor’s opportunity cost of capital; in other words, the highest return possible from alternative
investments.

The additional costs or benefits (Cop) may include annual changes in operating and maintenance
(O&M) costs, avoided capital costs, or externalities associated with a particular energy efficiency
investment. Benefits are reflected as a negative cost in Cop of the CSE formula in Box 1.27). The
total annual costs of the energy efficiency investment (CRF*Cc+Cop) are expressed in terms
of a single unit of energy saved (for example, kWh of electricity or m3 of gas). This is achieved
by dividing the total annual costs of the energy efficiency investment by the total annual savings
resulting from the investment.

The annual cost of saved energy (CSE) can be compared to the average energy price to determine
whether the investment makes sense from an economic or financial perspective. If, for example,
the CSE of installing energy efficient lighting is one Russian ruble/kWh, but the investor pays, on
average is two Russian rubles/kWh for electricity, then the investment will yield a positive return
and is (in the case of this example) financially viable.

Economic viability
As noted above, the difference between economically and financially viable investments is modeled
by differentiating between: i) the opportunity cost of capital used for public and private investors, ii)
the inclusion of indirect benefits of energy savings, and iii) the inclusion of externalities.

This study assumes a 6 percent opportunity cost of capital for public investors, lower than for
private investors. Public investors, which may include governments, or possibly some nonprofits or
community organizations, will have an interest in making investments which may produce lower
returns but which yield benefits for society as a whole.

Economically viable investments are also distinguished from financially viable investments in that
externalities (positive and negative) are included as part of additional costs (Cop). The largest
externality considered in the sections that follow is the reduction in carbon dioxide (CO2) which
accompanies many energy efficiency investments. This model assumes that the energy savings
achieved in some sectors could be sold as CO2 reduction credits. The value of these credits is
included as an offset (negative Cop) to the cost of saved energy, assuming a sale price of €10
(roughly $13.68) per ton of CO2.

Finally, this study distinguished economically viable investments from financially viable investments
by accounting for the indirect effects of end-use energy efficiency improvements. The estimates of
energy efficiency savings in this chapter account for the fact that the volumes of energy saved by
most energy efficiency investments include both direct and indirect savings. End-use consumption is
directly reduced by an energy efficiency investment while primary energy consumption is indirectly
reduced because less fuel is required to transform energy for end-use consumption. For example, a
reduction in household electricity consumption reduces the volume of fuel generators must use to
serve load. The less fuel generators burn, the less fuel that needs to be extracted and transported
(whether by pipeline, rail, or road), and the less energy that needs to be spent extracting that fuel.
A reduction in end-use electricity consumption also reduces the absolute volume of electricity


                                                                                                                                        129
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         transmission losses, as well as the volume of fuel lost in delivery to the generating station. The value
                         of this “multiplier” was calculated from Russia’s 2005 IFEB, using a method developed by CENEf.
                         An explanation of this methodology is included in B.3.

                         Financial viability
                         Private actors will have a higher opportunity cost of capital, because their objective is driven
                         largely by profit motivation. This study assumes a 12 percent opportunity cost of capital for private
                         investors, and a 50 percent opportunity cost of capital for households (individual) investors.
                         Households will have a still higher opportunity cost of capital for a number of reasons: they are
                         typically more risk averse to making energy efficiency investments, they would need to borrow
                         at retail lending rates in order to make any significant capital investment, or they have what they
                         perceive to be higher value uses for their free cash.

                         This study further distinguishes financially viable projects from economically viable projects by
                         excluding from the CSE calculation the value of any externalities or indirect energy efficiency
                         savings. Private investors will undoubtedly make investments which have positive (and negative)
                         externalities, and yield indirect energy savings, but the investor will not likely consider these factors
                         important when deciding whether to invest in energy efficiency.

                         B.3 Evaluating the Direct and Indirect Effects of Improving End-Use Energy
                         Efficiency
                         As discussed in B.2 above, the translation of final energy savings into saved primary energy requires
                         that indirect effects of end-use energy efficiency improvements be evaluated throughout the
                         entire energy supply chain. Data in the IFEB allow for the estimation of an intermediate energy
                         consumption matrix (see Table B.2), followed by the calculation of an AE matrix (a square matrix of
                         coefficients of primary energy carrier i to produce and deliver to end-user one unit of energy carrier j,
                         see Table B.3), as well as a reverse (E-AE) -1 matrix (see Table B.4).

                         Table B.2 should be read: to produce and deliver to final users 160.74 mtoe of district heat, 41.25
                         mtoe of coal, 129.4 of natural gas, are needed throughout the whole energy sector, and 24.25 mtoe
                         are heat losses. In the last case, for every one mtoe of district heat produced, 0.151 mtoe is lost, as
                         shown by the coefficients in Table 7.3.

                          Table B.2: Intermediate energy consumption by Russian energy complex, 2005 (mtoe)
                                                                                                                               Other solid
                                                                                                     Petroleum




                                                                                                                                                  Electricity
                                                                                         Crude oil



                                                                                                     products




                                                                                                                               fuels




                                                                                                                                                                   Heat
                                                                               Coal




                                                                                                                 Gas




                           Coal                                                  -3.26                   -0.10     0.00                             -34.19          -41.25
                           Crude oil                                                         -3.78       -0.07    -0.02                                   0.00       -0.79
                           Petroleum products                                    -0.17       -0.37       -2.81     0.00                                -3.73        -12.48
                           Gas                                                               -2.73       -7.61    -7.46                             -91.60         -129.40
                           Other solid fuels                                                             -0.42     0.00               0.00             -3.35         -6.26
                           Electricity                                           -0.67       -4.09       -0.89    -0.68                             -13.45           -3.52
                           Heat                                                  -0.73       -1.44       -4.58    -1.54                                             -24.25
                           Total primary or secondary energy production        134.97    470.14       200.49     517.13            14.36          54.11*         160.74*

                                                                                                                       * Nuclear and hydro electricity and heat are excluded

                          Source: Estimated by CENEf for the World Bank.

 130
                                                                                         5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Table B.3: Direct coefficients of primary energy supply by energy complex per unit of energy
production in 2005 (mtoe/mtoe)




                                                                                                       Other solid
                                                                            Petroleum




                                                                                                                     Electricity
                                                             Crude oil



                                                                            products




                                                                                                       fuels




                                                                                                                                     Heat
                                                   Coal




                                                                                            Gas
 Coal                                               0.024        0.000          0.001        0.000          0.000         0.632       0.257
 Crude oil                                          0.000        0.008          0.000        0.000          0.000         0.000       0.005
 Petroleum products                                 0.001        0.001          0.014        0.000          0.000         0.069       0.078
 Gas                                                0.000        0.006          0.038        0.014          0.000         1.693       0.805
 Other solid fuels                                  0.000        0.000          0.002        0.000          0.000         0.062       0.039
 Electricity                                        0.005        0.009          0.004        0.001          0.000         0.249       0.022
 Heat                                               0.005        0.003          0.023        0.003          0.000         0.000       0.151

Source: Estimated by CENEf for the World Bank.


Table B.4: Full coefficients of primary energy supply by energy complex per unit of energy
production in 2005 (mtoe/mtoe)




                                                                                                       Other solid
                                                                            Petroleum




                                                                                                                     Electricity
                                                              Crude oil



                                                                            products




                                                                                                       fuels




                                                                                                                                     Heat
                                                   Coal




                                                                                            Gas



 Coal                                                 1.03           0.01         0.01         0.00           0.00            0.87      0.34
 Crude oil                                            0.00           1.01         0.00         0.00           0.00            0.00      0.01
 Petroleum products                                   0.00           0.00         1.02         0.00           0.00            0.10      0.10
 Gas                                                  0.02           0.03         0.07         1.02           0.00            2.32      1.04
 Other solid fuels                                    0.00           0.00         0.00         0.00           1.00            0.08      0.05
 Electricity                                          0.01           0.01         0.01         0.00           0.00            1.34      0.04
 Heat                                                 0.01           0.00         0.03         0.00           0.00            0.02      1.19
 Total                                               1.07          1.07          1.14         1.03           1.00           4.73       2.75
 Total. including fuel transportation                1.08          1.07          1.16         1.11           1.00           4.94       2.84
Source: Estimated by CENEf for the World Bank.


To produce one toe of electricity, 1.69 toe of natural gas is needed; but to produce this gas, some
additional energy (0.068 toe, including 1.69*0.001 toe of electricity and 1.69*0.003 toe of heat) is
required to produce, so additional 0.11 toe of gas is needed. Evaluation of full coefficients of primary
energy supply by the energy complex per unit of energy production allows it to express this endless
chain of calculations through a single multiplier – the so-called full coefficient (Table B.4). The last
two lines in Table B.4 show such multipliers and their composition for the assessment of integral
effects of end-use efficiency improvements. These coefficients may be interpreted as follows: if end-
users save one toe of petroleum products, the total energy need in the whole energy sector will decline
by additional 0.14 toe (or 0.16 toe, if liquid fuel in transportation is accounted for125). The highest
multipliers are for electricity and heat generation. They far exceed regular multipliers accounting
only for the fuel efficiency of electricity generation (2.5 with 40 percent efficiency, or three with 67
percent generation transmission and distribution losses126) and heat generation (1.25 with 85 percent

125	
     These estimates for multiplies are quite close to the ones assessed in 1992 for the FUSSR. See I. Bashmakov. Costs
     and benefits of CО2 emission reduction in Russia. In Costs, Impacts, and Benefits of CO2 Mitigation. Y. Kaya,
     N. Nakichenovich, W. Nordhouse, F. Toth Editors. IIASA. June 1993.
126	 Worrell, E., Neelis, M., Price, L., Galitsky, C., Zhou, N. World Best Practice Energy Intensity Values for Selected
     Industrial Sectors, 2007. Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. 2007.                                                                   131
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                         efficiency of heat generation and 5 percent heat losses). If one mtoe of electricity is saved in Russia the
                         integrated primary energy savings throughout the whole energy supply chain are not 2.5-3 mtoe as
                         usually calculated accounting only for power generation and electricity transmission and distribution
                         efficiency in Western countries, but 4.7 mtoe (4.9 mtoe if fuel transport by railroads is accounted for).

                         To make the transition from the final to primary energy simpler for some applications, Table B.4
                         was reduces to a 3x3 matrix limited to fuels, electricity, and district heat (Table B.5).

                          Table B.5: Reduced form of full coefficients of primary energy supply by energy complex per unit
                          of energy production in 2005 (mtoe/mtoe)

                                                                               Fuels          Electricity               Heat
                           Fuels                                                       1.06                     3.46             1.56
                           Electricity                                                 0.01                     1.36             0.05
                           Heat                                                        0.01                     0.03             1.19
                           Total                                                       1.07                     4.84            2.80
                           Total. including fuel transportation                        1.10                     4.92            2.83
                           Traditionally used coefficients                             1.00                 2.50-3.03          1-1.25
                          Source: Estimated by CENEf for the World Bank.



                         The coefficients presented above are used in the evaluation of technical and economic potential only,
                         as private individuals or firms would have no way to recoup this savings and therefore do not base
                         their decisions on its potential.




 132
                                                                                                                 5 . How c a n R u s s i a I m p rove i t s En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y ?




Appendix C: Measures to Improve Energy Efficiency
Table C.1: Measures to improve energy efficiency in Russia by impact, preparation time and
incremental cost per unit.

 Measure                                                                                                Impact               Preparation time     Incremental
                                                                                                                                                  cost per unit

 Pre-requisites for Success
 Establish a dedicated agency/function                                                                       high                under 1 year           low
 Statistical data gathering                                                                                  high                 1-3 years             low
 1.Residential
 Quick wins
 Launch an EE information dissemination campaign                                                             high                 1-3 years             low
 Introduction of mandatory minimum requirements into standards on energy efficiency of buildings,            high                under 1 year        medium
 keeping of energy passports to monitor energy efficiency throughout the period of use of building
 Essentials
 Require that energy efficiency improvements be made as a condition of government financial                 medium               under 1 year        medium
 support for capital repairs
 Provide incentives for more widespread metering                                                            medium                1-3 years             low
 Develop standardized performance-based management contracts for HOAs and building                          medium                1-3 years             low
 management companies
 Establish a capital repairs loan guarantee facility                                                        medium                1-3 years          medium
 Introduce energy efficiency standards and labeling for lighting and household appliances                        low              1-3 years             low
 2. Public Organizations
 Quick wins
 Allow more budget flexibility and extend budget planning periods                                            high                under 1 year           low
 Develop regulations to allow for multi-year contracts and application of EE criteria for procurement        high                under 1 year           low
 Essentials
 Autonomous status for public organizations                                                                 medium                1-3 years             low
 Set targets based on benchmarking                                                                          medium                1-3 years          medium
 Disseminate information on EE improvements                                                                 medium               under 1 year           low
 3. Industry
 Quick wins
 Disseminate information on energy efficiency                                                                high                under 1 year           low
 Essentials
 Facilitate financing for EE investments through Russian financial institutions                           medium/high             1-3 years          medium
 Develop energy performance standards and labels for industrial equipment                                    high                 1-3 years          medium
 Introduce measures to reduce transaction costs                                                             medium                1-3 years          medium
 Fiscal incentives                                                                                           high                 1-3 years            high
 Introduce taxation or cap-and-trade schemes for pollutants and/or emission                                  high                 1-3 years            high
 High cost, high return
 Complete electricity sector reforms, and initiate gas sector reforms                                        high                over 3 years          high




                                                                                                                                                                                    133
En e rg y Ef f i c i e n c y i n R u s s i a : U nt a p p e d R e s e r ve s




                           Measure                                                                                               Impact         Preparation time   Incremental
                                                                                                                                                                   cost per unit

                           4. Heating
                           Quick wins
                           Transform MUPs into commercial entities or private-public partnerships                                     high          1-3 years            low
                           Reform tariff methodologies                                                                                high          1-3 years            low
                           Essentials
                           Develop and coordinate municipal heat supply development plans                                            medium         1-3 years            low
                           5. Electricity
                           Quick wins
                           Reform tariff-setting methodologies                                                                        high          1-3 years            low
                           Essentials
                           Implement DSM/Rate payer funded energy efficiency programs                                                 high          1-3 years            low
                           Clarify and standardize requirements and procedures for siting new generation plants and connecting       medium        over 3 years          low
                           to the grids
                           High cost, high return
                           Complete electricity sector reforms                                                                        high         over 3 years         high
                           6. Transport
                           Essentials
                           Encourage changes in behavior through information dissemination                                           medium         1-3 years            low
                           Reward drivers who opt for more energy efficient transport options                                        medium        under 1 year       medium
                           Introduce fuel efficiency labeling for new cars                                                                low      under 1 year          low
                           Tighten fuel efficiency and emissions standards                                                            high         under 1 year         high
                           High cost, high return
                           Charge users the full cost of road usage                                                                   high          1-3 years           high
                           Take an integrated approach to transport planning                                                          high         over 3 years         high
                           Offer better quality of service on public transport                                                        high         over 3 years         high
                           Tax drivers for private vehicle usage                                                                      high         over 3 years         high
                           7. Gas Flaring
                           Quick wins
                           Improve monitoring and enforcement of utilization requirements, possibly through an independent            high         under 1 year          low
                           regulatory body
                           Essentials
                           Enact Federal legislation requiring APG utilization, including heavier fines and possible loss of          high          1-3 years           high
                           operating licenses
                           Allow third-party access to Gazprom pipelines                                                              high          1-3 years           high
                           High cost, high return
                           Continue liberalization of gas prices                                                                      high         over 3 years         high




 134
