                     91508




Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
TEXTILES & APPAREL
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein may
    not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1, or any
    other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to demonstrate
    a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into company
    management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing its impact
    on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does not
    imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Standards,
    including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply endorse-
    ment by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor the
    organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged in render-
    ing technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates comprising
    the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational purposes only, and
    are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes. Implementation of
    the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final users. The material
    in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can
    be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the
    information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other member of the World Bank
    Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, puni-
    tive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited to, damages for loss of profits,
    goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even if IFC has been advised of the
    possibility of such damages) in any way arising or resulting from use or reliance on
    the Handbook or any such conclusion or determination. The Handbook is distributed
    subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be sold or oth-
    erwise circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeliness,
    completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is not
    responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice, opinions
    and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not necessarily
    represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the World Bank or
    its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in the
Textiles & Apparel Industry..........................................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
     Overview...........................................................................................................................12
     Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................................13
     System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
     Using The Handbook And Companion Publications To Develop And
     Implement Your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System............................................................ 17
     1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
         Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
         Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One..........................................18
         Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.....................................................19
     2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
         Key Risks in the Textiles and Apparel Industry........................................................................20
     3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................23
         Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................24
         Short Cases......................................................................................................................24
         Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................36
         Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................37
     4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................38
         Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................38
         Communication and Training..........................................................................................40
     5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................42
         Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the Textiles and Apparel Industry...............45
     6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................48
         Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................49
         Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................50
     7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism............................................52
         External Communication.................................................................................................52
         Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................52
     8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................55
     9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................56
         Indicators........................................................................................................................57
         Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................60
         Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................61
         Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................62
Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014                         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                                       3
                       Welcome & How to
                       Use This Handbook
                       Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                       more and more important in today’s global
                       economy. There are thousands of environmental
                       and social codes and standards in the world
                       today. The codes and standards define the rules
                       and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                       implementation. An environmental and social
                       management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                       integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                       operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                       repeatable processes.

                       This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                       to help companies in the textiles and apparel
                       industry develop and implement an environmental
                       and social management system, which should help
                       to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                            In the current economic climate, companies are
                            under pressure to perform or even just survive.
                            New initiatives are often met with resistance as
                            people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
                            day responsibilities. Some people think that an
                            environmental and social management system
                            must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
                            is not really true. To be effective, a management
                            system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
                            the company.

                            If a company has existing management systems for
                            quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
                            to expand them to include environmental and social
                            performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
                            will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                            improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                            employees and stakeholders.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	   5
                        Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                        These sections provide background on environmental and
                         Sections I – II                social management systems (ESMS) in the textiles and
                                                        apparel industry.

                                                        This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                        develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                         Section III
                                                        it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                        Toolkit.

                                                        Section I of this companion publication gives tools,
                                                        including forms, templates, checklists, and other useful
                                                        documents, to help you develop and implement the systems
                                                        described in the Handbook. We suggest that you adapt
                                                        each tool for your company.

                                                        Section II includes case studies presenting two companies
                         ESMS Toolkit and               in the food and beverage industry that implemented an
                                                        ESMS. These hypothetical cases illustrate how to develop
                         Case Studies                   and implement an ESMS appropriate to the size and nature
                                                        of your company.
                                                        •	   ABC Company – a 400-person denim mill based in
                                                             China.

                                                        •	   XYZ Company – a 50-person clothes manufacturer
                                                             based in Greece and Bulgaria.

                         ESMS                           This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                         Self-Assessment                maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                         and Improvement                measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan
                         Guide                          for improvement.




                       Acknowledgements
                       This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                       department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Rob Horner,
                       Larissa Luy and Juan Jose Dada.

                       The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                       the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss and Jane
                       Hwang, as commissioned by IFC. Additional contributions were made by Eileen
                       Kauffman, Edwin Koster, and Caroline Lewis. Graphic design services were
                       provided by Pam Henry.

                       Additional IFC contributors include John Graham, Amy Luinstra, Maria
                       Soledad Requejo, Jeremy Ansell, Louis Philippe Mousseau, Debra Sequeira
                       and Ekaterina Grigoryeva. The Handbook also significantly benefited from
                       comments from an internal peer review process, which involved a diverse group
                       of individuals who are too many to acknowledge individually. However, the
                       drafting team is very thankful for their valuable and insightful comments and
                       hopes they find their input reflected in this final version.

                       Photography courtesy of IFC ILO Better Work and World Bank Photo Library

6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                    I

                              Benefits of an Environmental
                              and Social Management System
                              in the Textiles & Apparel Industry




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	   7
“We are facing
intense global
competition and
declining spending
during the current
global economic                  Benefits of an Environmental
crisis. Improving our            and Social Management
environmental and
                                 System in the Textiles &
social management is
helping us to reduce
                                 Apparel Industry
material inputs,
                                 Today, textiles and apparel companies are confronted with a number of
minimize waste                   significant environmental and social challenges. None of the challenges are
                                 insurmountable, but if not effectively addressed and managed, they will hurt
and improve our
                                 your core business operations and profitability.
competitiveness and
                                 Among these challenges are increasing energy and raw materials costs, the
our profitability.”              growing power and influence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies,
                                 and rapidly evolving consumer awareness and concerns about environmental
CFO - Garment
                                 and social issues. These risks are in addition to the primary risk of failing to
manufacturer in                  build brand and consumer confidence. All of these risks ultimately can have
Southeast Asia                   financial consequences. Moreover, export is vital to the success of most textiles
                                 and apparel businesses; but exporting brings even more demands from interna-
                                 tional legislation, voluntary standards and buyers’ requirements – increasingly
                                 related to environmental and social practices. All of these risks, requirements
                                 and pressures that your business faces are forces that encourage you to imple-
                                 ment a management system.



                                “Our business was suffering from a high level of
                                 worker absenteeism, which was common in the
                                 region. We improved our labor management
                                 system and consulted workers about how to
                                 improve working conditions. We are now seeing
                                 increases in worker satisfaction, productivity and
                                 retention, and decreases in absenteeism.”
                                 General Manager
                                 Apparel manufacturing group in Middle East


       8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
    “With intercontinental supply chains, tremendous product variety
    and short product lifecycles, the apparel industry has unique
     challenges. We look for suppliers with good E&S manage-
    ment systems. Our experience shows that these suppliers are
    more effective not only in managing E&S issues, but also quality,
     on-time delivery and other critical factors in our industry.”
     Managing Director - Leading multi-national brand, USA




                              There are direct business benefits from implementing an environmental and
                              social management system. Conserving and using energy and materials
                              efficiently helps to reduce production costs. Reducing waste and discharges
                              can minimize the cost of increasingly expensive, regulated discharges to the
                              environment. Continuous-feed systems can reduce the amount of material used
                              and the number of partially finished apparel discarded. Process modifications
                              can eliminate the use of many toxic compounds saving companies thousands
                              of dollars in disposal and safety compliance costs each year. A management
                              system can elucidate where expenditures exceed industry benchmarks and iden-
                              tify potential production cost savings.

                              The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transparent
                              human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                              workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems.
                              Effective occupational health and safety management procedures work toward
                              the identification of workplace and process hazards, then seek to eliminate or




“Despite the proliferation of codes, certifications and associated
 compliance audits, many suppliers have recurring environmental
 and social performance issues. We believe that helping suppliers
to improve their environmental and social management systems
 is critical to tackling root causes and effectively managing these
 issues in a sustainable manner.”
Senior VP -Multinational brand, Europe




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                       9
                          reduce them through engineering controls and employee training on how to
                          avoid job site risks. This serves not only to reduce incidents, accidents and
                          fatalities, but also contributes to reducing insurance premiums for worker
                          compensation.

                          Management systems are widely used by textiles and apparel companies in
                          quality control. An environmental and social management system simply
                          extends that approach to managing the impact your business has on the
                          environment and the working conditions at your facility.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized,
                          instead of having one system for quality, one for occupational health and safety
                          and one for environment. Integrated management systems are the goal, and
                          the focus of this Handbook is on helping you implement an ESMS that is
                          appropriate for the size and nature of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                  II
                              Understanding an
                              Environmental and Social
                              Management System




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve              A lot of companies in the textiles and apparel industry already have management
                               systems for quality. If so, you may already have elements of an ESMS, and there
what you don’t                 is no need to replace what you already have. In this Handbook’s companion
                               publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, we provide a
measure.                       self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements. The self-assessment will
                               allow you to measure your current level of system development and implementa-
                               tion. You will answer a series of questions and get your score for each element
                               in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score measures the maturity
                               of your system. Once you understand the maturity of your system, it is easier to
                               target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                         THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                                Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                        chain partners – continual improvement embedded in opera-
                                        tions
                                Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                        routine improvement projects
                                Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                        tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                                Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                        primarily reactive
                                Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                                Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




     14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                              REMEMBER
                              A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                              valuable if it is well-implemented.

                              SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                               One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                               is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                               management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                               lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                              “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                               cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                              Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                              routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                              goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                              that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                              to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                              ment.

                              One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                              development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                              tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                              well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                              mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                              developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                              organization change.

                              The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, Toolkit and
                              Case Studies and Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system
                              development and system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                               DEFINITIONS
                               System                     The documented policies and procedures.
                               Development
                               System                     Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                               Implementation             ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.

Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                  15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK

     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan                                               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
     •	   Learn how other companies                                           elements of an ESMS
          scaled the ESMS to their
          size and complexity
                                                 REDO this graphic
                              ESMS
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                            TOOLKIT &
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                              CASE
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                             STUDIES
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                   III
                              Practical Guidelines for
                              Developing and Implementing
                              Your Environmental and Social
                              Management System

                              This section provides step-by-step instructions on
                              how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                              For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                              way to measure where you are now.


                                      When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                      there is a tool in the companion publication
                                      Toolkit and Case Studies to make it easier
                                      to get started.




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies
    in place.                   and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related         it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    policies and procedures.    of the specific risks you face in the textiles and apparel industry.




    18    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your        Commitment;
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   and
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.
                                                                                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-       Your senior
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          management
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           can help you to
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
                                                 The key message is that this       accelerate all
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for              will contribute to the com-
 Developing a Company Policy                     pany’s success and that each       three stages.
 Statement to get ideas of what you              person will benefit - but that
 could include in your policy.                   they  will also be held ac-
                                                 countable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
                                                 stages with your senior man-
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter                 agement. Consider accompa-
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to               nying the Policy Statements
 get started.                                    with a message from the CEO.




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	         19
                                    ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     identify the potential negative environmental
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-     and social impacts so that you can develop the
    tors, subcontractors, third
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   appropriate strategies to address them.


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
    itization of E&S risks         In the following pages, we present the key issues
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
                                   that come up in the textiles and apparel industry.
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-
    ment in company.               KEY RISKS IN THE TEXTILES AND APPAREL INDUSTRY




3
    Awareness and engage-          1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency
    ment of staff in identifica-      •	 Use of raw materials, chemicals and processes that give rise to liquid effluents
    tion and prioritization of          whose uncontrolled or poorly-treated discharge can contaminate surface and
    E&S risks and impacts.              groundwater
    External experts involved
                                      •	 Use of processes such as bleaching, mercerizing, dyeing, printing and
    as required.
                                        mothproofing with chemical agents potentially affecting employees, consumers
                                        and the environment
                                      •	 Emission of solid and liquid waste containing salts, oil, ink, VOCs (volatile
                                        organic compounds) and other materials requiring specialized handling and



2
    Procedures in place for             disposal
    identification of E&S risks       •	 Emission of air pollutants from drying, printing, fabric preparation, finishing
    and impacts across all key          processes (e.g. coating and dyeing operations) and wastewater treatment residues
    activities.
                                      •	 Use of large amounts of water during wet processing (treatment, washing and
                                        dyeing) of textiles
                                      •	 Use of large amounts of energy

                                   2.	 Occupational Health and Safety




1
                                      •	 Exposure to cotton and other dusts from yarn and fabric manufacturing leading
    Basic identification and
                                        to byssinosis and other respiratory diseases
    assessment of E&S risks
    and impacts, but limited          •	 Exposure to dust in denim distressing operations, particularly sandblasting,
    to a few activities.                leading to silicosis
                                      •	 Explosion hazard arising from high concentrations of dust or VOCs in the
                                        workplace
                                      •	 Exposure to hazardous chemical agents such as dyes and solvents causing burns,
                                         scalds and respiratory illnesses with potentially carcinogenic effects
                                      •	 Risk of serious injury and death from failure to de-energize and lock out /tag out




0
    No identification or                mechanical or electrical systems for maintenance and testing purposes
    assessment of E&S
    risks and impacts.




      20     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                               2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




                                •	 High levels of noise causing difficulty in communication and potential damage
                                   to hearing
                                •	 Lack of/inappropriate PPE (e.g. facial splash protection when handling caustic
                                   solutions, metal gloves for fabric-cutters, masks for spot cleaning operations)
                                •	 Lack of machinery guards (e.g. sewing machine needle guard)
                                •	 Exhaustion and associated accidents due to long working hours
                                •	 Poor lighting and ventilation with temperature and humidity extremes
                                •	 Use of structurally unsound or not fit for purpose buildings for factories
                                •	 Restricted evacuation due to emergency exits and evacuation routes that are not
                                   clearly marked, blocked, locked or inadequate for building occupancy

                              3.	 Labor
                                •	 Low wages or failure to pay salary deductions (e.g. social security payments) to
                                   government
                                •	 Preponderance of women, migrant and temporary workers who may be subject
                                   to discriminatory treatment
                                •	 Use of child labor
                                •	 Mandatory and excessive overtime and lack of rest days due to rapidly changing
                                   production schedules
                                •	 Restrictions on workers’ rights to freedom of association
                                •	 Verbal, sexual or physical harassment
                                •	 Lack of maternity provision (e.g. failure to provide breast-feeding breaks)
                                •	 Lack of appropriate welfare facilities (e.g. potable drinking water, toilets, washing
                                   facilities)
                                •	 Unsafe and unhygienic workers’ living quarters
                                •	 Sub-contracting work to unauthorized, unmonitored facilities including
                                   homeworkers

                              4.	 Community Health, Safety and Security
                                •	 Exposure to noise and unpleasant odors
                                •	 Unsupervised children and minors due to parents’ long working hours
                                •	 Strain on water supplies for domestic and agricultural purposes
                                •	 Dangers from industrial fires and collapse of unsafe buildings and structures
                                •	 Adverse impact on the health of the end-users due to chemical residues in textiles
                                   and apparel from the use of allergenic or carcinogenic compounds




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                         21
Top 3 risks and                       There are different ways to conduct a risk assessment. One
opportunities in the                  common method is to map your facility and production
Textiles & Apparel                    processes – this can highlight OHS and environmental risks.
                                      A common method for labor risks is to use a checklist of risk
industry
                                      factors , such as employee demographics, regional labor
                                      laws, contracting arrangements, etc.
1   Wastewater and liquid
    waste may contain toxic
substances and lead to
                                      The following are key considerations for a robust risk
                                      assessment system:
environmental pollution.
Wastewater is the largest               •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks;
waste stream of the textile
                                        •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;
industry. It may contain a
mixture of substances such              •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to
as dyes, salts, acids, alkalis,              operations;
oils and fats as well as
                                        •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as
(chlorinated) solvents. Pre-
                                             new laws or regulations;
treatment may be required
to minimize interference                •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers;
with treatment works and
negative impacts on receiv-             •	   Include input from affected communities and other
ing water quality, health                    external stakeholders;
risks from contaminated
                                        •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff does
water use and conflicts
                                             not have the capability;
with other uses.
                                        •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the severity

2  Fire safety hazards
   posed by storage of
highly flammable textiles               •	
                                             and probability of negative impacts;

                                             Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those
and cotton without ade-                      in your company; and
quate fire detection and                •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
suppression systems, often                   business.
combined with inadequate
evacuation provisions.
                                                  Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks in

3   Harsh working condi-
    tions in the apparel
industry due to low pay,
                                                  the textiles and apparel industry, you can first use the Risk
                                                  Identification Worksheet to identify your potential risks
                                                  and negative impacts based on your operations and operating
long work hours, inad-                            environment. Then you can use the Process Mapping or
equate rest periods and                           the Physical Mapping tools to identify in more detail where
poor sanitary conditions                          problems are likely to arise within your production process.
can be highly detrimental
                                                  Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
to both individual workers
                                                  single environmental and social impact that your company
and a company’s own
                                                  could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form
reputation; in particular to
                                                  to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.
consumer-facing companies
such as clothing brands and
retailers.                            For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
                                      and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at
                                      www.ifc.org/sustainability.

          22    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
 ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                                      5
Management Programs are centered on Action                              Verified progress against
                                                                        objectives and targets;
                                                                        significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                        in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                        onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were                       continual improvement
                                                                        using annual improvement
                                                                        plans.
identified.


                                                                                                      4
                                                                        Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                        mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                            activities to proactively
                                                                        manage E&S risks and
                                                                        impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                        pany-wide objectives and
                                                                        targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the                      and update.




                                                                                                      3
lack of a system for employees to express their                         Actions/activities in place
                                                                        to manage E&S risks and
                                                                        impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                               mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                        avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                              compensate. Proactive
                                                                        approach to managing
                                                                        issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                                      2
                                                                        Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of hazardous waste and you have                        responsibilities to address
                                                                        and mitigate E&S risks
identified this as a risk factor because of the high                    and impacts across all key
                                                                        activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                        tive.
percentage of chemical waste produced in your
plant, you may take action by using less toxic dyes.

                                                                                                      1
                                                                        A few informal programs
                                                                        or activities to mitigate
                                                                        E&S impacts. No systems
                                                                        awareness or repeatable
                                                                        processes




                                                                        No process for mitigating
                                                                        E&S risks and impacts.
                                                                                                      0
Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014   ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                23
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                    First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                    example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                    water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                    differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                    owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain dyeing
                                               process that exposes workers to toxic chemicals and pollutes the
                                               local river system. You might design your product mix to avoid this
              Prioritizing Your Actions        process or find alternate dyeing methods.
                      AVOID                       In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                        ▼                         be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                     MINIMIZE                     cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, sup-
                        ▼                         pose that you are located in an area where women are traditionally
                                                  given lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace
                 COMPENSATE/OFFSET
                                                  they are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. The
                                                  local cultural context and the need to hire both men and women is
                                                  unavoidable. It is important to pay attention to your recruitment,
                                        hiring and training procedures, to make sure that women are hired on equi-
                                        table terms and given equal access to training and promotion opportunities.
                                        You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure that rules for
                                        recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow. Additionally,
                                        you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of and follows
                                        the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.


            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in the
            texiles and apparel industry. Action Plans can be scaled to the
            size of your company and the nature of the risks you face.

            24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: CHINA


Textile Mill
RISK: Use of hazardous substances
A mill in Guangdong Province, China, annually produces 5 million meters of fabric. Government
and clients increasingly question the environmental impact of textile production in the region. A
surprise inspection by state officials was conducted last week and they collected several waste-
water samples discharged by the mill. The laboratory found all samples to be heavily contami-
nated with dyes and to contain toxic substances such as chlorine, chromium, various alkaline
compounds, zinc and copper. The sludge from the wastewater treatment plant was found to be
leaching and contaminating the groundwater in the surrounding areas.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Negative impacts on the health and safety of workers and the community

  •	 Negative impacts on the environment

  AVO I D

  •	 Review use of hazardous materials and substitute with less hazardous when available (e.g.
    see restricted chemical lists of major clients or institutes such as OEKO-TEX® Standard 100)
  •	 Institute multiple levels of approvals – incorporating the EHS department - for the pur-
    chase of workplace materials
  •	 Use biodegradable products where possible

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Collect and segregate industrial process wastewater for differentiated pre-treatment of
    wastewater streams as follows:
     •	 remove of non-biodegradable organic matter using chemical oxidation;
     •	 reduce in heavy metals using precipitation, coagulation and flocculation; and
     •	 treat of highly colored or concentrated TDS streams using reverse osmosis or other seg-
        regation techniques
  •	 Collect, characterize and properly dispose of sludge and other potentially hazardous
    materials

  O FF S E T

  •	 Remediate contaminated areas and natural resources




Revision 2.2    June 1. 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	             25
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: PAKISTAN


            Textile Mill
            RISK: High Energy Consumption
            During a meeting, the senior manager of a mill in Pakistan is made aware of the increasing prices
            of energy. Energy cost as a percentage of total production costs of the mill has increased signifi-
            cantly. As a result the manager decided to hire an external expert to see where energy can be
            saved without compromising quality. The factory uses natural gas and electricity; 20 percent of
            the electricity is used to light the factory.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Depletion of natural resources and GHG emissions

              •	 Ever increasing production costs

              AVO I D

              •	 Identify and measure energy use per process, step or machine and benchmark energy use
                 against industry standards
              •	 Make sure that energy demand levels are sustainable given the availability of local energy
                 resources; commence planning to fill anticipated gaps
              •	 Consider diversifying energy sources and identify local energy options (e.g. photovoltaics
                 on factory roof, use of solar water heating)
              •	 Identify and implement energy savings/generation projects with a short-term capex
                 payback (e.g. less than 2 years)

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Start simple:
                  •	 Install low energy lighting, timer switches and daylight sensors;
                  •	 Install motion-activated area lighting;
                  •	 Switch off unused machinery and lights;
                  •	 Insulate pipes
              •	 Implement energy efficient techniques and processes:
                  •	 Reuse of or heat recovery from hot wash water before disposal;
                  •	 Use of waste heat to preheat water and for drying processes;
                  •	 Installation of shut-off valves to eliminate steam waste;
                  •	 Use of enzymatic bleaching;
                  •	 Use of high-fixation reactive dyes at low temperatures;
                  •	 Drying controls;
              •	 Review boilerhouse opportunities: boiler blowdown control, oxygen trim for combustion
                 control, economizer;
              •	 Plan and implement energy conservation awareness and training program for workers, su-
                 pervisors and area managers, to include aggressive identification and correction of water,
                 steam and compressed air leaks
              •	 Consider award programs for energy conservation ideas that lead to significant savings, or
                 with capital cost payback of less than two years




            26    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: TURKEY


T-Shirt Manufacturer
RISK: Subcontracting
A T-Shirt manufacturer in Turkey employs 450 workers. The manufacturer specializes in basic
T-Shirts. The management has however succeeded in diversifying its production over the past
years. Besides basic T-Shirts, they now also sell large volumes of printed, embroidered and washed
T-shirts and polos. All printing, embroidery and washing is outsourced to nearby units specialising
in this type of work. Units were being selected on price, speed and quality of the work. Manage-
ment of the T- shirt manufacturer is increasingly faced with questions about the labor and en-
vironmental conditions under which their products are produced. They feel comfortable about
their own factory but are aware that the subcontract units are not always in line with Turkish law
or with buyer expectations. Management does not know how to address labor and environmen-
tal issues related to their subcontractors.


  I M PAC T

  Labor and environmental legal non-compliances at the subcontractor level

  AVO I D

  •	 Establish, communicate and seek to implement well-defined labor and environmental
    policies based on national law and requirements of key clients; make policies contractually
    binding under the agreements with subcontractors
  •	 Ensure organization’s labor and environmental policies are understood and implemented
    by all subcontractors
  •	 Periodically monitor and audit the subcontractors for their labor and environmental per-
    formance as per organization’s own policies and procedures; gradually decrease produc-
    tion with subcontractors unwilling or unable to improve their labor and environmental
    practices
  •	 Allow subcontractors to meet social and environmental policies by agreeing on reasonable
    prices, lead times and product specifications

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Select and reward subcontractors on price and quality and also on labor and environmen-
    tal criteria
  •	 Provide training to purchasing managers and subcontractors on organization’s labor and
    environmental policies and procedures
  •	 Train/inform subcontractors on product alternatives (e.g. phthalate-free plasticol inks)

  •	 Agree to phase out certain processes or substances within a certain period of time; reward
    subcontractors on periodic progress made

  O FF S E T

  •	 Compensate victims of workplace injuries or loss of life in case of subcontractor’s
    negligence




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	             27
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: INDONESIA


           Textile Mill
           RISK: Lack of Fire Safety
           A mill in Indonesia produces wovens and non-wovens for industrial purposes. A couple of weeks
           ago a fire broke out in a similar factory nearby. During the fire 18 workers were seriously injured.
           This accident has brought fire safety to the top of the agenda for the management of the mill.
           They suddenly realize this could happen to them as well. The workers of the mill are also aware of
           the risks. They started to ask management questions about the fire safety in their factory. They
           realize they do not know what to do or where to go in case of a fire. Clients also expressed their
           concerns.

              I M PAC T

              Life and health risks due to lack of fire safety programs

              AVO I D

              •	 Conduct a risk assessment and review your building’s design and operation to identify
                 how it can be upgraded towards compliance with contemporary local and internationally-
                 accepted fire safety codes, with particular attention to:
                  •	 Fire prevention (e.g. electrical installations, storage of flammable materials away from
                     ignition sources and hot surfaces, etc.);
                  •	 Means of egress (e.g. at least two - but not less than the number prescribed for build-
                     ing size and occupancy - clearly marked and unlocked emergency exits per floor, back
                     up battery powered emergency lights, appropriately sized stairs with handrails and
                     non-slip trading, etc.);
                  •	 Fire detection and alarm systems (e.g. smoke detectors, visual and audible alarms);
                  •	 Compartmentalization to limit the spread of smoke and fire;
                  •	 Fire suppression and control (e.g. type, number and location of fire extinguishers, fire
                     hoses and other equipment to extinguish fires)
              •	 Undertake weekly/daily inspections to confirm that emergency evacuation routes and
                 emergency exit doors are clearly marked, well lit (even in the event of a power failure at
                 night), unobstructed and unlocked
              •	 Annually conduct a fire and emergency risk assessment to evaluate root causes such as
                 electrical wiring, circuit breaker cabinets/fuse boxes, boilers, combustible dust, stored ma-
                 terial, etc.
              •	 Contract a certified and competent company for annual inspection, testing and mainte-
                 nance of fire detection, alarm and suppression systems
              •	 Locate buildings/plants/structures to minimize potential risks from forces of nature (e.g.
                 earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, windstorms) and fires from surrounding areas and buildings
              •	 Establish, communicate and implement fire safety and emergency preparedness and re-
                 sponse policies and procedures through joint worker/manager safety/OSH committee




            28    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Assemble and regularly train fire fighting and emergency response teams; the number of
    fire fighters and emergency responders must be proportional to the total workforce and
    there should be at least one for each section of the factory
  •	 Provide identification of fire fighters and emergency responders (e.g. brightly coloured
    armband, color coded hard hats, badges)
  •	 Conduct emergency drills at least every month; drills must be conducted in all work shifts

  •	 Have staff practice emergency evacuation procedures regularly; ensure that new and
    temporary workers are trained on emergency evacuation procedures as part of their
    induction training
  •	 Maintain records of accidents and incidents; have appropriate parties (e.g. engineering,
    maintenance, insurance manager) and joint management-worker health and safety com-
    mittees regularly review records to confirm that appropriate actions to prevent reoccur-
    rence have been taken
  •	 Ask workers about hazardous conditions they notice and reward them for alerting
    management to them

  O FF S E T

  •	 Provide medical care for people who are injured in the workplace

  •	 Compensate for loss of life and loss of ability to work

  •	 Ensure that the workers continue to receive their salary until relocation/re-opening of a
    factory damaged by fire



CASE STUDY: BRAZIL

Children’s clothes manufacturer
RISK: Gender Discrimination
A clothes manufacturer in Brazil employs 110 workers, 75% female. Senior Management and
line supervisors are all men. Men performing the same work as women get better paid and are
offered chances for training leading to promotion. The women in the factory feel they face
systematic discrimination. They are better educated than women 10-15 years ago, have learned
about better non-discriminatory practices amongst other factories in the same region and
have decided to go on strike. Management panics, since now they will not be able to meet an
important shipment date and fear being subject to a penalty from the relevant customer. They
have offered the women a 5% wage increase to fix the situation. The women see this offer as
insufficient.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Decreased productivity due to tensions and conflicts in the workplace

  •	 Discrimination lawsuits against company

  •	 Loss of orders



Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	             29
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: BRAZIL (CONTINUED)


            Children’s clothes manufacturer
            RISK: Gender Discrimination
              AVO I D

              •	 Establish, communicate and implement clear policies on non-discrimination, equal pay for
                 equal work and zero tolerance of sexual-harassment
              •	 Ensure that workers are hired, promoted and compensated solely based on their ability
                 to do the job
              •	 Do not indicate gender preference in job advertisements to avoid discrimination

              •	 No pregnancy tests as part of job candidate screening

              •	 Seek out opportunities for women in doing non-traditional jobs such as cutters, drivers,
                 security, and line supervisors
              •	 Ensure that all workers have equal access to training, tools and opportunities for career
                 advancement

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Encourage an employment relationship for all women and male workers that allows for a
                 work/life balance including family responsibilities:
                  •	 Clearly specify in the employment contract what are the regular working hours,
                     maximum overtime and rest days;
                  •	 Clearly communicate ahead of time (at least one week) requirements on overtime;
                  •	 Conduct training during work hours and compensate for that time;
                  •	 Provide workers transportation;
                  •	 Provide health centres for workers and their families to reduce lost time;
                  •	 Provide child caring facilities;
                  •	 Provide maternity benefits as required by law
              •	 Provide progressive skills training to male and female workers including for non-traditional
                 jobs (e.g. cutters and line supervisors for women, sewing operators for men)
              •	 Provide training to managers, supervisors and workers on preventing, identifying and
                 addressing sexual harassment
              •	 Align line supervisors’ pay to their workers’ pay; this decreases the likelihood that supervi-
                 sors use their discretion on approving workers bonuses and meeting quotas as an instru-
                 ment for intimidation and sexual harassment
              •	 Establish “risk free” communication channels for workers to reach managers

              •	 Require recruitment agencies and contractors to follow anti-discrimination policies and
                 verify their compliance through the review of worker demographics and compensation
              •	 Regularly consult local women’s experts and groups on gender based violence and
                 women’s health to help female workers lead more empowered and healthy lives

              O FF S E T

              •	 Regularly review salary compensation of men and women in non-managerial jobs and
                 immediately bring them to parity if a gap is identified
              •	 Review worker and manager gender demographics in the workplace and take positive dis-
                 crimination actions to remediate for historical exclusion of women from higher paid jobs


            30    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: JORDAN


CMT unit
RISK: No use of Personal Protective Equipment
A cut, make and trim unit in Jordan produces blouses for several European brands. As a result
the unit has been audited several times. The audits have pointed out the lack of personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) in the cutting department of the unit. The unit uses hand cutters and lint
cutters. The factory management pointed out that mesh metal gloves are available but that the
workers prefer not to wear them. Recently one of the workers got seriously injured.

  I M PAC T

  Injuries due to lack of (use of) PPE

  AVO I D

  •	 Conduct a job hazard/safety analysis

  •	 Plan to phase out processes and machinery with high risk of injuries and illnesses
    (e.g., sandblasting)
  •	 Establish, communicate and implement clear policies and procedures related to machine
    safety and mandatory use of PPE
  •	 Have joint management-worker health and safety committee examine why workers do
    not wear metal gloves
  •	 Have workers try on different sizes and styles of metal gloves to select the most
    appropriate ones
  •	 Adapt daily production quotas if the use of metal gloves slows down worker productivity

  •	 Consider the substitution of automated equipment for manual cutting

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Regularly train workers on safe work procedures and correct use and maintenance of PPE
    (e.g. metal gloves, needle guards, sandblasting equipment); this must be included in the
    induction training for all new and temporary workers
  •	 Periodically monitor and audit the implementation of safe work procedures and use of PPE

  •	 Include OHS indicators in the performance evaluation of supervisors

  •	 Assign first responders and regularly train them on first-aid skills and knowledge suitable
    to the specific workplace
  •	 Make sure trained first responders are present during all shifts in all departments

  •	 Maintain appropriately stocked and unlocked first aid kits

  •	 Display safety posters to visually communicate the importance of using PPE (e.g. metal
    gloves) and the potential consequences of not using it
  •	 Display first aid response posters suitable to the specific workplace

  •	 Maintain records of accidents and incidents; have joint management-worker health and
    safety committee regularly review records to confirm that appropriate actions to prevent
    reoccurrence have been taken

  O FF S E T

  •	 Provide medical care for workers who are injured in the workplace

  •	 Compensate for loss of life and loss of ability to work


Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	             31
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: EGYPT


        Spinner
        RISK: Use of agencies to recruit temporary workers
        A spinner in Egypt has 200 permanent workers and 100 temporary workers. The temporary workers
        are placed at the factory by a recruitment agency. The factory management prefers this since the
        agency takes over the recruitment, contracts, transport, housing and payment of the workers. The
        agency brings both domestic and migrant workers to fill the demand. The factory supervisors and
        permanent workers are from the local area. Their rights and contracts meet local labor law. They feel
        comfortable in the factory .The temporary workers are not satisfied. They complain that their wages
        do not meet the set minimum wage. They also complain about excessive deductions for unsafe and
        dirty housing provided by the agency.

          I M PAC T

          •	 Wages of temporary workers not meeting legal minimum wage

          •	 Unsafe and unhygienic housing conditions for temporary workers

          AVO I D

          •	 Decrease company’s reliance on temporary workers
          •	 Use only legally accredited recruitment agencies
          •	 Establish, communicate and implement adequately defined hiring and remuneration policies
            and terms of employment conforming to national labor laws for temporary workers
          •	 Ensure organizational labor policies are understood and implemented by the recruitment
            agency; make policies contractually binding under the service agreement with the recruitment
            agency
          •	 Periodically monitor and audit the recruitment agency’s labor performance as per spinner’s own
            policies and procedures and local law
          •	 Ensure recruitment agency is not withholding workers’ papers

          M I N I M IZE

          •	 Make sure that temporary workers are informed (in all applicable languages) on their rights
            including wages, benefits and deductions
          •	 Agree with the recruitment agency on reasonable deductions for housing, transport and other
            services provided to temporary workers
          •	 Make sure all temporary workers receive contracts and clear records of pay calculations in their
            native language
          •	 Make sure all temporary workers are paid at least the minimum wage
          •	 Set up a phone hotline to receive workers’ complaints – openly or anonymously – via voice or
            SMS; ensure that complaints can be presented in workers’ native language
          •	 Implement a complaint management resolution mechanism (grievance mechanism) accessible to
            both permanent and temporary workers
          •	 Periodically talk to temporary workers on complaints and opportunities

          O FF S E T

          •	 Together with the recruitment agency and local authorities, seek an alternative for housing of
            temporary workers; consult IFC/EBRD Guidance Note on Workers’ Accommodation for interna-
            tional good practices
          •	 Reimburse workers for illegal deductions made by contractors
          •	 Retroactively pay workers whose compensation didn’t met legal minimum wage and return papers


            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: INDIA


Shirt Manufacturer
RISK: Excessive overtime and lack of premium compensation
A shirt factory in India employs 150 workers in a one shift operation. In the past, the facility only
delivered to the domestic market but it has recently started to supply two foreign brands. As a
result total demand has increased over 30%. In order to get the export orders, the management
of the factory was tempted to give delivery times which are difficult to realize. Management is
also hesitant about hiring extra staff as they are not sure whether the export business will con-
tinue. The management has decided to increase capacity of the factory by adding 3 mandatory
hours of overtime daily for all workers and working seven days/week. The extra hours are paid at
the normal rate instead of being compensated with the premium rate as defined by law.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Forced overtime

  •	 No weekly rest day

  •	 Lack of premium compensation for overtime

  AVO I D

  •	 Establish, communicate and implement organization’s policy on remuneration and working
    hours conforming to national labor laws; all overtime should be limited, voluntary and be
    paid at premium rate
  •	 Remunerate the workers for their regular and overtime working hours based on regulatory
    requirements and industry norms; regular working hours should be limited to 48 hours per
    week, with at least one rest day per seven days, and overtime pay should be at least 150% of
    the regular rate
  •	 Consider operating two shifts instead of one for a number of production lines to meet the
    increased demand for production; provide safe transportation to night workers and ensure
    remuneration complies with the legal minimum wage for night workers
  •	 Consider outsourcing part of the production to sub-contractors with approved and moni-
    tored labor systems in place

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Provide workers with periodic and clear records of pay calculations including worked over-
    time and received compensation
  •	 Engage with customers on expected volumes of production and discuss realistic lead times

  •	 Review pay structure to incentivize productivity during regular working hours, but avoid
    remuneration systems only based on piecework that could become exploitative
  •	 Provide training to managers and supervisors on production planning

  •	 Assess the current production process to identify current inefficiencies due to lack of train-
    ing, poor production design and poor machinery

  O FF S E T

  •	 Retroactively compensate for overtime work at the established overtime rate




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	             33
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: BANGLADESH


            Dyeing House
            RISK: Excessive water consumption
            A dyeing house in Bangladesh is questioning the long term sustainability of its current water con-
            sumption. The area where the factory is located is faced with increased periods of water shortag-
            es. The water shortages are negatively impacting industry and farms in the area. The factory cur-
            rently uses 1 million m3 of water per year. About 40% is from groundwater; the rest comes from
            a nearby river. The factory owner also sees reducing raw water demand as a priority in order to
            reduce production costs and to position his factory as an environmentally conscious manufacturer,
            as this is becoming more and more important to clients.

              I M PAC T

              Depletion of local water resources (ground and surface water)

              AVO I D

              •	 Develop water balance for specific processes and estimate consumptive and non-
                 consumptive water usage; add meters to monitor key consumers; benchmark water use
                 against industry standards
              •	 Identify and prevent all water losses, including pilferage, transmission losses due to seepage
                 (exfiltration), leakage, evaporation, etc.
              •	 Convert wet-cleaning processes to dry processes
              •	 Install waterless dyeing processes such as air and CO2 dyeing

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Modify/replace water-intensive processes with water-efficient technologies, such as:
                  •	 counter current washing;
                  •	 continuous horizontal washers and vertical spray washers or vertical double-laced
                     washers;
                  •	 use of rinse water from bleaching in textile washing;
                  •	 continuous and semi-continuous dyeing processes instead of batch dyeing;
                  •	 use of solution dyes when dyeing synthetic fabrics;
                  •	 low liquor-ratio jet dyeing machines;
              •	 Consider efficient combination of operations, such as scouring and bleaching, to save
                 energy and water
              •	 Use of computer controlled water flow-controls to ensure that water only flows to a
                 process when required
              •	 Reuse water (e.g. rinse water for subsequent dyeing, recovering and recycling condensate,
                 cooling water, and treated wastewater)
              •	 Plan and implement water conservation awareness and training program for workers,
                 supervisors and managers

              O FF S E T

              •	 Actively consult and engage with local communities, regulators and NGOs to plan specific
                 programs and actions to address and resolve water concerns in the region
              •	 Participate in and promote Integrated Water Resources Management processes
              •	 Develop and implement rainwater harvesting programs
              •	 Assist community in easy access to safe and potable water
              •	 Reduce demand by others through adequately treating industrial wastewater and finding
                 alternative applications for this resource (e.g. irrigation, raw water for other local industries)

            34    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: MEXICO


Fabric mill and dyeing house
RISK: Nuisance due to noise
A dyeing house in Mexico has decided to vertically integrate its operations. Besides the dyeing
and finishing of fabrics, it is now also weaving the fabrics. Six months ago management finished
the building of an extra production hall and bought 30 weaving machines. The management is
satisfied as it now able to better control quality and lead times of the fabrics. People living close
to the factory however complain. The new hall is close to their homes and the weaving machines
create a permanent loud noise.

  I M PAC T

  Nuisance in the community due to loud noise

  AVO I D

  •	 Include the assessment of community impacts in investment decisions and plans (e.g. prefer-
    ence for low noise machinery)

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Improve the acoustic performance of the hall applying sound insulation

  •	 Install acoustic enclosures (e.g. curtains) on weaving machines

  •	 Use machinery only during the day and not during the night

  O FF S E T

  •	 Engage in active consultation with victims of nuisance and compensate as committed




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	              35
3. Management Programs




                                     WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                                     Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                                     process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and ad-
                                     just the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve
                                     the right internal people and departments.

                                     As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                                     think about:

                                        •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                                        •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                                        •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                                             results (targets)
                                        •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                                        •	   Who – responsible people



                                        Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.

                                     The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the industry. These
                                     are just some of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to your
                                     situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet your company’s specific situa-
                                     tion. As you tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and managers,
                                     experts and external stakeholders, including your suppliers and community.
                                     They can offer insight into important issues and effective actions. They can also
                                     help you obtain commitment for plans you are trying to implement, and provide
                                     candid feedback about how well the plans are working. This will be critical to
                                     the continual improvement of your systems.



                                     For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                                     community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS
                                     Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




            36    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                       3. Management Programs




                              WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                              Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and
                              managers. They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how
                              to behave. They enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turn-
                              over. Clear, detailed procedures help to embed your social and environmental
                              policies into your daily operations.

                              It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your
                              procedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists,
                              flowcharts, or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary
                              depending on the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for
                              managers and supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with
                              less literate or immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as short and simple as
                              possible.


                                Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure and the
                                Sample Procedure Flowchart to get started.

                              Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is
                              the ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new
                              procedure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the
                              skills and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through
                              routine communication and effective training. You will learn more about this
                              in the next chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                              Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version
                              of each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly
                              marked as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old
                              procedure.




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                37
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                   A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S       trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management          that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                   ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                   IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                   First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                   commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.        beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an           sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte- grated system. New       the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S        do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.           long-term commitment by your company.

                                   Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                   responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company      anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-         duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles       involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily     A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is       with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                   sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                   contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is       In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-      have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                   social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-       tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided    the labor aspects, production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                 and the reduction of waste, procurement manages the qualifications and
                                   performance of suppliers and contractors, and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with         equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-         tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles        The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-    impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    ing to get defined. No         be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all
    systems awareness or
                                   levels of the company, including supervisors and workers, as they are key
    repeatable processes.
                                   frontline identifiers of problems.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    38    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                      4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                              As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                              and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                              departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                              The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                              exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                              consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                              Once the ESMS Team is selected, they need to select a team leader. This is an
                              important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader needs to set the
                              tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initiatives in a compa-
                              ny face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is no exception.
                              The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable hurdles, and
                              should have direct access to senior management.




                                Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate
                                for Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit and
                                Case Studies for a list and sequencing of activities to develop and
                                implement an ESMS.




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	               39
                                                          EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                        Quality
                                                                  Human
When selecting a                                                 resources
                                                                                        control


team leader, look                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                              health & safety
for someone who                                Production


has the following                                                           Select a
                                                                          team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                       Procurement/
                                                          Worker
                                                                                           Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                   Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.            Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                   dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                   This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                   There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                   1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                      •	 What is it?
                                      •	 What are its goals?
                                      •	 What do I need to do?

                                   2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                       the company.
                                      •	 How does this help our company?
                                      •	 How does it help my department?
                                      •	 What will change?
                                      •	 What is in it for me?

                                   3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                      their roles.
                                      •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                      •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                      •	 How do I do that?
                                      •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        40   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                            4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                             Your ESMS Team needs detailed training so they
      Effective Communication and Training
                                                             can develop the necessary knowledge and skills.
                                                             They will need to understand the basics of the
      Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                             Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle and know the nine
      munication or training module is to build
                                                             elements of an ESMS. This Handbook provides
      awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                             the information they will need, but additional
      people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                             help may be necessary. In addition to the detailed
      implement.
                                                             training of the team, everyone will need to receive
                                                             awareness training so there is a shared understand-
                                                             ing of the goals of the ESMS.

                                  The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                                  general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                                  learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                                  You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                                  tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                                  Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                                  way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                                  and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                                  people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                                  responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                    Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                    tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                       CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N



    Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                     41
                                     ELEMENT 5


                                    Emergency Preparedness
                                    and Response

5
    Regular engagement with         Even when you have considered all the risks and put
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and
    offsite emergency plan.
                                    the appropriate management programs in place,
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neighbor-       accidents and emergency situations can happen.
    ing companies.

                                    Your business is a dynamic operation, and many

4
    Senior management and
    all units and shifts, includ-
    ing contract and tempo-         things change from day to day – people go in and
    rary workers, participate
    in emergency risk assess-       out of your workforce, materials and suppliers enter
    ment, preparedness plan-
    ning and mock drills.           and exit your supply chain, facilities and equipment
    Continual improvement.
                                    are added to and removed from your production


3
    All onsite and off-site
    emergency issues have           line. A management system will help to maintain
    been identified and an
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan
                                    continuity and consistency throughout these
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local      changes. However, there may be a momentary lapse
    industry best practices.
                                    or gaps in the system (e.g. someone not properly


2
    The emergency prepared-
    ness plan is in place, but      trained, someone not following the procedures,
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-          a machine breakdown), or an external force (e.g.
    tion. Some trainings are
    provided to the workers on      natural disaster) that can lead to an accident or
    emergency requirements.
                                    emergency situation at your facility. While it is not


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,      always possible to prevent such situations, you can
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.       be prepared to respond effectively to prevent and
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.            mitigate any harm to your workers, community and
                                    the environment.

0
    Very limited emergency
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No for-
    mal plan in place.




       42   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                               5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                              The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                              help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                                 •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                   communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                   your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                   mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community.
                                 •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                   explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                   everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs to do.
                                 •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                   response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                   people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                   that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                   during accidents and emergencies.
                                 •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                   it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                   working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                                 •	 Communicate so that everyone in your company understands the importance
                                   of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                   monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                   who may be affected.
                                 •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an overview
                                   of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what
                                   to do – ask for and obtaininput on what needs to be addressed and what can
                                   be improved. Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will
                                   need to exercise individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations.
                                   This is more likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system
                                   beforehand.
                                 •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                   you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                                 •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to test how well the system is working and
                                   to re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                   continually improve your system.
                                 •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                   Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                   the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                   response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability
                                   and effectiveness.




                               Look at the Sample Fire Response Procedure and Sample Chemical
                               Spill Response Procedure Flowchart for examples.




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                             43
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                        An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                        should include:
                                          •	   identification of potential emergencies based on
                                               hazard assessment;

                                          •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency
                                               situations;

                                          •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                          •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution;

                                          •	   procedures for decontamination;

                                          •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation, including a
                                               designated meeting place outside the facility;

                                          •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                                          •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for
                                               employees responsible for responding to the
                                               emergency (fire-fighting equipment, spill response
                                               equipment, personal protection equipment for the
                                               emergency response teams, first aid kits and stations);

                                          •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment
                                               and facilities;

                                          •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and
                                               maintenance of emergency equipment;

                                          •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and
                                               meeting points;

                                          •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local
                                               emergency response services (fire fighters);

                                          •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                          •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols,
                                               including with affected communities when necessary,
                                               and procedures for interaction with the government
                                               authorities;

                                          •	   procedures for periodic review and update of
                                               emergency response plans.




             44   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in
Textiles and Apparel Factories
 Common Hazards/              Potential Causes
 Emergency
 Situations in
 Textiles and
 Apparel Factories
  Cuts and lacerations        •	 Absence of machinery guards resulting in cuts or lacerations (e.g.
  sustained in cutting          sewing machine needle guard)
  and sewing                  •	 Cutting tools are poorly designed (e.g. awkward grip and/or hand
  operations                    position) or poorly maintained
                              •	 Poorly designed work stations (e.g. inappropriate or inadequate
                                height, insufficient lighting, insufficient working space)
                              •	 PPE not appropriate or adequate for assigned tasks (e.g. issued
                                gloves are not cut-proof)
                              •	 Poorly planned incentive schemes (e.g. piecework incentive) that
                                negatively impact workplace safety
                              •	 Distractions in the workplace (e.g. excessive noise, interruptions
                                from supervisors/co-workers, etc.)
                              •	 Fatigue due to inadequate ventilation, high temperature and
                                humidity, insufficient drinking of water/fluids, and long working
                                hours.

  Cuts, fractures,            •	 Absence of rotating machinery guards resulting in persons being
  puncture wounds,              struck by, struck against, or caught in machinery
  amputations or              •	 Removal of machine guards by worker to increase production
  fatalities due to             rates (found commonly in plants with production based
  being “struck by,”            incentives)
  “struck against,”           •	 Absence of lockout/tag-out procedures, equipment and training
  and “caught in”             •	 Absence of floor markings indicating flow of traffic, and spaces
  the equipment and             reserved for pedestrian and vehicle traffic
  plant machinery             •	 Failure to follow safe practices for forklifts, trucks, and storage
                                (safe shelving)
                              •	 Improper attire (e.g. loose clothing or gloves, unconfined long
                                hair, jewelry, etc.) being caught in moving parts of machinery
                              •	 Improper structural stability and design to accommodate dynamic
                                and static loads
                              •	 Improperly designed or installed materials, or utilities suspended
                                from ceilings and overhead structures

  Back injuries, strains      •	 Inadequate workplace cleaning resulting in slippery work surfaces
  and sprains, contu-         •	 Tripping over boxes, electrical cords, equipment, or other items
  sions and fractures           that are left in aisles and walkways
  due to slips, trips         •	 Missing rails or non-slip treads in the stairways
  and fall                    •	 Absence of guardrails or toeboards on elevated work places
                              •	 Use of ladders not equipped with non-slip safety feet


Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                45
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




              Common Hazards/              Potential Causes
              Emergency
              Situations in
              Textiles and
              Apparel Factories
              Burns, scalds,               •	 Inadequate procedures for handling, storage, and clean up
              respiratory and                of hazardous chemicals
              potentially                  •	 Inadequate exhaust ventilation combined with excess atmospheric
              carcinogenic effects           vaporization leading to inadequate air supply for workplaces
              from exposure to             •	 PPE not appropriate or adequate for assigned tasks (e.g. respira-
              chemicals and dust             tory cartridges are not fit for purpose for the risk in hand)
                                           •	 Exposure to cotton and other dusts from lint, yarn, and fabric
                                             leading to byssinosis

              Electric shock and           •	 Use of ungrounded and improperly grounded machinery
              electrocution                  and equipment
                                           •	 Electrical cables passing through/laid around damp, humid,
                                             and otherwise unsafe locations
                                           •	 Inadequately guarded electrical conductors or open electrical
                                             cabinets
                                           •	 Cracked fuses, plugs, and sockets, damaged distribution sockets
                                             and circuit breakers, and poorly connected, worn, frayed, or bare
                                             cables
                                           •	 On/Off power circuit switches that are not located at clearly
                                             visible points
                                           •	 Absence of lockout/tag out maintenance procedures, training
                                             and required apparatus to de-energize electrical circuits
                                           •	 Absent, insufficient, and unreadable signage related to electrical
                                             hazards
                                           •	 Inadequate electrical lightning conductor deployment and
                                             installation leading to power surges and associated problems
                                           •	 Lack of PPE for workers that may be in contact with exposed
                                             electric parts (e.g. electrical gloves and insulated tools rated for
                                             the voltage level, class B hard hats, electrically rated steel-toed
                                             boots, safety glasses)




             46    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                   5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




 Common Hazards/               Potential Causes
 Emergency
 Situations in
 Textiles and
 Apparel Factories
 Emergency events             •	 Unsafe handling and storage of flammable, combustible and explo-
 arising out of fires           sive materials including pressurized containers
 and/or explosions            •	 Absent, insufficient, and unreadable signage related to storage
                                areas of flammable, combustible, and explosive materials
                              •	 Inadequate housekeeping (cleaning, servicing, repairing), and
                                collection and proper disposition of flammable and combustible
                                materials from workplaces and storage areas
                              •	 Poor inspection and maintenance of fuel lines

                              •	 Leaks and spills from flammable, explosive, and hazardous materi-
                                als containers and installations
                              •	 Inadequate exhaust ventilation facilitating accumulation of fine
                                dust particles or solvents exceeding the lower explosive limit (LEL)
                              •	 Improper storage (e.g., unventilated places) and transport (e.g.
                                rolling instead of using carts) of pressurized gas cylinders
                              •	 Failure to reject, return to supplier or eliminate damaged or incom-
                                pletely equipped gas cylinders (e.g. missing regulator caps)
                              •	 Inadequate procedures for controlling ignition sources such as
                                smoking, welding, and burning
                              •	 Unsafe gas hoses and gas welding equipment

                              •	 Use of equipment producing sparks close to explosive, combustible,
                                and flammable materials storage and usage
                              •	 Poor electrical maintenance using unauthorized electricians who
                                are not following electrical codes and regulations
                              •	 Faulty and/or overloaded electrical wiring and cable trays

                              •	 Operating electrical equipment over the normal “sanctioned load”

                              •	 Absence of adequate smoke/fire detection and alarm systems

                              •	 Absence of adequate fire suppression and safety equipment

                              •	 Absent or insufficient training of personnel on fire safety, emer-
                                gency response, building evacuation, and first aid procedures
                              •	 Obstructed or locked emergency exits, and narrow stairways

                              •	 Insufficient or non-existent lighting at emergency exits, in
                                corridors, and hallways




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	               47
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement            Your company may have an impact on the lives
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      of many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group is different, and you
    is actively considered.
                                      need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate risks to
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    effective dialogue. Some          to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                                    FINANCIAL
                                                                               S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                            ER                   AC
                                                                    U   M
    Some public events, lim-                                     NS                             G R TIV




2
                                                            CO                                     OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                                                           PS T
    process. Sporadic and
                                                       ES




    selective responses
                                                UN D
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    when approached by
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                         NGO




    stakeholders.
                                            A




                                                                                                                           s




    Limited channels in place.                                                 COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                                 S/
                                                                                                                     O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                              NS
                                                                                                                     C IA E R
                                                                                                                         TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                           TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                               AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                               T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                          EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                      M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                   RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                                  SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                            GO
    with stakeholders.                                                        CONTRACTORS




      48    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                         6. Stakeholder Engagement




                              Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                              by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                              groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                              the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                              MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                              The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                              them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                              negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                              Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                              ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                              these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                              more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                              those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                              Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                              them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                              engage with each of them.



                               INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                                Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                                need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                                and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                                However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                                those used for external stakeholders.




                                Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                                Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.



Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                     49
For effective                           DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                        After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                        to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                           ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                        environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                        At a minimum, even if your company does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                        munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                        receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your manage-
•	 Disclose meaningful                  ment program (see Element 7, External Communication).

   and accurate                         If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to implement
                                        a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, Grievance Mechanism) and actively
   information;                         engage them in consultation, regularly disclosing clear and meaningful infor-
                                        mation on both your impacts and potential benefits, and providing communi-
•	 Use culturally                       ties with opportunities to express their concerns and suggestions.
   appropriate means to                 In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and com-
   reach them;                          munities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                        and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
•	 Provide opportunities                ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                        pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
   for two-way dialogue ;               mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plan.
•	 Document to keep                     Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
                                        your company is putting in place to address the issues identified through the
   track of issues raised;
                                        engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected Commu-
   and                                  nities).

•	 Report back on how                   Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excel-
                                        lent way for you to understand how company operations affect them and to
   their input has been                 get early warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to
                                        stakeholders, ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time.
   used and considered
                                        Don’t wait until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those
                                        relationships in place to manage the problem.




                                                                    Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                    Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                    with the important stakeholder groups.




           50     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    6. Stakeholder Engagement




                              TIP

                               Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                               ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                    you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                               ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                    significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                                    elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                               ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                               ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                    sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                                    fected groups and communities.

                               ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                    where they feel comfortable.

                               ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                               ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                    provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                    your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                               ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                    in the “outside world.”

                               ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                    expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                  Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                               your company

  Affected                     People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                               verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                               personal safety, health or livelihood.




                              For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                              Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                              Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	               51
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your business is perceived and,
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-
                                   mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is
    limited to those directly      and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    handling the complaints.       responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




      52    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                            7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                              In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                                •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                     pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                     are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                     regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                                •	   Assign a person or team in your company to be responsible for receiving,
                                     registering and processing all grievances.
                                •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                     mine resolution and redress options.
                                •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                     ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                     response.
                              Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                              company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                              same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                              such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                              immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                              investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                              lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                              dent mediators.
 TIP
                                                             The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                         dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                             resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and
                                                             The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your company.
                                                             ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                             for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily un-                   to raise concerns. This requirement mandates
       derstandable, accessible, trusted and                 having the right people leading this effort inside
       culturally appropriate.                               your company. The grievance mechanism must be
                                                             accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
  ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-
                                                             party that originated the complaint and should not
       ance procedure so people know where
                                                             impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
       to go and whom to approach.

  ••   Commit to a response time and keep                    Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       to it as this will increase transparency              ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       and a sense of “fair process.”                        ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
                                                             problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
  ••   Keep records of each step to create a                 to address.
       “paper trail.”




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014                ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                       53
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                     Independent
                                                                                     mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Company team                                            Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                        TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).


             54    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
        ELEMENT 8




       Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                             Affected communities’
                                                                                             issues and concerns are
                                                                                             proactively addressed.
       Affected Communities                                                                  There is ongoing com-
                                                                                             munication to avoid risks
                                                                                             and impacts before new
       Affected communities will want to know what                                           projects as well as to
                                                                                             address existing issues.
       actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                             Reporting to affected
       the issues identified when engaging with them.                                        communities is regu-
                                                                                             larly implemented and
       Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical             evidenced in documen-
       element for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know              tation. Key units are
       when they will receive an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the     involved in the review
       amount of time you spend responding to questions.                                     of the key issues.




                                                                                                                         3
       The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of stake-       When applicable, con-
       holders’ concerns, but it should be at least annual. If your company’s activities     sultation processes have
       change or new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to contact           been implemented.
       stakeholders outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.                External consultants are
                                                                                             involved as required. No
TIP                                                         You can also decide to           ongoing review.
                                                            report back to the wider
 Ongoing Communication
                                                            public on your progress




                                                                                                                         2
••    Provide an immediate update if new envi-              in meeting your commit-
                                                            ments to avoid, reduce           Procedures in place
      ronmental or social risks emerge.                                                      for reporting, usually
                                                            and mitigate any negative
••    Report progress on implementation of                                                   assigned to E&S staff.
                                                            environmental or social
      your commitments.                                                                      Primarily reactive.
                                                            impacts from your com-
••    Report monitoring results on issues that              pany’s activities. Sustain-
      interest the community.                               ability reporting initiatives,
                                                            guidelines, including



                                                                                                                         1
••    Use the opportunity to communicate the
      benefits generated by your company.                   sector-specific guidelines,      Some basic communica-
                                                            and good practices are also      tions with affected com-
••    Translate information into local languages
                                                            rapidly emerging in this         munities, mostly limited
      and easily understandable formats.
                                                            area. The most notable           to meetings.
••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals               is the Global Reporting
      with the community.                                   Initiative (GRI).
••    Involve your employees as communication



                                                                                                                         0
      links to the community.
••    Consider conducting a stakeholder survey                                               No reporting.
      to learn how your company is perceived.


          Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities for
          examples of formats and venues you can use.



       Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                 55
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



      56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                            9. Monitoring and Review




                               TIP

                                Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                               Intent:
                                     1.	Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                               Implementation:
                                     2.	Are the action plans being carried out?
                                     3.	Are procedures being followed?
                               Effectiveness:
                                     4.	Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                     5.	Are you making progress toward your overall objectives
                                        and targets?
                                     6.	How is the environmental and social performance of the
                                        company in general?



                              INDICATORS
                              A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                              titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                              might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                              environmental and social policy.

                              Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                                •	   energy consumption;
                                •	   volume of solid waste disposal;
                                •	   water consumption;
                                •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                                •	   emissions to air;
                                •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage), incidents and near misses;
                                •	   lost time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates
                                •	   emergency response incidents;
                                •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                                •	   wages levels;
                                •	   incidences of child labor;
                                •	   incidences of disciplinary and discrimination complaints; and
                                •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.


Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014                ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                   57
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          You can also use this information when reporting to a wider public on your
                                         ESMS performance. When selecting your key performance indicators, you
  Improving                              may refer to voluntary guidelines such as the Textiles, Apparel, Footwear and
                                         Luxury Goods Supplement of the Global Reporting Initiative, which provides
  Remember, you                          a list of indicators relevant to the textiles and apparel industry.
  can’t improve what                     Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  you don’t measure.
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
                                         a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
                                         evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing for water and energy conservation;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?

                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit and Case Studies for
                                           more examples of key indicators common in the Textiles and Apparel
                                           industry.



             58    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     9. Monitoring and Review




                                             THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                              Visual observation                    Interviews
                              physical walk-throughs of             consultations with workers,
                              your facility and surround-           managers and external stake-
                              ing land. Examples of what            holders. Examples of topics
                              you might observe: physi­             you might discuss: Do workers
                              cal obstructions and blocked          and managers understand
                              exits, fire detection, alarm and      the policies and procedures?
                              fighting equipment, use of            How are they impacted? Are
                              PPE, warning signs, storage of        there ideas for improvement?
                              hazard­  ous materials, house-        Do workers feel comfortable
                              keeping, production process-          filing complaints? How are
                              es, drinking water and sani-          external stakeholders
                              tation facilities, information        impacted by the company?
                              displayed on notice boards            Are there ideas for improve-
                              (e.g. policies and regulations,       ment? Do external stakehold-
                              salary scales, wages), worker         ers feel comfortable filing
                              and manager body language             complaints?
                              and interactions.

                              Measuring and                         Document review
                              testing                               looking through documents
                              checking using equipment              and records. Examples of
                              that is properly calibrated.          what you might review: water
                              Examples of what you might            and energy bills, waste dispos-
                              check: water and energy               al records, chemical use and
                              consumption, emissions to air,        discharges records, packaging
                              effluents, noise decibel levels,      material invoices, inspection
                              dust levels, ambient tempera­         records, OHS records, com-
                              ture, light levels.                   plaints logs, wage slips, time
                                                                    cards, policies and procedures,
                                                                    training records.




                                        Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                        on how to conduct an audit.



Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	              59
9. Monitoring and Review



                                         Monitoring and auditing are words that are often
                                         used interchangeably, which can be confusing.
                                         Auditing is a formal, on-site evaluation against a
                                         specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
                                         internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
                                         Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various
                                         methods for evaluating performance. These may
                                         include: visual observation, measuring and testing,
                                         questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
                                         and external stakeholders, and document review.
                                         It is important to design your monitoring program
                                         to obtain qualitative and quantitative information.
                                         It is also important that workers and managers are
                                         monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.

                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing,
                                         Document Review and Interviewing People.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.




             60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                           Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                           Improvement Plan
                                           Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                           environmental, labor and community
                                           problems and remediate negative impacts
                                           ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                           continually improve the management system to
                                           support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                   Ongoing Reporting
               Risks and Impacts




                                                                 Preparedness and




                                                                                                  Communications
               Identification of




                                                                                                                                       Monitoring and
                                                Organizational




                                                                                                  and Grievance
                                   Management




                                                                                                                   Communities
                                                Capacity and




                                                                                    Engagement




                                                                                                  Mechanisms
                                                Competency




                                                                                    Stakeholder




                                                                                                                   to Affected
                                                                 Emergency

                                                                 Response
                                   Programs




                                                                                                  External




                                                                                                                                       Review
     Policy




      Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
      improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
      Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
      improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the company
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014                     ESMS Implementation Handbook - Textiles & Apparel	                                                      61
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




             62    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



June 2014
