                   91505




Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
CONSTRUCTION
                       Although the environmental and social management system described in this
                       Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein may
                       not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1, or any
                       other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to demonstrate
                       a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into company
                       management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing its impact
                       on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

                       The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
                       either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
                       chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
                       an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does not
                       imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Standards,
                       including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply endorse-
                       ment by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

                       The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor the
                       organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged in render-
                       ing technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates comprising
                       the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational purposes only, and
                       are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes. Implementation of
                       the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final users. The material
                       in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can
                       be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the
                       information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other member of the World Bank
                       Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, puni-
                       tive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited to, damages for loss of profits,
                       goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even if IFC has been advised of the
                       possibility of such damages) in any way arising or resulting from use or reliance on
                       the Handbook or any such conclusion or determination. The Handbook is distributed
                       subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be sold or oth-
                       erwise circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior written consent.

                       IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeliness,
                       completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is not
                       responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice, opinions
                       and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not necessarily
                       represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the World Bank or
                       its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in the
Construction Industry..................................................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
      Overview...........................................................................................................................12
      Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................13
      System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
      Using the Handbook and Companion Publications to Develop and
      Implement your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing Your
Environmental and Social Management System.................................................................... 17
      1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
          Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
          Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One......................................18
          Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.................................................19
      2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
          Key Risks in the Construction Industry..............................................................................20
      3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................23
          Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................25
          Short Cases......................................................................................................................24
          Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................38
          Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................39
      4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................40
          Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................40
          Communication and Training..........................................................................................42
      5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................44
          Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the Construction Industry..........................47
      6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................50
          Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................51
          Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................52
      7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism............................................54
          External Communication.................................................................................................54
          Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................54
      8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................57
      9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................58
          Indicators........................................................................................................................59
          Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................62
          Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................63
          Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................64

Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                                             3
                       Welcome & How to
                       Use This Handbook
                       Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                       more and more important in today’s global
                       economy. There are thousands of environmental
                       and social codes and standards in the world
                       today. The codes and standards define the rules
                       and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                       implementation. An environmental and social
                       management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                       integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                       operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                       repeatable processes.

                       This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                       to help companies in the construction industry
                       develop and implement an environmental and
                       social management system, which should help to
                       improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                            In the current economic climate, companies are
                            under pressure to perform or even just survive.
                            New initiatives are often met with resistance as
                            people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
                            day responsibilities. Some people think that an
                            environmental and social management system
                            must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
                            is not really true. To be effective, a management
                            system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
                            the company.

                            If a company has existing management systems for
                            quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
                            to expand them to include environmental and social
                            performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
                            will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                            improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                            employees and stakeholders.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	   5
                        Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                         These sections provide background on environmental and
                         Sections I – II                 social management systems (ESMS) in the construction
                                                         industry.

                                                         This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                         develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                         Section III
                                                         it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                         Toolkit.

                                                         Section I of this companion publication gives tools,
                                                         including forms, templates, checklists, and other useful
                                                         documents, to help you develop and implement the systems
                                                         described in the Handbook. We suggest that you adapt
                                                         each tool for your company.

                                                         Section II includes case studies presenting two companies
                         ESMS Toolkit and                in the construction industry that implemented an ESMS.
                                                         These hypothetical cases illustrate how to develop and
                         Case Studies                    implement an ESMS appropriate to the size and nature of
                                                         your company.
                                                         •	    ABC Company – an international civil engineer
                                                               contractor based in Far East

                                                         •	    XYZ Company – a family-owned construction
                                                               company based in Asian subcontinent

                         ESMS                            This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                         Self-Assessment                 maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                         and Improvement                 measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan
                         Guide                           for improvement.




                       Acknowledgements
                       This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                       department with primary contributions from Rob Horner, Irene Angeletti,
                       Larissa Luy and Juan Jose Dada.

                       The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                       the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss and Jane
                       Hwang, as commissioned by IFC. Additional contributions were made by
                       Yogendra Chaudhry, Doug DeRuisseau, Dundar Sahin and Caroline Lewis.
                       Graphic design services were provided by Pam Henry.

                       Additional IFC contributors include Justin Pooley, Jeremy Ansell, Debra Se-
                       queira and Ekaterina Grigoryeva. The Handbook also significantly benefited
                       from comments from an internal peer review process, which involved a diverse
                       group of individuals who are too many to acknowledge individually. However,
                       the drafting team is very thankful for their valuable and insightful comments and
                       hopes they find their input reflected in this final version.

                       Front cover photo courtesy of Gerardo Pesantez, World Bank Photo Collection


6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                  I

                            Benefits of an Environmental
                            and Social Management System
                            in the Construction Industry




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	   7
“As construction
companies face
increasing compe-
tition, we realize
quality alone cannot              Benefits of an Environmental
create a ‘sustainable             and Social Management
advantage.’ From
                                  System in the Construction
a customer’s
perspective, one’s                Industry
environment and
                                  Today, construction companies are confronted with a number of significant
social performance is             environmental and social challenges. None of the challenges is insurmountable,
                                  but if not effectively assessed and managed, they will hurt your profitability,
equally important.”
                                  reputation, and prospects for future contracts.
Managing Director -
                                  Among these challenges are increasing energy and raw materials costs, cost
Multi-national
                                  of insurance for workers’ compensation, and, the growing power and influ-
construction company,             ence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies. These risks are in addi-
Europe                            tion to the primary risk of failing to deliver projects on schedule, at the agreed
                                  cost, and with the required quality. All of these risks ultimately have financial
                                  consequences. Moreover, international exposure is vital to the success of some
                                  construction businesses; but exporting such services has added demands from
                                  international legislation, local industry standards, and consumer requirements,
                                  many of which are increasingly related to environmental and social practices.
                                  All of these risks, requirements and pressures are forces that should encourage
                                  you to implement a management system.




                                 “Any plan for becoming the market leader requires
                                  direction; and, in my experience, firms that achieve
                                  high employee satisfaction also achieve higher cus-
                                  tomer satisfaction and superior economic returns.”
                                  Senior VP – Commercial and Institutional construction
                                   company, Africa




        8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                            “As a construction company we are a labor and
                             resource intensive company. Measuring and
                             improving our environmental and social perfor-
                             mance has consistently helped us increase our
                             profitability even when many of our competitors
                             are struggling to survive.”
                            CFO - A small private construction company in Asia




                            There are direct business benefits to be derived from implementing an environ-
                            mental and social management system (ESMS). Conserving and using energy
                            and materials efficiently helps to reduce construction costs. Managing surface
                            water run-off and run-on to control erosion avoids schedule delays and the risk
                            of fines. Recycling building waste from demolition can reduce the increasingly
                            expensive cost of disposal in landfills and other waste facilities.

                            The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transpar-
                            ent human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                            workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems.
                            Effective occupational health and safety management procedures work toward
                            the identification of workplace and process hazards, then seek to eliminate or
                            re¬duce them through engineering controls and employee training on how to
                            avoid job site risks. This serves not only to reduce near misses, accidents and
                            fatalities, but also contributes to reducing insurance premiums for workers’
                            compensation.




“Labor shortages had always been a challenge for us. Now,
thanks to our, ‘social and labor management system,’ not only
 are our employees happy and productive, but also they with us
stay longer.”
General Manager – Contractor to various large construction companies, Latin America




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                       9
                          Management systems are widely used by construction companies in quality
                          con¬trol and occupational health and safety. An environmental and social
                          management system (ESMS) simply extends that approach to managing the
                          impact your business has on the environment, your host neighborhoods, and
                          other external stakeholders.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized,
                          instead of having one system for quality, one for occupational health and
                          safety, and one for environment. Integrated management systems are the goal,
                          and the focus of this Handbook is on helping you implement an ESMS that is
                          appropriate for the size and nature of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                II

                            Understanding an
                            Environmental and Social
                            Management System




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                     13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve            A lot of companies in the construction industry already have management sys-
                             tems for quality or occupational health and safety. If so, you may already have
what you don’t               elements of an ESMS, and there is no need to replace what you already have. In
                             this Handbook’s companion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
measure.                     ment Guide, we provide a self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements.
                             The self-assessment will allow you to measure your current level of system devel-
                             opment and implementation. You will answer a series of questions and get your
                             score for each element in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score
                             measures the maturity of your system. Once you understand the maturity of
                             your system, it is easier to target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                       THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                              Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                      chain partners – continual improvement embedded in
                                      operations
                              Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                      routine improvement projects
                              Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                      tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                              Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                      primarily reactive
                              Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                              Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




   14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                            REMEMBER
                            A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                            valuable if it is well-implemented.

                            SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                             One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                             is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                             management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                             lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                            “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                             cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                            Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                            routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                            goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                            that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                            to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                            ment.

                            One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                            development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                            tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                            well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                            mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                            developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                            organization change.

                            The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, Toolkit and
                            Case Studies and Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system
                            development and system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                             DEFINITIONS
                             System                     The documented policies and procedures.
                             Development
                             System                     Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                             Implementation             ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.

Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                      15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK

     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan                                               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
     •	   Learn how other companies                                           elements of an ESMS
          scaled the ESMS to their
          size and complexity
                                                 REDO this graphic
                              ESMS
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                            TOOLKIT &
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                              CASE
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                             STUDIES
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                 III
                            Practical Guidelines for
                            Developing and Implementing
                            Your Environmental and Social
                            Management System

                            This section provides step-by-step instructions
                            on how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                            For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                            way to measure where you are now.


                                    When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                    there is a tool in the companion publication
                                    Toolkit and Case Studies to make it easier
                                    to get started.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies in
    place.                      and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related poli-   it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    cies and procedures.        of the specific risks you face in the construction industry.




    18    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your        Commitment;
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   and
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.
                                                                                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-       Your senior
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          management
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           can help you to
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
                                                 The key message is that this       accelerate all
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for              will contribute to the com-
 Developing a Company Policy                     pany’s success and that each       three stages.
 Statement to get ideas of what you              person will benefit - but that
 could include in your policy.                   they  will also be held ac-
                                                 countable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
                                                 stages with your senior man-
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter                 agement. Consider accompa-
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to               nying the Policy Statements
 get started.                                    with a message from the CEO.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	             19
                                    ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     identify the potential negative environmental
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-     and social impacts so that you can develop the
    tors, subcontractors, third
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   appropriate strategies to address them.


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
    itization of E&S risks         In the following pages, we present the key issues
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated           that come up in the construction industry.
    across existing, new and
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-
    ment in company.               KEY RISKS IN THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY




3
    Awareness and engage-        1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency
    ment of staff in identifica-
                                     •	 Uncontrolled storm water discharge leading to erosion of barren surfaces and
    tion and prioritization of
                                        downstream flooding
    E&S risks and impacts.
    External experts involved as     •	 In-stream sand-and-gravel mining causing degradation of rivers
    required.                        •	 Dewatering and over pumping of ground water causing area subsidence and
                                        sinkholes
                                      •	 Inadequate disposal of construction waste leading to land/water contamination
                                      •	 Inadequate storage, dispensing and use of hydrocarbons for construction-related




2
    Procedures in place for             equipment
    identification of E&S risks       •	 Emission of noise and dust during crushing, grinding, drilling, blasting, and
    and impacts across all key          transport of rock
    activities.
                                      •	 Emission of NO, NO2, and CO during blasting activities
                                      •	 Shock waves during blasting activities impacting physical environment (e.g.
                                        other buildings) and biodiversity (particularly during breeding or birthing)
                                      •	 Emission of noise from compression brakes on heavy transport vehicles
                                      •	 Rupture or blow-apart of hydraulic hoses on heavy equipment




1
    Basic identification and          •	 Damage to ecosystems through land conversion, clearing, grubbing and removal
    assessment of E&S risks             of vegetation for temporary or permanent facilities and haul roads
    and impacts, but limited
    to a few activities.           2.	 Occupational Health and Safety
                                      •	 Lack of OHS specifications in contracts
                                      •	 Lack of job-specific risk assessment and qualified OHS oversight – particularly
                                        when multiple jobsites and night shifts
                                      •	 Not appropriate OHS reporting lines – problems tend to be ignored if OHS




0
                                        officer reports directly to the jobsite manager
    No identification or
                                      •	 Excessive use of overtime
    assessment of E&S risks
    and impacts.                      •	 Absence of a robust and stringently enforced zero tolerance policy for alcohol,
                                        drugs and other intoxicating or impairing substances



      20    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
  •	 Appropriate access control to jobsites – particularly     •	 Use of migrant/temporary labor subject to working
     when there are hazardous activities underway                 conditions below minimum standard established
  •	 Presence of unskilled workers leading to an                  by law
     increased risk of accidents and exposure to hazards       •	 Restricted freedom of association due to high
  •	 Language barriers and cultural differences for               turnover and hostility of employers to organized
     migrant workers leading to an increased risk of              labor
     accidents and exposure to hazards                         •	 Low wages
  •	 Failure to equip workers with PPE including head,         •	 Gender discrimination in terms of employment
     eye, hand and foot protection, and highly visible/          (such as remuneration)
     reflective clothing                                       •	 Sexual harassment
  •	 Fatalities and/or injuries related to:
    •	 falls from heights due to improper installation       4.	 Community Health, Safety and Security
      and use of formwork/ scaffolding/ stairways /            •	 Accidents due to increased vehicle traffic from
      railings                                                    transport of construction materials and waste
    •	 falling materials                                       •	 Unsafe loading or overloading of heavy vehicles
    •	 inappropriate use and maintenance of heavy                used to transport construction materials and waste
      construction machinery and equipment                     •	 Employment of poorly trained vehicle operators
    •	 excavation cave-ins when working underground              who engage in inappropriate behavior (e.g.
      without shoring or other protective means                  speeding, over revving, excessive brake use in heavy
                                                                 vehicles) potentially leading to mechanical failures
    •	 entering confined spaces without preparation              and accidents
    •	 carrying heavy loads                                    •	 Failure to deploy traffic warning signs and
  •	 Exposure to construction materials such as cement            personnel to control movement of workers,
     dust in excess of the allowable limits defined in            equipment and goods to and within construction
     MSDSs and ICSCs                                              site
  •	 Exposure to dust particles containing dangerous           •	 Uncontrolled storm water discharge loaded with
     trace components such as asbestos – particularly            sediments (e.g., cement dust, soil from barren
     during demolition                                           surfaces) leading to downstream flooding and
  •	 Unsafe levels of noise from machinery and                   rendering water courses unusable for irrigation or
     demolition                                                  potable water
                                                               •	 Poorly constructed temporary structures, roads or
  •	 Eye injuries associated with welding, grinding and
     other construction activity                                  bridges may collapse and kill/injure members of
                                                                  community or damage neighboring properties
  •	 Lack of potable water and sanitation facilities
                                                               •	 Lack of proper fencing or boundary controls to
  •	 Lack of appropriate housing and cooking facilities           prevent site access from unauthorized personnel
     for workers leading to overcrowding, informal                and members of the community (especially
     cooking in rooms, etc.                                       children)
                                                               •	 Exposure to dust from use of machinery or
3.	 Labor
                                                                  demolition, potentially containing dangerous trace
  •	 Failure to screen contractors’ and subcontractors’           components
     possession of licenses leading to assignment of
                                                               •	 Exposure to noise or vibrations from extraction,
     unqualified workers to potentially hazardous work
                                                                  demolition, drilling, breaking or crushing
  •	 Failure to monitor contractors’ and subcontractors’
                                                               •	 Spread of HIV-AIDS and other STDs due to
     compliance with and enforcement of labor laws
                                                                 migratory labor force
  •	 Low awareness of labor laws among contractors
                                                               •	 Increase of disease vectors - mosquitoes, black flies,
     and subcontractors as minimum working
                                                                 rodents - from failure to manage liquid and solid
     conditions are typically absent from the
                                                                 wastes
     subcontracting process
                                                               •	 Inappropriate use of force by security guards



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                     ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                           21
2. Identification of Risks and Impacts


Top 3 risks and                               There are different ways to conduct a risk assessment. One
opportunities in the                          common method is to map your facility and production
Construction industry                         processes – this can highlight OHS and environmental risks.
                                              A common method for labor risks is to use a checklist of
                                              risk factors , such as employee demographics, regional
1   Construction sites and move-
    ment of materials to, and
wastes from them, overwhelm
                                              labor laws, contracting arrangements, etc.

                                              The following are key considerations for a robust risk
existing transport routes, and
can lead to downstream                        assessment system:
impacts on housing, water, land                 •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks;
use, farming and other local
operations. Moreover they                       •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;
cause dust and air emissions
from the use of heavy equip-                    •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to
ment and during demolition.                          operations;
These emissions present OHS
                                                •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such
risks as well
as hazards to the community.                         as new laws or regulations;

                                                •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers;
2   Construction is a highly dan-
    gerous industry with many
inherent OHS risks. Worldwide,
                                                •	   Include input from affected communities and other
                                                     external stakeholders;
the ILO has estimated that
there are over 100,000 fatalities               •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff
due to OHS hazards in construc-                      does not have the capability;
tion annually, and some 30 to
40 per cent of fatal occupa-                    •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the
tional injuries overall. Specific                    severity and probability of negative impacts;
risks arise from underground
                                                •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to
construction, demolition (espe-
                                                     those in your company; and
cially of industrial buildings and
those containing asbestos) and                  •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of
the use of heavy machinery.                          your business.
These risks all require special
precautions and equipment.
                                                          Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks

3  Use of migrant labor is
   widespread in the construc-
tion industry, particularly for
                                                          in the construction industry, you can first use the Risk
                                                          Identification Worksheet to identify your potential
                                                          risks and negative impacts based on your operations and
unskilled or low-skilled workers.                         operating environment. Then you can use the Process
Many are young inexperienced                              Mapping or the Physical Mapping tools to identify in
workers. Temporary work
                                                          more detail where problems are likely to arise within your
and unfair contracting leave
                                                          production process.
migrant workers
vulnerable to violations of                               Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
freedom of association, forced                            single environmental and social impact that your company
labor, harassment, unlawful                               could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment
deduction of wages, unpaid                                Form to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.
overtime and other labor viola-
tions.
                                              For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
                                              and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at
                                              www.ifc.org/sustainability.

            22     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
 ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                              5
Management Programs are centered on Action                      Verified progress against
                                                                objectives and targets;
                                                                significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were               continual improvement
                                                                using annual improvement
                                                                plans.
identified.


                                                                                              4
                                                                Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                    activities to proactively
                                                                manage E&S risks and
                                                                impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                pany-wide objectives and
                                                                targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the              and update.




                                                                                              3
lack of a system for employees to express their                 Actions/activities in place
                                                                to manage E&S risks and
                                                                impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                       mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                      compensate. Proactive
                                                                approach to managing
                                                                issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                              2
                                                                Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of solid waste and you have                    responsibilities to address
                                                                and mitigate E&S risks
identified this as a risk factor because of the high            and impacts across all key
                                                                activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                tive.
percentage of construction waste produced in
your worksite, you may take action by sending

                                                                                              1
                                                                A few informal programs
                                                                or activities to mitigate
demolition waste to a recycling facility to re-use              E&S impacts. No systems
                                                                awareness or repeatable
materials such as concrete, tyres, rigid plastic,               processes.


masonry and lumber and avoid sending them to


                                                                                              0
the landfill.                                                   No process for mitigating
                                                                E&S risks and impacts.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014   ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	               23
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                    First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                    example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                    water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                    differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                    owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain construc-
                                               tion process that exposes workers to toxic chemicals and pollutes the
                                               local river system. You might design your product mix to avoid this
              Prioritizing Your Actions        process or find alternate methods.
                      AVOID                       In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                        ▼                         be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                     MINIMIZE                     cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, sup-
                        ▼                         pose that you are located in an area where women are traditionally
                                                  given lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace
                 COMPENSATE/OFFSET
                                                  they are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. The
                                                  local cultural context and the need to hire both men and women is
                                                  unavoidable. It is important to pay attention to your recruitment,
                                        hiring and training procedures, to make sure that women are hired on equi-
                                        table terms and given equal access to training and promotion opportunities.
                                        You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure that rules for
                                        recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow. Additionally,
                                        you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of and follows
                                        the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.


            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in the
            food and beverage industry. Action Plans can be scaled to the
            size of your company and the nature of the risks you face.


            24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: ARGENTINA


City Builders
RISK: Construction waste disposal
City Builders is a small company owned by a local business carrying out many demolition and con-
struction jobs in Mendoza city. Currently the company is working on a contract in the heart of the
city that involves demolition of an old office complex to build a multi-story housing complex. The
local residents have complained frequently that the company has littered the entire area with con-
struction debris potentially contaminated with asbestos and other hazardous materials. Demolition
was started without any effort to rid the building of rodents and other vermin first. Unmanaged
piles of construction rubble have accumulated resulting in harborage for rodents, extensive dust,
presence of scavengers living in the vicinity, an unpleasant sight affecting property values and land
contamination in the surrounding area from windborne dust. Putrescible wastes from the construc-
tion crew are adding significantly to rodent problems in the area.

 I M PAC T
  •	 Improper disposal of construction wastes causing land contamination and impacting local
    community

 AVO I D
  •	 Establish and implement a construction waste management plan for all construction sites
  •	 Establish and implement procedures for reuse, recycle, and safe disposal of construction
    waste to a landfill site licensed to take such wastes
  •	 Train and periodically retrain all workers on proper demolition behavior and handling and
    disposal of construction and putrescible wastes
  •	 Locate and remove hazardous facilities such as underground storage tanks prior to com-
    mencement of demolition
  •	 Implement rodent elimination program prior to commencement of demolition
  •	 Conduct asbestos survey and if necessary prepare and implement an asbestos remediation
    plan prior to demolition
  •	 Conduct air monitoring for asbestos removal activity and other demolition exercises
  •	 Implement needed measures to prevent fugitive dust migration offsite
  •	 Deploy containers for collection and safe disposal of solid waste from the site
  •	 Deploy pest (rodent proof) containers for collection and safe disposal of putrescible waste
    from the site
  •	 Remove building demolition rubble and recyclable materials at least daily
  •	 Employ water mist to reduce production and offsite transport of dust and particulate from
    building demolition. Have this effluent drain to suitable collection points or to municipal
    sewers after been pre-treated to acceptable levels.
  •	 Transport dust generating wastes in covered vehicles. Periodically monitor effectiveness of
    dust covers during transport.

 MINIMIZE
  •	 Develop and deploy a grievance mechanism for local area residents to facilitate understand-
    ing of impacts and issues in a timely manner

 OFFSET
  •	 Remove accumulated waste materials
  •	 Immediately implement a rodent removal/destruction program
  •	 Compensate local residents negatively affected by uncontrolled activities
  •	 Provide physical and other health-related examinations for individuals claiming physical harm
    from demolition activity

Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                 25
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: SUDAN


           Sudan Development Company
           RISK: Surface run-off from construction site
            Sudan Development Company started building a large agro-industrial complex about six
            months ago in South Sudan. The region has a number of diverse wetlands that support a wide
            range of plants and animals. Recently, the project has been strongly contested by the local envi-
            ronmental NGOs citing the problem of surface run-off from the project site. A recent investiga-
            tive report from a journalist states that this run-off has contributed to significant discharges of
            sediment that have degraded water quality. The wetlands are not only a conservation area but
            parts of it support inland fisheries which are exploited for sustenance as well as on a commer-
            cial basis. The damage has severely affected the livelihood of the local populations.

              I M PAC T

                 •	 Adverse impact on the wetlands water quality
                 •	 Adverse impact on local fisheries and livelihood of local communities

              AVO I D

                 •	 Obtain and review the environmental impact assessment and management plan; adhere
                   to the mitigation measures written into the documents, if any
                 •	 Schedule works to avoid expected high rainfall
                 •	 Mark the boundaries of the construction site; ensure soil disturbance occurs only within
                   marked boundaries
                 •	 Preserve existing vegetation cover as much as possible
                 •	 Clear land in stages so as to avoid large scale barren areas
                 •	 Plan ahead and limit the area of exposed soil at any one time

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Install silt fences downhill from bare soil to catch all runoff
                 •	 Divert clean storm-water away from areas where soil is to be exposed by constructing
                   intercepting drains/diversion berms
                 •	 Construct temporary sedimentation ponds for storm water; direct drainage into the sedi-
                   mentation ponds
                 •	 Establish an adequate inspection, maintenance and cleaning program for sediment runoff
                   control structures
                 •	 Ensure that contingency plans are in place for unusual storm event
                 •	 As soon as feasible, ensure seeding and re-establishment of vegetation on areas that
                   were cleared or degraded prior to and during construction; provide temporary protection
                   with mulch and matting until vegetative cover including grass is reestablished

              OFFSET

                 •	 Reconstruct overwhelmed, eroded or otherwise impacted surface facilities including
                   drainage channels, sediment basins
                 •	 Rehabilitate affected wetlands
                 •	 Replant affected plant species
                 •	 Ensure adequate replenishment and flow of uncontaminated water to wetlands
                 •	 Provide alternative source of livelihood to the affected communities




            26     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
CASE STUDY: CHAD                                                              3. Management Programs




Sudan Development Company
RISK: Oil and chemical spills
Energy Infrastructure Company is one of the largest infrastructure companies in the country
currently engaged with the construction of an underground oil pipeline network in Chad’s
southwestern region. The project ownership is comprised of a consortium of two-international
oil companies. Since the beginning of the project, the company has undergone several accidental
releases of petroleum and other toxic chemicals at its construction sites. One of the recent acci-
dents involved spillage of significant quantities of liquid fuel from a storage tank. The oil compa-
nies are concerned that even small releases may endanger public health and contaminate water
and soil in the region causing great damage to the companies’ reputation. The oil companies have
threatened to terminate the contract with Energy Infrastructure if the construction company does
not improve its environmental performance.

I M PAC T
 •	 Contamination of water and soil
 •	 Adverse impact on public health

AVO I D
 •	 Carry out hazard and operability (HazOps) studies for storage and dispatching petroleum prod-
   ucts and hazardous materials; fully implement remedial measures to prevent unplanned events
 •	 Establish and implement procedures for safe handling of fuel and hazardous chemicals at site
   based upon the results of periodic HazOps
 •	 Implement HazOps recommendations for storage units to prevent accidents from moving
   equipment such as vehicles or fork-lifts
 •	 Provide secondary containment of a suitable volume for all liquid materials storage
 •	 Deploy automatic cut-offs for all fuel dispensers
 •	 Render all storage units highly resistant to vandals

M I N I M IZE
 •	 Actively manage materials procurement and inventories to receive infrequently used
   chemicals just prior to use; reduce quantities of chemicals and fuel stored on-site to minimum
   practicable levels
 •	 Assemble, train, equip and deploy a spill response team
 •	 Establish on-call contracts with hazardous materials and waste haulers and emergency
   responders for containment, removal and disposal of spilled material
 •	 Install bunds to prevent spilled hydrocarbons and other materials escaping and causing
   environmental damage
 •	 Design the height of bunds (secondary containment) walls considering essential construction
   materials, vehicular access and storm water management to minimize the impact of materials’
   spills

O FF S E T
 •	 Ensure environmental reclamation and ecological restoration is carried out for all
   environmental spills
 •	 Collect soil and ground water samples from material spill areas to ensure that complete
   cleanup and remediation has been carried out
 •	 Seek spill site cleanup confirmation from regulatory agencies or prime contractor
   environmental staff
 •	 Remediate affected properties and facilities to fully address complaints arising out of
   unplanned events and releases

Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	              27
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: MONGOLIA


           City Roads Company
           RISK: Exposure to noise and vibrations due to heavy
           construction machinery
            City Roads Company is a local infrastructure development company currently working on a
            highway project in Dornod province, Mongolia. The road construction work involves extensive
            land disturbance including removing vegetation and reshaping the topography using heavy
            equipment. To meet the project timeline, the company has recently started working round the
            clock.

            The local community is demanding they stop the night shift operation as it is causing a lot of
            disturbance due to extremely high noise. They have also complained that the noise is disruptive
            during the day to the community school and hospital.

              I M PAC T

                 •	 Adverse health effects on local community

              AVO I D

                 •	 Fit and maintain appropriate mufflers on earth-moving and other vehicles on the site
                 •	 Enclose noisy equipment at fixed facilities (e.g. electric power generators at crushing
                   facilities)
                 •	 Limit all crushing, drilling and material transfer to daylight hours; construction work
                   during night shift should be limited to grading, compaction and similar low noise
                   operations

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Prohibit the use of compression brakes close to sensitive facilities such as schools and
                   hospitals and during evening hours; post warning signs “no engine breaks” around
                   sensitive facilities
                 •	 Schedule deliveries to the site so that disruption to local amenities and traffic is minimized
                 •	 Provide appropriate training to workers for proper operation of vehicles and construction
                   equipment and minimize unnecessary idling
                 •	 Develop and implement a preventive maintenance schedule for all heavy construction
                   equipment and machinery to minimize noise and vibrations
                 •	 Advise local residents when unavoidable out-of-hours work will occur

              OFFSET

                 •	 Assist community financially, to adopt noise insulation measures (.e.g. provision of sound
                   insulation, erection of noise barriers, wall installation, etc.)




            28      Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: PHILIPPINES


Country Builders Pvt. Ltd.
RISK: Exposure to dust and air emissions from
drilling/crushing
Country Builders Pvt. Ltd. is one of the largest private construction companies engaged in con-
struction projects throughout the Philippines. The company boasts being one of the most special-
ized in the country, employing over 500 employees and having access to the most sophisticated
heavy construction machinery. The company is well known for its quality programs, customer
loyalty and best labor practices in the sector. However, the company was recently highlighted in
the national news for its growing conflict with the local communities where it is involved with
the construction of a big upcoming industrial complex. The project site is located close to a village
and the villagers have complained on several occasions of an increase in air pollution and dust
from the drilling, breaking and crushing processes and increased vehicular movement. Some vil-
lagers have developed persistent coughs and complained of breathing problems.

  I M PAC T

   •	 Respiratory illnesses among local villagers

  AVO I D

   •	 Obtain and review the environmental impact assessment and management plan; adhere
     to dust control mitigation measures written into the documents, if any
   •	 Identify and prevent all “non-necessary” movement of equipment and construction
     machinery
   •	 Reduce need for multiple transfer points (e.g. processing plants should be located in
     quarry areas)
   •	 Explore opportunities for “pre-fab” material and construction aggregates

  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Suspend blasting or earthworks on windy days
   •	 Spray water on temporary/haul roads or apply surface treatment (e.g. calcium chloride
     and other binding agents)
   •	 Impose speed limits for trucks
   •	 Prohibit off-road driving outside designated areas unless specifically authorized
   •	 Cover loads on all construction vehicles
   •	 Use enclosed conveyors and belt transport instead of hauling material by trucks
   •	 Spray water on stockpiles
   •	 Spray water mist on crushing operations and vibrating screens
   •	 Develop and implement maintenance schedule for all heavy construction equipment and
     machinery to minimize noise and air emissions

  O FF S E T

   •	 Engage with affected communities to identify areas affected by high particulate
     deposition and initiate feasible cleaning and removal activities
   •	 Support community health clinics to diagnose and treat local people affected by upper
     respiratory illnesses attributable to exposure to dust and air emissions from the
     construction site




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	               29
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: UGANDA

           National Construction
           RISK: Use of scaffolds; Absence of health and
           safety committees
            National Construction is a small construction company presently working on two multi-story
            buildings around Kampala district. The construction sector in Uganda is undergoing fast growth.
            The company has recently been awarded a new contract and they want to finish existing projects
            soon so that the new project can be started on time. The management has brought in new labor-
            ers and has decided to add one more shift to the existing operations. Recently the construction
            manager was approached by workers who complained about the growing number of accidents
            and injuries at the sites. In the last week, two workers were severely injured in separate instances
            when they fell from supported scaffolds. There have also been several cases of falling objects
            from scaffolds, which were not reported as they did not result in any major injury. Uganda’s Oc-
            cupational Safety and Health Act requires that companies employing more than 20 people should
            have health and safety committees that report on identified risks. None of the construction sites
            operated by this company has these committees.


             I M PAC T

              •	 Injuries/fatalities due to falling from heights and falling objects
              •	 Incident reoccurrences due to the lack of identification of risks by health and safety com-
                 mittees and implementation of corrective actions

             AVO I D

              •	 Develop occupational health and safety policy regarding the installation and use of scaf-
                 folding; communicate policy to managers, supervisors and workers
              •	 Hire a specialized company to install scaffolding, if existent in the local market
              •	 Have a qualified professional check that scaffolding has been set up correctly and in compli-
                 ance with OSHA or other international standards; ensure instructions for scaffolding instal-
                 lation are available at the workplace
              •	 Regularly train workers on scaffolding installation practices and procedures:
                 •	 Install guardrails during erection of scaffolding; guardrails should remain in place until
                    that section of the scaffolding is dismantled
                 •	 Install full deck of planks at each floor
                 •	 Install an appropriate access system (i.e. stairway or ladder progressively installed as scaf-
                    folding is erected)
                 •	 Inform employees that climbing the scaffold framework is not acceptable
                 •	 Barricade areas below if there is a chance of items falling from scaffolding
                 •	 Deploy canopies or safety nets to contain falling objects
                 •	 Honor clearance distances required between power lines and scaffolding; de-energize
                    the lines if mandatory clearances cannot be met




            30    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                             3. Management Programs




 M I N I M IZE

  •	 Establish and implement systems (and documentation) for regular inspection of scaffold-
    ing; inspection must be performed by a competent worker
  •	 Regularly train workers on safe scaffolding use procedures and practices:
     •	 Do not carry materials when climbing scaffolding; use a hoist or rope to move materials
        to upper levels
     •	 Do not accumulate tools, materials or debris on the platform
     •	 Do not overload the scaffolding with too many people or materials in any one area
     •	 Do not work on scaffolding during storms or high winds
     •	 Use appropriate PPE (hard hats and steel-toed footwear) when working on scaffolds or
        around them
     •	 Use personal fall protection equipment (safety harness) when working over a void or
        leaning out from the scaffold without the protection of a guardrail
  •	 Ensure that safety signs in local language are posted and understood by the workers
  •	 Assign supervisor to record all OHS incidents
  •	 Assemble joint management-worker health and safety committee to investigate and
    analyze incidents, propose corrective actions and confirm that appropriate action to
    prevent reoccurrence has been taken

 O FF S E T

  •	 Provide medical assistance for cases of workplace related injury
  •	 Compensate injured workers for wages lost
  •	 Compensate for treatment and recovery, loss ability to work, and loss of life




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	              31
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: MALAYSIA


       Residential Projects Company
       RISK: Use of earth-moving/heavy equipment
        Residential Projects Company is a newly established company with its headquarters in Kuala Lumpur.
        Currently it is involved with the construction of 300 housing units in Sarawak province. The project
        involves construction of housing, infrastructure and landscaping in the area. Most of the building
        crew is new and the company is still in the process of developing systems, procedures and opera-
        tional guidelines. There have been a few instances of minor injuries and workers’ complaints in the
        past but the management has yet to establish a formal occupational health and safety management
        system. One of the accident cases this week involved a worker being critically injured at the worksite.
        This happened when a dump truck backed over him. The incident investigation report revealed that
        the truck was backing up without guidance from the traffic controller and the victim had his vision
        obstructed by a hooded rain jacket. The noise level at the site was high and the victim was talking on
        his cellular phone.

          I M PAC T

           •	 Injuries/Fatalities due to being struck by heavy equipment

          AVO I D

           •	 Develop occupational health and safety policy regarding the use of heavy equipment; com-
             municate policy to managers, supervisors and workers
           •	 Plan a drive-through site to eliminate the need for vehicles to back up
           •	 Establish designated pedestrian routes through worksites and use signs to indicate them
           •	 Prevent unauthorized workers or bystanders from entering a danger zone; when appropri-
             ate, install barricades and signs around the danger zone

          M I N I M IZE

           •	 Permit only qualified and authorized personnel to operate heavy equipment
           •	 Ensure that mobile equipment backup alarms are audible above ambient noise levels
           •	 Regularly train workers on procedures and practices for safe work around heavy equipment:
             •	 Ban cellular phones and headphones unless special permission is granted for work pur-
                poses
             •	 Mobile equipment operators must be directed by a worker (i.e. spotter, traffic controller)
                with an unobstructed view of the area that the vehicle is reversing into
             •	 Spotters and drivers must agree on hand signals before backing up
             •	 Spotters must always maintain visual contact with the driver while the vehicle is backing
             •	 Drivers must stop reversing immediately if they lose sight of the spotter
             •	 Spotters must not perform additional duties while they are acting as spotters
             •	 Workers must wear high-visibility clothing, especially during night operations
             •	 All employees shall be familiarized with the worksite and all vehicle operations; make sure
                workers are aware of blind areas
           •	 Ensure that safety signs in local language are installed and are understood by workers

          O FF S E T

           •	 Provide medical assistance for cases of workplace related injury
           •	 Compensate injured workers for wages lost
           •	 Compensate for loss of life or loss ability to work

            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: VENEZUELA


Country Builders
RISK: Use of crane suspended personnel platforms
Country Builders is a leading developer in Venezuela with one of its major project sites in the
Monagas province. The project involves architectural, civil & infrastructure works. Followed by
a major accident at the construction site last week, the company is seeking to employ two full
time safety managers to oversee occupational health and safety issues. The accident happened
when four workers were being lowered on a work platform suspended by a crane into a steel
caisson. During the process, the work platform fell into the bottom of the excavated area, and the
workers were pinned by the 350 pound load block (hook and cable connection). Two workers are
in critical condition while the other two sustained major leg injuries. During investigation it was
found that the dead end of the load line was not adequately secured to the hoist drum and the
load line slipped off the drum.

 I M PAC T

  •	 Injuries/Fatalities due to unsafe crane operations

 AVO I D

  •	 Develop occupational health and safety policy regarding the use of cranes; communicate
    policy to managers, supervisor and workers
  •	 Use conventional means of access (e.g. scaffolds and ladders) if feasible; use work platforms
    suspended by crane only when conventional means present greater hazards
  •	 Ensure that only skilled and trained employees are assigned the operation and maintenance
    of cranes
  •	 Regularly inspect all critical components of the crane and emergency stop button functions
  •	 Ensure that wire ropes comply with the required minimum safety factor for the maximum
    intended load
  •	 Use only crane-suspended work platforms in full compliance with OSHA or other
    international requirements

 M I N I M IZE

  •	 Ensure the platform is not loaded in excess of its rated load capacity
  •	 Perform a trial lift with the unoccupied work platform throughout the entire range of
    travel immediately before workers enter the platform; the platform must be loaded at
    least to its anticipated lift weight; commission inspections and repairs by qualified,
    competent workers if the lift trial exposed any defects
  •	 Hold a meeting with all employees involved in personnel hoisting operations to review
    OSHA standards on crane suspended personnel platforms; this meeting must be held
    before the trial lift and must be repeated for any employees newly assigned to the
    operation
  •	 Ensure that safety signs in local language are posted and understood by the workers

 O FF S E T

  •	 Provide medical assistance for cases of workplace related injury
  •	 Compensate injured workers for wages lost
  •	 Compensate for treatment and recovery, lost ability to work, and loss of life




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                 33
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: CHILE


            Best Commercial Builders Inc.
            RISK: Lack of appropriate sanitary facilities
            Best Commercial Builders is one of the leading builders of residential properties in Chile. Recently,
            the company has started working on a new housing project in Tocopilla Province. The country has
            a strong skilled labor shortage in the construction sector. Therefore, like many other construc-
            tion companies, Best Commercial is reaching out to women and training them for various trades;
            these positions were once reserved for men. Approximately 7% of the construction workers at
            this site are female. During one of the safety meetings, the women employees have complained
            that access to sanitary facilities is a major problem at this site. Temporary facilities provided by
            the company are unisex, often without privacy, and generally not very well maintained. Unclean
            facilities can result in disease as well as urinary tract infections. Due to the lack of facilities, the
            women workers avoid drinking water on the job, risking heat stress and other health problems.

              I M PAC T

                 •	 Gender discrimination and potential health and safety impacts for female employees due
                   to unclean sanitary facilities

              AVO I D

                 •	 Develop occupational health and safety policy regarding the provision of clean drink-
                   ing water and clean sanitary facilities; communicate policy to managers, supervisors and
                   workers
                 •	 Provide adequate number of sanitary facilities for male and female workers (e.g. one
                   separate toilet for each 20 male employees and each 10 female employees) and ensure
                   privacy (e.g. sanitary facility can be locked from the inside)
                 •	 Hire cleaning staff and maintain a cleaning schedule for sanitary facilities at all construc-
                   tion sites
                 •	 Provide/maintain adequate supplies of potable water
                 •	 Arrange for adequate number of clean temporary/portable facilities separated for male
                   and female workers in all short term construction sites

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Establish employee grievance mechanism for reporting concerns related to drinking water
                   and sanitary facilities
                 •	 Communicate to workers how to file complaints
                 •	 Task OSH committee with the responsibility to identify and address workers’ concerns on
                   access to drinking water and sanitary facilities at site; the committee must include female
                   employees and members of management

              OFFSET

                 •	 Introduce health check-up/treatment for female workers who may have been infected in
                   the past due to inadequate sanitary facilities
                 •	 Compensate for wages lost during ill-health treatment




            34     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: BRASIL


B&B Construction
RISK: Male dominated environments
B&B Construction is a small construction company in Sao Paulo that was started 5 years ago by two
brothers who worked earlier with a large construction company. Since its inception B&B has been
providing labor and other construction services as a contractor to various large companies. B&B’s
construction sites are overwhelmingly male dominated, and on many jobsites women construction
workers have complained about sexual harassment with three such cases directed against the con-
struction supervisor at one of its sites. The owner for this site is a large multinational company and
they have well established labor codes of conduct that are contractually binding on all their suppliers
and contractors. Based on the reported complaints, the site owner has formed a committee which
is investigating the reported sexual harassment cases. During the interviews with the B&B female
employees, many other workers reported that they are reluctant to report the harassment problems
lest they be tagged as complainers or whiners. Based on its investigation, the committee is recom-
mending terminating the contract with B&B construction as it has failed to provide a harassment
free and safe work environment for its female employees.

 I M PAC T

  •	 Sexual harassment of female employees

 AVO I D

  •	 Develop clear policies against sexual harassment conforming to national laws and requirements
    of key clients; communicate policies to managers, supervisors and workers
  •	 Modify labor contracts to state that B&B Construction projects are staffed by men and women,
    and that B&B has a zero tolerance policy toward any form (verbal or physical) of sexual harassment
  •	 Ensure that new employee orientation includes briefing on this issue and emphasizes that this
    behavior constitutes grounds for immediate dismissal

 M I N I M IZE

  •	 Periodically conduct mandatory training on sexual harassment policies and gender sensitivity
    issues for all managers, supervisors and workers
  •	 Train managers, supervisors and workers on how to recognize and prevent sexual harassment
  •	 Establish and communicate disciplinary procedures against sexual harassment cases
  •	 Inform workers on how to respond to incidents of sexual harassment
  •	 Implement a risk-free communication channel for reporting – openly or anonymously - sexual
    harassment cases
  •	 Establish an anti-sexual harassment committee to detect, report and assist in the redress of all
    sexual harassment cases. The sexual harassment committee must include 50 percent female
    members and members of top management
  •	 Investigate all sexual harassment cases quickly and thoroughly; maintain accurate records of
    the investigations, findings, and remedial measures undertaken
  •	 Regularly communicate to employees on the gender related complaints and the status of cor-
    rective and preventive actions initiated by the company

 O FF S E T

  •	 Take immediate action when sexual harassment is discovered, suspected or reported to
    protect affected employee
  •	 Make sure employees who present charges do not face retaliation
  •	 Enforce zero tolerance policy; dismiss employees found to have engaged in sexual harassment


Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                35
3. Management Programs                 CASE STUDY: INDIA

        ABC Property Ltd.
        RISK: Use of labor intermediaries to recruit
        seasonal migrants
        ABC properties Ltd. was recently exposed by the local media for various labor law violations in
        Andhra Pradesh in India. The story became public when some of the migrant workers from Bihar
        (another province) managed to escape from the work site and contact a local NGO working on social
        and labor issues in the region. The NGO produced the frightened workers before the media and re-
        gional labor inspector for their testimony. The workers narrated that they were paid Rs. 50 per week
        as wages, as against the promised Rs. 157 per day. The workers were provided accommodation at a
        charge and were not allowed to go out without permission. The NGO has hired a prominent lawyer
        to represent the workers who explained that the company has violated several national regulations
        and international labor codes. Construction workers in India are guaranteed certain forms of protec-
        tion and rights which include the right to minimum wages, overtime payments, rest days, specific
        allowances in the case of migrant workers, housing and other social security benefits. ABC relies on
        labor intermediaries to recruit and supply seasonal migrants from rural areas. However, as employers,
        construction companies are legally responsible for providing protection to workers.

          I M PAC T

           •	 Forced labor due to indebtedness owed to labor intermediaries
           •	 Non-payment of minimum wage
           •	 Curtailing freedom of movement

          AVO I D

           •	 Develop policies on remuneration, working conditions and workers’ accommodation for
             migrant workers conforming to national labor laws
           •	 Communicate policies to labor intermediaries and make sure they understand
           •	 Make policies contractually binding under the service agreement with labor intermediaries
           •	 Appoint a team of company’s supervisors to physically observe payment of wages to migrant
             workers by labor intermediaries and inspect workers’ accommodations
           •	 In India, register workers with the State Welfare Board, that is the primary guarantor of
             social security, working conditions and overtime pay for construction workers

          MINIMIZE

           •	 Ensure that workers are informed (in all applicable languages) on their rights including
             wages, benefits and deductions
           •	 Ensure all workers receive contracts and periodic clear records of pay calculations in their
             native language
           •	 Implement a risk-free communication channel to receive workers’ complaints – openly or
             anonymously – on labor rights violations including payment of wages
           •	 Set up periodic formal meetings between workers and company managers to document
             workers’ concerns; distribute minutes/results of meetings and review issues raised during
             management meetings

          OFFSET

           •	 Reimburse workers for illegal deductions made by labor intermediaries
           •	 Retroactively pay workers whose compensation did not meet legal minimum wage (or
             agreed contract value if higher than legal minimum)
           •	 Establish ongoing dialogue with local labor NGOs, trade unions and other interested parties
             to review labor risks and company’s initiatives in addressing those risks

            36    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: NIGERIA

International Infrastructure Company
RISK: Use of contractors and subcontractors
International Infrastructure Company is a large infrastructure development corporation working in various
African countries. Recently, the company acquired a large government contract in Lagos that requires
building large housing complexes, sports complexes and related infrastructure. The project schedule
requires completion in six months’ time and the company has engaged several contractors and sub-con-
tractors to meet the project timeline. While working on a labor research project, a team of international
researchers found the working conditions at one contractor’s site shocking: injuries are common (from
falling debris, structural collapse and machine-related) and minimum wage is not being paid. Overtime
pay is nonexistent. The researchers have tried to help the workers by contacting the local chapter of the
largest trade union. However, when the workers tried to organize a meeting with the union representa-
tives in the canteen, management forbade it. Since then, workers have been threatened that they will lose
their jobs if they do not “keep their heads down and work”. One worker who spoke up has been fired.

 I M PAC T

  •	 Labor legal non-compliances at the contractor and subcontractor level

 AVO I D

  •	 Develop and disseminate – among company’s procuring officers and potential tenderers –
    company’s policy on OHS and workers’ rights including freedom of association conforming with
    national labor laws and international conventions; extend policy to workers of contractors and
    subcontractors in company’s construction sites
  •	 Include labor and OHS criteria for the prequalification of contractors
  •	 Require tenders to itemize labor costs to ensure sufficient allocation of funds (i.e. wages and ben-
    efits, accommodation, sanitary facilities, canteen, drinking water, transport, workers’ insurance, etc.)
  •	 Require tenders to itemize OHS costs (i.e. PPE, training, etc.) and to present OHS costs in a
    separate, standalone proposal accompanying the financial/technical proposal
  •	 Include labor and OHS policies in labor contract agreements with contractors
  •	 Appoint a qualified, experienced contractor to develop an OHS action plan with implementing
    procedures and clear allocation of responsibilities, mandatory training course content, definition
    of appropriate PPE, etc.

 M I N I M IZE

  •	 Make sure that all workers are informed on their rights including wages and benefits and on their
    fundamental right to associate freely under the law
  •	 Appoint a team of supervisors to physically observe payment of wages and inspect welfare facili-
    ties and OHS practices in company’s construction sites
  •	 Develop OHS training tools on high risk activities (i.e. falls from heights; falling objects; electrocu-
    tion; caught-in by machinery); make periodic training mandatory for all workers and supervisors
  •	 Prohibit site entry to workers without documented OHS training and appropriate PPE
  •	 Develop pictorial posters and booklets on OHS and workers’ rights; post them in all construction
    sites and distribute to all workers
  •	 Request contractors to identify subcontractors with color coded hard hats; make zone managers
    responsible for identifying at-risk behavior from subcontractors
  •	 Set up a hotline to receive workers’ complaints – openly or anonymously – via voice or SMS; hotline
    must be accessible to workers of contractors and subcontractors

 O FF S E T

  •	 Retroactively compensate workers for lost earnings at legal minimum wage and overtime premium
  •	 Compensate for injuries and recuperation, loss of ability to work, and loss of life
  •	 Require contractor to re-instate fired worker

  Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                 37
3. Management Programs




                                     WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                                     Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                                     process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and ad-
                                     just the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve
                                     the right internal people and departments.

                                     As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                                     think about:

                                        •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                                        •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                                        •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                                             results (targets)
                                        •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                                        •	   Who – responsible people



                                        Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.

                                     The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the industry. These
                                     are just some of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to your
                                     situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet your company’s specific situa-
                                     tion. As you tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and managers,
                                     experts and external stakeholders, including your suppliers and community.
                                     They can offer insight into important issues and effective actions. They can also
                                     help you obtain commitment for plans you are trying to implement, and provide
                                     candid feedback about how well the plans are working. This will be critical to
                                     the continual improvement of your systems.



                                     For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                                     community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS
                                     Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




            38    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     3. Management Programs




                            WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                            Operational control procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers,
                            supervisors and managers. They allow for everyone to have a common under-
                            standing of how to behave. They enable the rules to be followed even when
                            there is staff turnover. Clear, detailed procedures help to embed your social
                            and environmental policies into your daily operations.

                            It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your
                            procedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists,
                            flowcharts, or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary
                            depending on the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for
                            managers and supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with
                            less literate or immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as short and simple as
                            possible.


                              Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure and the
                              Sample Procedure Flowchart to get started.

                            Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is
                            the ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new
                            procedure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the
                            skills and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through
                            routine communication and effective training. You will learn more about this
                            in the next chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                            Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version
                            of each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly
                            marked as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old
                            procedure.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                    39
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                   A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S       trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management          that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                   ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                   IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                   First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                   commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.        beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an           sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte- grated system. New       the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S        do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.           long-term commitment by your company.

                                   Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                   responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company      anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-         duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles       involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily     A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is       with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                   sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                   contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is       In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-      have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                   social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-       tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided    the labor aspects, production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                 and the reduction of waste, procurement manages the qualifications and
                                   performance of suppliers and contractors, and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with         equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-         tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles        The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-    impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    ing to get defined. No
    systems awareness or
    repeatable processes.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    40    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                            be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all levels
                            of the company, including supervisors and workers, who are key frontline
                            identifiers of problems.

                            As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                            and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                            departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                            The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                            exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                            consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                            Once the ESMS Team is selected, they need to select a team leader. This is an
                            important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader needs to set the
                            tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initiatives in a compa-
                            ny face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is no exception.
                            The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable hurdles, and
                            should have direct access to senior management.



                              Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate
                              for Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit and
                              Case Studies for a list and sequencing of activities to develop and
                              implement an ESMS.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                    41
                                                          EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                        Quality
                                                                  Human
When selecting a                                                 resources
                                                                                        control


team leader, look                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                              health & safety
for someone who                                Production


has the following                                                           Select a
                                                                          team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                       Procurement/
                                                          Worker
                                                                                           Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                   Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.            Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                   dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                   This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                   There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                   1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                      •	 What is it?
                                      •	 What are its goals?
                                      •	 What do I need to do?

                                   2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                       the company.
                                      •	 How does this help our company?
                                      •	 How does it help my department?
                                      •	 What will change?
                                      •	 What is in it for me?

                                   3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                      their roles.
                                      •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                      •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                      •	 How do I do that?
                                      •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        42   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                           Your ESMS Team needs detailed training so they
     Effective Communication and Training
                                                           can develop the necessary knowledge and skills.
                                                           They will need to understand the basics of the
     Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                           Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle and know the nine
     munication or training module is to build
                                                           elements of an ESMS. This Handbook provides
     awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                           the information they will need, but additional
     people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                           help may be necessary. In addition to the detailed
     implement.
                                                           training of the team, everyone will need to receive
                                                           awareness training so there is a shared understand-
                                                           ing of the goals of the ESMS.

                                The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                                general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                                learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                                You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                                tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                                Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                                way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                                and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                                people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                                responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                  Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                  tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                     CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N



    Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                         43
                                    ELEMENT 5


                                   Emergency Preparedness
                                   and Response
                                   Even when you have considered all the risks and
    Regular engagement with        put the appropriate management programs in


5
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and         place, accidents and emergency situations can
    offsite emergency plan.
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neigh-
                                   happen.
    boring companies.

    Senior management              Your business is a dynamic operation, and many


4
    and all units and shifts,
    including contract and         things change from day to day – people go in and
    temporary workers, par-
    ticipate in emergency risk     out of your workforce, materials and suppliers
    assessment, preparedness
    planning and mock drills.
    Continual improvement.
                                   enter and exit your supply chain, facilities and

    All onsite and off-site
                                   equipment are added to and removed from


3
    emergency issues have
    been identified and an         your production line. A management system
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan     will help to maintain continuity and consistency
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local     throughout these changes. However, there may
    industry best practices.
                                   be momentary lapses or gaps in the system (e.g.
    The emergency prepared-



2
    ness plan is in place, but     someone not properly trained, someone not
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-
    tion. Some trainings are
                                   following the procedures, a machine breakdown),
    provided to the workers
    on emergency require-          or an external force (e.g. natural disaster) that can
    ments.
                                   lead to an accident or emergency situation at your


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,     facility. While it is not always possible to prevent
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.      such situations, you can be prepared to respond
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.           effectively to prevent and mitigate any harm to



0
    Very limited emergency         your workers, community and the environment.
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No
    formal plan in place.


      44   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                             5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                            The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                            help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                               •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                 communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                 your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                 mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community.
                               •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                 explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                 everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs to do.
                               •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                 response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                 people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                 that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                 during accidents and emergencies.
                               •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                 it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                 working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                               •	 Communicate so that everyone in your company understands the importance
                                 of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                 monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                 who may be affected.
                               •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an overview
                                 of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what
                                 to do – ask for and obtain input on what needs to be addressed and what can
                                 be improved. Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will
                                 need to exercise individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations.
                                 This is more likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system
                                 beforehand.
                               •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                 you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                               •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to test how well the system is working and
                                 to re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                 continually improve your system.
                               •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                 Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                 the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                 response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability
                                 and effectiveness.




                                        Look at the Sample Emergency Preparedness and
                                        Response Procedures for examples.



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                                 45
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                      An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                      should include:
                                         •	   identification of potential emergencies based on hazard
                                              assessment;

                                         •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency situa-
                                              tions;

                                         •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                         •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution;

                                         •	   procedures for decontamination;

                                         •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation, including a desig-
                                              nated meeting place outside the facility;

                                         •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                                         •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for employees
                                              responsible for responding to the emergency (fire-fight-
                                              ing equipment, spill response equipment, personal protec-
                                              tion equipment for the emergency response teams, first
                                              aid kits and stations);

                                         •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment and
                                              facilities;

                                         •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and maintenance
                                              of emergency equipment;

                                         •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and meeting
                                              points;

                                         •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local emer-
                                              gency response services (fire fighters);

                                         •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                         •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols, includ-
                                              ing with affected communities when necessary, and pro-
                                              cedures for interaction with the government authorities;

                                         •	   procedures for periodic review and update of emergency
                                              response plans.




             46    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the
Construction Industry

Common Hazards/             Potential Causes
Emergency
Situations in the
Construction
Industry
 Accidents arising          •	 Using cracked, broken and greased ladders and scaffolding materials
 from use of plat-          •	 Nonexistent protective fences around fixed ladders and beneath
 form, scaffolding,          platforms and scaffolding
 ladders and working        •	 Using top step levels of portable ladders and placing portable
 at elevated places          ladders in unsafe positions on floors
 Unsafe workplace           •	 Installation and dismantling of scaffolding and platforms by unau-
                             thorized/untrained persons and without required work permits
 conditions (slippery
 or unstable surfaces),     •	 Unsafe placement of scaffold footing, overloading of scaffolding
                             platforms and ladders and loose and unsafe connections between
 using defective equip-
                             scaffolding and platforms
 ment, unqualified
                            •	 Slippery surfaces on scaffolding and platforms
 and poorly trained
                            •	 Waste and scattered equipment on scaffolding and platforms
 workers, unsafe con-
                            •	 Oversized (more than 15 centimeters) extensions of scaffolding, and
 nections and anchor
                             platforms and working on scaffolding and platforms (exceeding 2
 points, unsafe behav-       meters height) without safety harness
 ior (smoking, throw-
                            •	 Using painted and waste wood as scaffolding material
 ing garbage, carrying
                            •	 Metal scaffolding not being grounded against static electricity
 equipment), poor posi-
                            •	 Workers carrying materials and hand tools while accessing scaffold-
 tioning of scaffolding
                             ing and platforms
 and platforms
                            •	 Working under scaffolding and platforms while other works are
                             carried out on overhead scaffolding and platforms
                            •	 Unsafe working locations surrounding scaffolding, platforms and
                             ladders such as busy roads	
 Injuries sustained         •	 Broken, worn out and crushed steel rope and pulley connections
 from lifting and           •	 Loose, wide hooks, hooks without safety locks or worn out safety
 hauling                     lock springs
 Absence of sufficient      •	 Defective limit switches, automatic stoppers and power transmission
 safety locks, unsafe        systems
 connections and            •	 Deformation of crane rails and defective crane warning system
 anchor points, defec-      •	 Overloading of cranes and swinging loads
 tive crane parts, poor     •	 Load being hung on/around unsafe working locations, and locations
 loading and position-       where there are workers
 ing, misjudged calcu-      •	 Crane boom length not being in compliance with catalogue values
 lations (crane boom        •	 Lifting or lowering of workers using crane’s ropes and hooks
 length, load weight),      •	 Poorly trained riggers or unlicensed operators not using proper
 improper warning            warning and communication signs
 systems and signs          •	 Lifting operations during unsuitable (harsh or abnormal) weather
                             conditions
                            •	 Unsafe crane cabins (containing flammable, explosive, hazardous
                             matters, electrical heaters and without protective systems)

Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                  47
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




             Common Hazards/               Potential Causes
             Emergency
             Situations in the
             Construction
             Industry
               Exposure and                •	 Unsafe storage and transportation of flammable, combustible,
               emergency events              explosive, and radioactive materials
               due to hazardous,           •	 Leakage from such containers with consequent damage (to eyes,
                                             skin and through contact and inhalation)
               flammable, explo-
               sive, and radioactive       •	 Lack of warning signs on flammable, explosive, radioactive, hazard-
                                             ous, and harmful materials
               substances
                                           •	 Use of equipment producing sparks close to explosive, combustible,
               Unsafe handling and
                                             and flammable materials
               storage, improper
                                           •	 Lack of convenient/adequate fire extinguishers and fire safety
               or insufficient PPE,
                                             equipment at places where explosive, combustible, and flammable
               absent or inadequate
                                             materials are stored
               warning signs and
                                           •	 Improper storage (e.g. unventilated places) and transport (e.g.
               response systems              rolling instead of using carts) of pressurized gas cylinders
               (for leakage, fire and
                                           •	 Dirty nozzles of gas welding apparatus, unsafe gas hoses and
               smoke), unsafe and            related connections with hoses passing through unsafe places
               defective equipment         •	 Harmful gas, dusts, and smoke uptake by compressors
                                           •	 Skin contact with irritating chemicals
                                           •	 Presence of unauthorized, unprotected persons at radiography
                                             units and locations
                                           •	 Insufficient illumination at workplaces and at locations where
                                             flammable, combustible and explosive materials are stored
               Hazards from                •	 Unsafe and unmarked excavation area without excavation permit
               excavation work             •	 Trench works undertaken during heavy rain creating a hazard if side
               and works carried              walls are unsupported, and excavated material and machines are
                                              stored near the edge of trenches
               out with construc-
                                           •	 High machinery vibration and noise levels
               tion machinery
                                           •	 Poor access site roads with slippery, deformed surfaces
               Unqualified and un-         •	 Worn out or old construction machines without proper maintenance
               authorized workers,            and/or improper operation by untrained or unqualified operators
               defective or improper       •	 Hazardous use (overloading, alcoholic or drug intoxication, overtired-
               contruction machines,          ness, no seat belts, using cellphones) of construction equipment
               absent or insufficient      •	 Working with construction machinery and equipment under and
                                              near the high voltage transmission lines
               warning signs and
                                           •	 Lack of alarm systems on construction machines
               systems, non compli-
               ance with mainte-
               nance procedures




             48    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common Hazards/             Potential Causes
Emergency
Situations in the
Construction
Industry
Hazards from work           •	 Working without blasting mask and protective clothing
involving sand blast-       •	 Using defective sand blasting and paint spray machines
ing, painting and           •	 Inhalation and skin exposure to coating/painting material
coating work                •	 Presence of unsuitable and uncollected painting and coating waste
                              at the working area
Improper or insuffi-
cient PPE and defective
equipment
Exposure to injury          •	 Working in confined spaces without an approved confined space entry
from work carried              procedure and permit
                            •	 Failure to include flammable and explosive gas measurement of con-
out in confined
                               fined spaces prior to entry
spaces
                            •	 Using equipment, which produces sparks in confined spaces containing
                               explosive and combustible material
Hazards and emer-           •	 Absence of log out/tag out maintenance procedures, training and
gency events arising          required apparatus to de–energize and isolate electrical circuits
                            •	 Use of ungrounded and improperly grounded machinery and
from working with
                               equipment
electrical energy, and
                            •	 Cracked fuses, plugs, and sockets, damaged distribution sockets and
with electrical hand           circuit breakers, and poorly connected, worn, frayed, or bare cables
tools and machines          •	 Electrical cables passing through/laid around damp, humid, and
Improper or insuf-             otherwise unsafe locations
ficient protectors,         •	 Risk of electric shocks from unsafe high voltage units and static
improper hand tools            electricity generation
                            •	 Use of inherently unsafe electric hand tools in flammable and
or equipment, unsafe
                               explosive environments
cable connections and
                            •	 Use of hand tools without proper skin and eye protection
passages, unquali-
                            •	 Lack of PPE for workers that may be in contact with exposed electric
fied or unauthorized           parts (e.g. electrical gloves and insulated tools rated for the voltage
workers                        level, class B hard hats, electrically rated steel-toed boots, safety
                               glasses)
                            •	 On/Off power circuit switches that are not located at clearly visible
                               points
                            •	 Broken, unsafe switches
                            •	 Use of unqualified electricians for repairs and for issuing compliance
                               certificates
                            •	 Absent, insufficient, and unreadable warning signs related to
                               electrical hazards
                            •	 Lack of (high voltage) work permit to allow high risk work
                            •	 Use of non-insulated floor materials at high voltage units
                            •	 High voltage transmission lines over/nearby operation sites and
                               workplaces, and high voltage poles with unsafe surrounding
                            •	 Improper deployment and installation of lightning conductors



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                  49
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement           Your company may have an impact on the lives
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      of many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group is different, and you
    is actively considered.
                                      need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate risks to
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    effective dialogue. Some          to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                                    FINANCIAL
                                                                               S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                            ER                   AC
                                                                    U   M
    Some public events, lim-                                     NS                             G R TIV




2
                                                            CO                                     OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                                                           PS T
    process. Sporadic and
                                                       ES




    selective responses
                                                UN D
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    when approached by
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                         NGO




    stakeholders.
                                            A




                                                                                                                           s




    Limited channels in place.                                                 COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                                 S/
                                                                                                                     O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                              NS
                                                                                                                     C IA E R
                                                                                                                         TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                           TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                               AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                               T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                          EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                      M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                   RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                                  SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                            GO
    with stakeholders.                                                        CONTRACTORS




      50    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing Your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                       6. Stakeholder Engagement




                            Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                            by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                            groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                            the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                            MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                            The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                            them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                            negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                            Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                            ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                            these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                            more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                            those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                            Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                            them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                            engage with each of them.



                             INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                              Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                              need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                              and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                              However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                              those used for external stakeholders.




                             Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                             Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                          51
For effective                           DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                        After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                        to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                           ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                        environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                        At a minimum, even if your company does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                        munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                        receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your manage-
•	 Disclose meaningful                  ment program (see Element 7, External Communication).

   and accurate                         If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to implement
                                        a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, Grievance Mechanism) and actively
   information;                         engage them in consultation, regularly disclosing clear and meaningful infor-
                                        mation on both your impacts and potential benefits, and providing communi-
•	 Use culturally                       ties with opportunities to express their concerns and suggestions.
   appropriate means to                 In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and com-
   reach them;                          munities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                        and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
•	 Provide opportunities                ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                        pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
   for two-way dialogue ;               mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plan.
•	 Document to keep                     Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
                                        your company is putting in place to address the issues identified through
   track of issues raised;
                                        the engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected
   and                                  Communities).

•	 Report back on how                   Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excel-
                                        lent way for you to understand how company operations affect them and to
   their input has been                 get early warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to
                                        stakeholders, ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time.
   used and considered
                                        Don’t wait until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those
                                        relationships in place to manage the problem.



                                                                    Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                    Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                    with the important stakeholder groups.




           52     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 6. Stakeholder Engagement




                            TIP

                             Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                             ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                  you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                             ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                  significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                                  elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                             ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                             ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                  sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                                  fected groups and communities.

                             ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                  where they feel comfortable.

                             ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                             ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                  provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                  your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                             ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                  in the “outside world.”

                             ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                  expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                             your company

  Affected                   People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                             verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                             personal safety, health or livelihood.




                            For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                            Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                            Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                   53
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your business is perceived and,
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-
                                   mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is
    limited to those directly      and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    handling the complaints.       responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




      54    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                            In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                              •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                   pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                   are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                   regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                              •	   Assign a person or team in your company to be responsible for receiving,
                                   registering and processing all grievances.
                              •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                   mine resolution and redress options.
                            •	 Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                               ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                               response.

                            Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                            company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                            same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                            such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                            immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                            investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                            lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                                                        dent mediators.
 TIP
                                                           The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                       dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                           resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and               The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your company.                 ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                           for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily un-
                                                           to raise concerns. This requirement mandates
       derstandable, accessible, trusted and
                                                           having the right people leading this effort inside
       culturally appropriate.
                                                           your company. The grievance mechanism must be
  ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-            accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
       ance procedure so people know where                 party that originated the complaint and should not
       to go and whom to approach.                         impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
  ••   Commit to a response time and keep                  Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       to it as this will increase transparency            ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       and a sense of “fair process.”                      ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
  ••   Keep records of each step to create a               problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
       “paper trail.”                                      to address.




Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                  ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                       55
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                     Independent
                                                                                     mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Company team                                            Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                        TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A Guide
                                      to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Development
                                      Projects,” CAO (2008).


             56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
       ELEMENT 8




      Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                              Affected communities’
                                                                                              issues and concerns are
                                                                                              proactively addressed.
      Affected Communities                                                                    There is ongoing com-
                                                                                              munication to avoid risks
                                                                                              and impacts before new
      Affected communities will want to know what                                             projects as well as to
                                                                                              address existing issues.
      actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                              Reporting to affected
      the issues identified when engaging with them.                                          communities is regu-
                                                                                              larly implemented and
      Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical               evidenced in documen-
      element for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know                tation. Key units are
      when they will receive an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the       involved in the review
      amount of time you spend responding to questions.                                       of the key issues.




                                                                                                                          3
TIP                                                           The frequency of this           When applicable, con-
                                                              communication will be           sultation processes have
 Ongoing Communication                                        proportional to the scale       been implemented.
                                                              of stakeholders’ concerns,      External consultants are
 •• Provide an immediate update if new
                                                              but it should be at least       involved as required. No
    environmental or social risks emerge.
                                                              annually. If your com-          ongoing review.
 •• Report progress on implementation of                      pany’s activities change or
    your commitments.                                         new environmental and



                                                                                                                          2
 •• Report monitoring results on issues that                  social risks emerge, you do     Procedures in place
    interest the community.                                   need to contact stakehold-      for reporting, usually
                                                              ers outside of the regular      assigned to E&S staff.
 •• Use the opportunity to communicate the
                                                              schedule to discuss these       Primarily reactive.
    benefits generated by your company.
                                                              changes.
 •• Translate information into local languages
    and easily understandable formats.                       You can also decide to
                                                             report back to the wider



                                                                                                                          1
 •• Try to maintain continuity in who deals
                                                             public on your progress          Some basic communica-
    with the community.
                                                             in meeting your commit-          tions with affected com-
 •• Involve your employees as communication                  ments to avoid, reduce           munities, mostly limited
    links to the community.                                  and mitigate any negative        to meetings.
 •• Consider conducting a stakeholder survey                 environmental or social
    to learn how your company is perceived.                  impacts from your com-
                                                             pany’s activities. Sustain-



                                                                                                                          0
                                                             ability reporting initiatives,
       guidelines, including sector-specific guidelines, and good practices are also          No reporting.
       rapidly emerging in this area. The most notable is the Global Reporting
       Initiative (GRI).

                  Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities
                  for examples of formats and venues you can use.



      Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                 ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                      57
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



      58    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                         9. Monitoring and Review




                             TIP

                              Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                             Intent:
                                   1.	Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                             Implementation:
                                   2.	Are the action plans being carried out?
                                   3.	Are procedures being followed?
                             Effectiveness:
                                   4.	Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                   5.	Are you making progress toward your overall objectives
                                      and targets?
                                   6.	 How is the environmental and social performance of the
                                      company in general?


                            INDICATORS
                            A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                            titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                            might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                            environmental and social policy.

                            Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                              •	   energy consumption;
                              •	   volume of solid waste disposal;
                              •	   water consumption;
                              •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                              •	   emissions to air;
                              •	   noise and vibration;
                              •	   work zone air quality;
                              •	   accidents, incidents, near-misses;
                              •	   lost work time frequency, severity, and incidence rates;
                              •	   emergency response incidents;
                              •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                              •	   wages levels;
                              •	   incidence of child labor;
                              •	   incidences of disciplinary and discriminatory complaints; and
                              •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                  ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                     59
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          You can also use this information when reporting to a wider public on your
                                         ESMS performance. When selecting your key performance indicators, you may
  Improving                              refer to voluntary guidelines such as the Construction & Real Estate Sector
                                         Supplement (CRESS) of the Global Reporting Initiative, which provides a list
  Remember, you                          of indicators relevant to the construction industry.
  can’t improve what                     Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  you don’t measure.
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
                                         a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
                                         evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing for efficient use of energy and materials;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?

                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit and Case Studies
                                           for more examples of key indicators common in the Construction
                                           industry.



             60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               9. Monitoring and Review




                                           THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                            Visual observation                   Interviews
                            physical walk-through of your        consultations with workers,
                            work site and surrounding            managers and external stake-
                            land. Examples of what you           holders. Examples of topics
                            may observe: restrictions to         you might discuss: Do workers
                            site entry, visitor check-in area,   and managers understand
                            slip, trip, and fall hazards,        the policies and procedures?
                            excavation without protec-           How are they impacted? Are
                            tion, crane swing warning            there ideas for improvement?
                            system, warning signs, use           Do workers feel comfortable
                            of PPE, presence of safety           filing complaints? How are
                            officer, backup alarms on            external stakeholders im-
                            heavy equipment, storage of          pacted by the company? Are
                            petroleum, oil, and lubricants,      there ideas for improvement?
                            storage of paints and solvents,      Do external stakeholders feel
                            waste segregation, sequenc-          comfortable filing complaints?
                            ing of vehicle traffic, adequate
                            lighting for non-daylight
                            work, confined spaces.

                            Measuring and                        Document review
                            testing                              looking through documents
                            checking using equipment             and records. Examples of
                            that is properly calibrated.         what you might review: EA
                            Examples of what you might           management plan and/or
                            check: fugitive dust emissions,      permit requirements, book of
                            noise, quality of drinking           permits, energy bills, project
                            water for workers, worksite          health and safety plan, OHS
                            and ambient air quality if           records, OHS corrective actions
                            working on previous con-             plans and status of corrective
                            taminated site or presence           actions, equipment calibra-
                            of hazardous materials (e.g.         tion logs, inspection records,
                            asbestos) in demolition work,        complaint logs, wage slips,
                            water quality from dewater-          time cards, policies and proce-
                            ing to verify compliance with        dures, training records.
                            discharge permits.




                                      Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                      on how to conduct an audit.



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	               61
9. Monitoring and Review




             Monitoring and auditing are words that are often used
             interchangeably, which can be confusing. Auditing is a formal,
             on-site evaluation against a specific set of criteria. Audits can
             be conducted internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
             Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various methods for
             evaluating performance. These may include: visual observation,
             measuring and testing, questionnaires, surveys, interviews with
             employees and external stakeholders, and document review. It is
             important to design your monitoring program to obtain qualitative
             and quantitative information. It is also important that workers and
             managers are monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.




                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing, Docu-
                                         ment Review and Interviewing People.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.



             62    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                          Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                          Improvement Plan
                                          Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                          environmental, labor and community
                                          problems and remediate negative impacts
                                          ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                          continually improve the management system to
                                          support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                  Ongoing Reporting
              Risks and Impacts




                                                                Preparedness and




                                                                                                 Communications
              Identification of




                                                                                                                                      Monitoring and
                                               Organizational




                                                                                                 and Grievance
                                  Management




                                                                                                                  Communities
                                               Capacity and




                                                                                   Engagement




                                                                                                 Mechanisms
                                               Competency




                                                                                   Stakeholder




                                                                                                                  to Affected
                                                                Emergency

                                                                Response
                                  Programs




                                                                                                 External




                                                                                                                                      Review
     Policy




     Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
     improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
     Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
     improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the company
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



Revision 2.2 June 4, 2014                       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Construction	                                                           63
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




             64    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



June 2014
