                   91506




Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
CROP PRODUCTION
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein may
    not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1, or any
    other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to demonstrate
    a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into company
    management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing its impact
    on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does not
    imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Standards,
    including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply endorse-
    ment by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor the
    organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged in render-
    ing technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates comprising
    the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational purposes only, and
    are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes. Implementation of
    the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final users. The material
    in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can
    be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the
    information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other member of the World Bank
    Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, puni-
    tive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited to, damages for loss of profits,
    goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even if IFC has been advised of the
    possibility of such damages) in any way arising or resulting from use or reliance on
    the Handbook or any such conclusion or determination. The Handbook is distributed
    subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be sold or oth-
    erwise circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeliness,
    completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is not
    responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice, opinions
    and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not necessarily
    represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the World Bank or
    its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook...............................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in the
Crop Production Industry......................................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System.............................11
     Overview.....................................................................................................................12
     Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS).......................... 13
     System Development and System Implementation..................................................15
     Using the Handbook and Companion Publications to Develop and
     Implement Your ESMS................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System...................................................... 17
     1.	 Policy......................................................................................................................18
         Purpose of an Effective Policy......................................................................................18
         Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One................................... 18
         Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment...........................................19
     2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts....................................................................20
         Key Risks in the Crop Production Industry...................................................................20
     3.	 Management Programs.........................................................................................23
         Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions..............................................................24
         Short Cases................................................................................................................24
         Writing an Effective Action Plan................................................................................34
         Writing an Effective Procedure...................................................................................35
     4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency........................................................36
         Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS.....................................36
         Communication and Training....................................................................................38
     5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response..............................................................40
         Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the Crop Production Industry.......... 44
     6.	 Stakeholder Engagement.....................................................................................48
         Mapping Your Stakeholders........................................................................................49
         Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan................................................................50
     7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism......................................52
         External Communication...........................................................................................52
         Grievance Mechanism................................................................................................52
     8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.................................................55
     9.	 Monitoring and Review.......................................................................................56
         Indicators..................................................................................................................57
         Measuring and Improving Your ESMS........................................................................60
         Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan.............................................61
         Conducting an Effective Management Review.............................................................62

         Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014                          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production                               3
                       Welcome & How to
                       Use This Handbook
                       Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                       more and more important in today’s global
                       economy. There are thousands of environmental
                       and social codes and standards in the world
                       today. The codes and standards define the rules
                       and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                       implementation. An environmental and social
                       management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                       integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                       operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                       repeatable processes.

                       This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                       to help companies in the crop production industry
                       develop and implement an environmental and
                       social management system, which should help to
                       improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                   In the current economic climate, companies are
                   under pressure to perform or even just survive.
                   New initiatives are often met with resistance as
                   people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
                   day responsibilities. Some people think that an
                   environmental and social management system
                   must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
                   is not really true. To be effective, a management
                   system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
                   the company.

                   If a company has existing management systems for
                   quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
                   to expand them to include environmental and social
                   performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
                   will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                   improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                   employees and stakeholders.




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production   5
                        Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                  These sections provide background on environmental and
                         Sections I – II          social management systems (ESMS) in the crop production
                                                  industry.

                                                  This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                  develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                         Section III
                                                  it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                  Toolkit.

                                                  Section I of this companion publication gives tools,
                                                  including forms, templates, checklists, and other useful
                                                  documents, to help you develop and implement the systems
                                                  described in the Handbook. We suggest that you adapt
                                                  each tool for your company.

                                                  Section II includes case studies presenting two companies
                         ESMS Toolkit and         in the crop production industry that implemented an ESMS.
                                                  These hypothetical cases illustrate how to develop and
                         Case Studies             implement an ESMS appropriate to the size and nature of
                                                  your company.
                                                  •	   ABC Company – a US-based fruit company that has
                                                       just acquired a pineapple plantation.

                                                  •	   XYZ Company – a large sugar mill in Nicaragua
                                                       looking to expand its export market.

                         ESMS                     This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                         Self-Assessment          maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                         and Improvement          measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan for
                         Guide                    improvement.




                       Acknowledgements
                       This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                       department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Robert Horner,
                       Larissa Luy and Juan Jose Dada.

                       The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                       the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss and Jane
                       Hwang, as commissioned by IFC. Additional contributions were made by Doug
                       DeRuisseau, Yogendra Chaudhry and Caroline Lewis. Graphic design services
                       were provided by Pam Henry.

                       Additional IFC contributors include Debra Sequeira, Ekaterina Grigoryeva,
                       Louis Philippe Mousseau and Jeremy Ansell. The Handbook also significantly
                       benefited from comments from an internal peer review process, which involved
                       a diverse group of individuals who are too many to acknowledge individually.
                       However, the drafting team is very thankful for their valuable and insightful
                       comments and hopes they find their input reflected in this final version.




6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                               I

                 Benefits of an Environmental
                 and Social Management System
                 in the Crop Production Industry




Revision 2.2   June 10, 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production   7
“By combining
customer satisfaction,
sound business
principles, natural
production, and
active engagement                Benefits of an Environmental
with our stakehold-              and Social Management
ers, we have been
                                 System in the Crop Production
able to establish
‘sustainable value
                                 Industry
chains’ in up and
                                 Today, crop production companies are confronted with a number of significant
downstream of our                environmental and social challenges. None of the challenges is insurmountable,
                                 but if not effectively addressed and managed, they will hurt your core business
business.”
                                 operations and profitability.
Senior VP -
                                 Among these challenges are increasing energy and agricultural inputs costs, the
Multi-national leading           growing power and influence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies,
agri-business brand              and rapidly evolving consumer awareness and concerns about environmental and
                                 social issues. These risks are in addition to the primary risk of failing to manage
                                 food safety while building brand and consumer confidence. All of these risks ul-
                                 timately can have financial consequences. Moreover, export is vital to the success
                                 of many crop production businesses; but exporting brings even more demands
                                 from international legislation, voluntary standards and consumer requirements
                                 – increasingly related to environmental and social practices. All of these risks,
                                 requirements and pressures that your business faces are forces that encourage you
                                 to implement a management system.




                                “Our agro-forestry and plantation departments have
                                 been recognized by the local administration for their
                                 reforestation programs and sustainable practices. Our
                                 employees see this as an exciting challenge, and take
                                 pride in meeting them.”
                                 General Manager
                                 Asia based supplier to a multi-national brand.




       8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
   “As a leading crop producer and exporter, we operate in compet-
    itive, globalized and volatile markets. Our management system
    based approach towards quality, environment and social issues
    has helped us attract and keep our global clientele through un-
    compromising product quality; prompt, reliable delivery; and fair,
    transparent and ethical business practices.”
    Managing Director - A crop producer and exporter company in Latin America




                         There are direct business benefits from implementing an environmental and so-
                         cial management system. Conserving and using energy and materials efficiently
                         helps to reduce production costs. Reducing waste and discharges can minimize
                         the cost of increasingly expensive, regulated discharges to the environment (such
                         as greenhouse gases and wastewater). In the crop production industry, there can
                         be financial benefits from waste management. Instead of merely capturing and
                         treating process wastes with no benefit, you can convert organic wastes to biogas
                         for boiler fuel or generate electric power, or organic fertilizer and soil amend-
                         ments to strengthen crop production sustainability. A management system can
                         elucidate where expenditures exceed industry benchmarks and identify potential
                         production cost savings.

                         The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transpar-
                         ent human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                         workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems. Ef-
                         fective occupational health and safety management procedures work toward the
                         identification of workplace and process hazards, then seek to eliminate or reduce




“By raising the standards of local agriculture by developing new
 plant varieties; training farmers and workers; financing small
farmers and guaranteeing markets for their crops and by imple-
 menting a certified-organic production chain, we have been
 able to strengthen our relationship with the local community
 and increase our profitability.”
CFO - An agriculture development company in Africa



        Revision 2.2   June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production            9
                          them through engineering and administrative controls, and employee training
                          on how to avoid job site risks. This serves not only to reduce incidents, accidents
                          and fatalities, but also contributes to reducing insurance premiums for worker
                          compensation.

                          Management systems are widely used by crop production companies in qual-
                          ity control and food safety. An environmental and social management system
                          simply extends that approach to managing the impact your business has on the
                          environment and the working conditions on your farm or plantation.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized,
                          instead of having one system for quality, one for food safety, and one for environ-
                          mental and social. Integrated management systems are the goal, but the focus of
                          this Handbook is on helping you implement an ESMS that is appropriate for the
                          size and nature of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                           II
                Understanding an
                Environmental and Social
                Management System




Revision 2.2   June 10. 2014    ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




           Revision 2.2   June 10. 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production          13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve              A lot of companies in the crop production industry already have management
                               systems for quality or food safety. If so, you may already have elements of an
what you don’t                 ESMS, and there is no need to replace what you already have. In this Hand-
                               book’s companion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide,
measure.                       we provide a self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements. The self-
                               assessment will allow you to measure your current level of system development
                               and implementation. You will answer a series of questions and get your score for
                               each element in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score measures
                               the maturity of your system. Once you understand the maturity of your system,
                               it is easier to target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                         THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                                Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                        chain partners – continual improvement embedded in opera-
                                        tions
                                Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                        routine improvement projects
                                Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                        tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                                Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                        primarily reactive
                                Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                                Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




     14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                       REMEMBER
                       A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                       valuable if it is well-implemented.

                       SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                        One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                        is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                        management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                        lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                       “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                        cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                       Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                       routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                       goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                       that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                       to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                       ment.

                       One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                       development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                       tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                       well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                       mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                       developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                       organization change.

                       The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, Toolkit and
                       Case Studies and Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system
                       development and system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                         DEFINITIONS
                         System                    The documented policies and procedures.
                         Development
                         System                    Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                         Implementation            ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.
       Revision 2.2   June 10. 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production           15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK

     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan                                               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
     •	   Learn how other companies                                           elements of an ESMS
          scaled the ESMS to their
          size and complexity
                                                 REDO this graphic
                              ESMS
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                            TOOLKIT &
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                              CASE
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                             STUDIES
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                         III
                Practical Guidelines for
                Developing and Implementing
                Your Environmental and Social
                Management System

                This section provides step-by-step instructions on
                how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick way
                to measure where you are now.


                             When you find a toolkit icon, it means there
                             is a tool in the companion publication Toolkit
                             and Case Studies to make it easier to get
                             started.




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies in
    place.                      and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related poli-   it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    cies and procedures.        of the specific risks you face in the crop production industry.




    18    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your        Commitment;
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   and
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.
                                                                                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-       Your senior
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          management
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           can help you to
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
                                                 The key message is that this       accelerate all
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for              will contribute to the com-
 Developing a Company Policy                     pany’s success and that each       three stages.
 Statement to get ideas of what you              person will benefit - but that
 could include in your policy.                   they  will also be held ac-
                                                 countable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
                                                 stages with your senior man-
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter                 agement. Consider accompa-
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to               nying the Policy Statements
 get started.                                    with a message from the CEO.




           Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production   19
                                   ELEMENT 2


                                  Identification of Risks
                                  and Impacts

5
    Mature system, rou-
    tinely reviewed and
                                  The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    updated as part of
    continual improvement         identify the potential negative environmental
    plan. Internal and exter-
    nal inputs. Procedures        and social impacts so that you can develop the
    extended to contractors,
    subcontractors, third par-
    ties and supply chain as      appropriate strategies to address them. In the
    relevant.




4
    Systematic, documented        following pages, we present the key issues that
    identification and pri-
    oritization of E&S risks      come up in the crop production industry.
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-         KEY RISKS IN THE CROP PRODUCTION INDUSTRY
    ment in company.




3
                                  1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency
    Awareness and engage-
                                    •	 Inefficient use of water resulting in strains on supply
    ment of staff in identifi-
    cation and prioritization       •	 Use of poorly designed, operated and managed irrigation schemes
    of E&S risks and impacts.       •	 Processes leading to degradation of soil quality, impermeability or extreme pH
    External experts involved          through nutrient loading
    as required.
                                    •	 Agricultural runoff containing high concentrations of organic material and toxic
                                       substances such as pesticides, chemical fertilizers and other agricultural inputs
                                    •	 Mismanagement of agricultural inputs (pesticides, fertilizers) in their storage,




2
                                      mixing, application and disposal
    Procedures in place for         •	 Overuse of pesticides that undermine stable ecosystems and risk harming non-
    identification of E&S risks        target or beneficial species
    and impacts across all
    key activities.                 •	 Production of large amounts of crop waste
                                    •	 Risks from crop burning including particulate emissions and loss of control of
                                       combustion
                                    •	 Use of unsuitable or low production areas such as wetlands for agriculture
                                    •	 Monocultures (single-crop production cycles) leading to weakening of local




1
                                       ecosystems
    Basic identification and        •	 Unplanned conversion of forested areas leading to deforestation and
    assessment of E&S risks            desertification
    and impacts, but limited
    to a few activities.




0   No identification or
    assessment of E&S risks
    and impacts.




    20    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




                2.	 Occupational Health and Safety
                   •	 Excessive exposure to hazardous substances including pesticides, chemical
                      fertilizers and other agricultural inputs and failure to provide adequate training
                      and PPE
                   •	 Injuries related to the operation of machinery and vehicles, such as tractors and
                      harvesting machinery
                   •	 Injuries related to falls, cuts, and strains from carrying heavy loads and repetitive
                      work
                   •	 Exposure to extreme temperature conditions during work, increasing risk of
                      dehydration, heat stroke, and kidney disease
                   •	 Exposure to unsafe levels of noise from operating machines, such as harvesters,
                      trucks and tractors
                   •	 Exposure to organic dust particles from grain, fungi and bacteria during the
                      threshing, handling and storage of grain
                   •	 Risk of explosion in grain handling and storage facilities due to concentrations of
                      dusts at or above the lower explosive limit (LEL) and presence of ignition source
                   •	 Use of harvesting machinery and creation of flying debris and stones
                   •	 Unsafe transportation conditions for farm workers

                3.	 Labor
                   •	 Inadequate protections for migrant/temporary workers
                   •	 Potential for forced labor situations arising out of migrant workers’ indebtedness
                   •	 Abusive terms of employment by recruitment agencies/contractors
                   •	 Endemic use of child labor in harvesting and weeding
                   •	 Excessive and/or uncompensated overtime due to unrealistic individual
                      production quotas
                   •	 Failure to pay minimum or living wage
                   •	 Limited or restricted freedom of association
                   •	 Inadequate worker housing and sanitation

                4.	 Community Health, Safety and Security
                   •	 Strain on local water supply
                   •	 Exposure to agrochemicals due to spray drift, agricultural runoff, and improper
                      disposal of agrochemicals packaging and containers
                   •	 Exposure to air emissions from open burning of crop waste or burning prior to
                      harvest (e.g. sugar)
                   •	 Exposure to odors from the use of manure
                   •	 Increased vehicle traffic due to transport of raw materials and finished products
                      to/from the plantation or farm
                   •	 Exposure of consumers to pathogens that could be transmitted from the use of
                      animal manure or the use of domestic wastewater for irrigation
                   •	 Exposure of consumers to harmful concentrations of pesticides in postharvest
                      products




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production                   21
2. Identification of Risks and Impacts


Top 3 risks and oppor-                   There are different ways to conduct a risk assessment. One
tunities in the Crop                     common method is to map your facility and production
Production                               processes – this can highlight OHS and environmental risks.
                                         A common method for labor risks is to use a checklist of risk

1   Intensive crop-growing               factors , such as employee demographics, regional labor
    may put a strain on the              laws, contracting arrangements, etc.
local water supply. Crop-
growing often requires large
                                         The following are key considerations for a robust risk as-
amounts of fresh water for               sessment system:
irrigation. A reliable supply              •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks;
of fresh water is essential
for ensuring continuity of                 •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;
production. Potential actions
for preventing shortages and               •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to op-
reducing conflicts with other                   erations;
users of the same water
resources include storing
                                           •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as
water during wet seasons                        new laws or regulations;
through rainwater harvest-                 •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers;
ing, groundawater recharge
streams, and drip irrigation.              •	   Include input from affected communities and other ex-
                                                ternal stakeholders;
2   Runoff from agricul-
    tural fields can lead to
environmental pollution.
                                           •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff does
                                                not have the capability;
Intensive crop-growing may
use chemical fertilizers and               •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the severity
pesticides, resulting in the                    and probability of negative impacts;
contamination of rivers, lakes
and groundwater. Conflicts                 •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those
with other users may result.                    in your company; and
The application of pesticides,
chemical fertilizers and other
                                           •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
agricultural inputs must be                     business.
managed carefully in order
to mitigate risks to human                           Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks
health and the environment.
                                                     in the crop production industry, you can first use the Risk

3   Agribusinesses may                               Identification Worksheet to identify your potential risks
    employ migrant workers                           and negative impacts based on your operations and operating
for seasonal work In order                           environment. Then you can use the Process Mapping or
to lower costs or when labor                         the Physical Mapping tools to identify in more detail where
supply falls short. These                            problems are likely to arise within your production process.
employers sometimes con-
fiscate passports and force                          Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
migrant laborers to work                             single environmental and social impact that your company
excessive hours. They often                          could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form
fail to provide employees                            to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.
with written contracts or
regular wages, and even
withhold wages in some                   For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
instances.                               and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.
                                         ifc.org/sustainability.

            22     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
 ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                                 5
Management Programs are centered on Action                         Verified progress against
                                                                   objectives and targets;
                                                                   significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                   in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                   onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were                  continual improvement
                                                                   using annual improvement
                                                                   plans.
identified.


                                                                                                 4
                                                                   Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                   mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                       activities to proactively
                                                                   manage E&S risks and
                                                                   impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                   pany-wide objectives and
                                                                   targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the                 and update.




                                                                                                 3
lack of a system for employees to express their                    Actions/activities in place
                                                                   to manage E&S risks and
                                                                   impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                          mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                   avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                         compensate. Proactive
                                                                   approach to managing
                                                                   issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                                 2
                                                                   Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of solid waste and you have                       responsibilities to address
                                                                   and mitigate E&S risks
identified this as a risk factor because of the high               and impacts across all key
                                                                   activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                   tive.
percentage of organic waste produced in your
operations, you may take action by building a

                                                                                                 1
                                                                   A few informal programs
                                                                   or activities to mitigate
composting facility to avoid sending organic waste                 E&S impacts. No systems
                                                                   awareness or repeatable
to the landfill.                                                   processes.




                                                                   No process for mitigating
                                                                   E&S risks and impacts.
                                                                                                 0
        Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014   ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production        23
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                   First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                   example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                   water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                   differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                   owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain cultiva-
                                              tion process that exposes workers to toxic chemicals and pollutes the
             MITIGATION HIERACHY
                                              local river system. You might design your product mix to avoid this
                                              process or find alternate cultivation methods or chemicals.
             Prioritizing Your Actions
                                              In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                       AVOID                  be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                         ▼                    cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, sup-
                      MINIMIZE                pose that you are located in an area where women are traditionally
                         ▼                    given lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace
                                              they are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. The
              COMPENSATE/OFFSET
                                              local cultural context and the need to hire both men and women is
                                              unavoidable. It is important to pay attention to your recruitment,
                                   hiring and training procedures, to make sure that women are hired on equi-
                                   table terms and given equal access to training and promotion opportunities.
                                   You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure that rules for
                                   recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow. Additionally,
                                   you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of and follows
                                   the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.



            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in the
            crop production industry. Action Plans can be scaled to the size of
            your company and the nature of the risks you face.

            24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: CHINA


Rice cultivation farm
RISK: Excessive groundwater consumption
Specialty Crop (S Crop) is a family owned agricultural company located in the southeastern part of
Hubei province, People’s Republic of China. S Crop produces export quality rice, mostly for Europe
and the Americas. The company owns over 800 hectares of land and relies on groundwater for
crop production. In the last few years, the local farmers in the region have made several com-
plaints to the District Administration that the groundwater table in the region has fallen below
the reach of many wells due to indiscriminate water use by S Crop. Irrigation water demand for S
Crop rice paddies is extremely high and the company has not developed guidelines or procedures
specifying the frequency or quantity of water required for cultivation. The company’s groundwa-
ter wells are much deeper than others in the region and this has further accelerated the depres-
sion of ground water tables in the area and thus reduced the availability of water resources.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Depression of groundwater tables in the region

  •	 Reduced availability of water resources adversely impacts the livelihoods of local farmers

  AVO I D

  •	 Convert to water-efficient and drought-tolerant rice cultivars

  •	 Level rice fields to remove land depressions that hinder water movement

  •	 Implement Alternate Wetting and Drying (AWD) technology

  •	 Install water-depth and water-circulation regulating systems

  •	 Conduct soil puddling in clay soils or soil compaction to reduce percolation and seepage

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Introduce pipeline conveyance systems for irrigation water transport

  •	 Minimize the use of open canals to reduce water losses through seepage and evaporation

  •	 Develop alternative water supplies and sources including rivers, Ranney wells, canals and
    rain water harvesting
  •	 Explore opportunities for replacing seedling transplanting by direct seeding

  •	 Explore use of alternatives to flooding, such as use of overhead sprinklers, furrows and
    drip irrigation
  •	 Work with local water authorities and farmers to optimize distribution of permits and
    cooperative use of groundwater wells in the area
  •	 Work with local regulators and NGOs to enforce groundwater well permitting require-
    ments, including monitoring and reporting of extraction rates by permitted wells in the
    region

  O FF S E T

  •	 Subsidize deepening of most severely affected wells

  •	 Transfer water conservation technology and/or subsidize alternatives to flooding irrigation
    to local farmers
  •	 Materially and financially support local communities in construction of rain water harvest-
    ing systems for groundwater recharge and irrigation


            Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production         25
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: PERU

            Fruit and vegetable farm
            RISK: Depletion of groundwater supplies

            A rapidly growing South American vegetable and fruit grower located in an arid coastal area, is
            expanding. All agricultural production uses groundwater for irrigation and fertilization (fertiga-
            tion). The farm has lucrative contracts with the US and Europe. Many farmers have moved into
            the area and established new farms, drilling unpermitted wells that have put significantly more
            pressure on the limited local aquifer. In fact, groundwater levels for several municipalities and
            other farming operations have fallen. The company has used its extensive capital to deepen the
            wells and continue high rates of groundwater extraction. A group of local farmers have enlisted
            non-governmental organizations to highlight the environmental and social injustices and impacts.
            The company believes that these efforts are politically inspired, and says that locals have no voice
            in their operations. Recently one US supplier notified the company that it will no longer purchase
            fruit and vegetables if the current impasse is not resolved.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Use of large amounts of potable water resulting in strains on water supply for agriculture
                 and domestic purposes

              AVO I D

              •	 Develop and use alternative sources of water including any nearby rivers during high flow
                 periods through installation of riverbank wells
              •	 Collect and store water from rivers in a purpose built reservoir for groundwater recharge,
                 irrigation and storage for irrigation during high flow periods
              •	 Reuse wastewater from packinghouse facility for irrigation
              •	 Investigate potential for treatment and reuse of wastewater from local municipality for
                 irrigation

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Convert all irrigation to drip irrigation systems
              •	 Modify irrigation timing to evening and night application to reduce evapotranspiration
              •	 Install soil moisture detectors to control irrigation and eliminate over watering
              •	 Monitor well systems and water levels to facilitate balanced view of aquifer and to reduce
                 stress on specific areas
              •	 Collaborate with other stakeholders and local authorities to review well permits, issue
                 licenses for drilling, enforce existing permit conditions
              •	 Collaborate with other stakeholders including farming operations and municipalities to
                 advocate for water use monitoring and reporting of extraction rates and volumes for all
                 registered and permitted wells

              O FF S E T

              •	 Investigate and identify farms and municipalities most heavily affected by reduced water
                 availability of water
              •	 Transfer and/or subsidize drip irrigation technology to other local farmers
              •	 Subsidize well reconstruction and other water access and saving activities
              •	 Organize a local farmers’ cooperative to jointly promote and conduct field trials of pro-
                 posed solutions for improved resource use, identification and development of alternative
                 sources, and reduce water shortages

            26    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: KENYA

Poultry and horticulture producer
RISK: Soil degradation due to wind erosion and
low organic soil carbon content
The Kenyan government offered arable lands to agribusinesses at very attractive prices provided
the lands were planted and managed to increase food production. One of the companies taking
advantage of this offer was a poultry producer in Eastern Kenya. The company immediately pur-
chased large areas because poultry farms require physical separation among farms to ensure ad-
equate biosecurity and prevention of disease vector propagation. The company then embarked
on extensive farming operations for the vacant lands situated between poultry farms. Over time
its farming activity has increased significantly and now includes diverse crops such as vegetables
and table grapes. It now processes and packages agricultural products.

There is abundant ground water, but the organic content of sandy soils is limited thus compromis-
ing local productive capacity. Periodic high winds have eroded topsoil in unprotected areas and
soil erosion is a continuing problem that detracts from productive capacity of local farms. The
company is increasingly aware that to enhance and expand production, more organic material for
the sandy soils is required. Experiments in direct use of poultry rearing waste were unsatisfac-
tory. Purchasing organic materials from other regions to enhance soil carbon was an alternative
but purchase and transport costs were prohibitive. A technical adviser suggested composting all
organic materials in the region to produce soil humus and organic fertilizer.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Limits on soil productivity and reduction of farming capacity

  AVO I D

  •	 Develop large scale composting program utilizing organic waste from poultry production
     (including mortality), vegetable processing and grape orchard trimmings
  •	 Raise awareness among farmers and other organic waste producers - within feasible/eco-
     nomically viable transport distances - to avoid combusting organic waste; make arrange-
     ments for collection of organic waste as additional raw materials for composting
  •	 Inventory organic waste production from other sectors/industries such as animal rearing,
     dairy cattle operations, beef cattle operations, and experiment with these materials for
     compost manufacture
  •	 Test composed organic waster for safety as fertilizer/soil enhancer and apply in productive
     areas (e.g. new plantings, existing fields and replanting) to enhance soil carbon, increase
     productive capacity, and increase moisture retention

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Replace inefficient irrigation technologies with subsurface drip irrigation and fertilization
    systems to prevent soil desiccation and wind erosion of organic topsoil
  •	 Install and maintain physical or vegetative drift fences (plants, hedges low shrubs and
    bushes) to capture and stabilize soils eroded by periodic high winds

  O FF S E T

  •	 Contribute to the development and implementation of a training program to inform
    farmers of feasible techniques to maintain/enhance soil carbon and to prevent wind
    erosion of existing soils
  •	 Barter delivered raw organic waste for organic compost and fertilizer
  •	 Offer compost at reasonable or subsidized price to regional crop producers
  •	 Develop seedling and nursery rearing for planting of vegetative drift fences; offer plants
    at reasonable or subsidized price to regional crop producers


            Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production          27
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: BRASIL

            Sugar cane farming
            RISK: PM10 and smaller particulate discharges to
            downwind areas due to large scale cane field burning
            prior to harvest in non-mechanized areas
            Sugar cane Group Inc. (SGI) located in Sao Paulo State has undergone rapid expansion in last five
            years. It is a medium sized company and has grown sugar cane for many years. All of the sugar
            cane produced by SGI is supplied to the Ethanol producers in the region. Although the company
            has mechanical harvesting, it still carries out manual harvesting in some areas, which requires
            application of chemicals to stop cane growth followed by cane burning prior to harvest. Local
            community groups are concerned about continuing deterioration in air quality as a result. The
            Secretary of Environment of Sao Paulo State signed an agro-environmental protocol in 2007 with
            the ethanol agro-industry sector, which mandates gradual elimination of burning practices by
            2014 for mechanized areas and by 2017 for non-mechanized areas.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Human respiratory distress and illness associated with particulate inhalation

              •	 Increased susceptibility to communicable and other respiratory diseases

              •	 Public health impacts on local communities, and financial stress for medical interventions

              AVO I D

              •	 Accelerate field revisions (i.e. grading, leveling, and removal of obstacles) to transition to
                 green cane mechanical harvesting
              •	 Transition to green cane harvesting and ‘trash blanket’ practices (i.e., eliminate pre-harvest
                 cane burning and deposit leaves, tops and other organic residues on the ground)
              •	 Prevent the spread of accidental and malicious fires through the construction of fire-
                 breaks, deployment of fire watchmen and training/equipping fire suppression brigades

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Obtain agricultural field burn permit from the relevant authority each time the company
                 intends to burn sugar cane fields
              •	 Employ data from air monitoring/meteorological stations and model combustion products’
                 distribution and drift to water resources, housing and other areas; employ these data to
                 determine optimal weather conditions for field burning

              O FF S E T

              •	 Engage with affected communities to identify areas affected by high particulate
                 deposition
              •	 Conduct morbidity and mortality studies and identify early warning symptoms of pathol-
                 ogy related to ambient air particulate exposures
              •	 Support community health clinics to diagnose and treat local people affected by upper
                 respiratory infections attributable to sugar cane burning emissions




            28    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: MEXICO


Mango Plantation
RISK: Workers and community exposure to pesticides
Located in Jalisco province Northern Mexico, Mango Fruits owns four mango plantations in the
region. The average plantation size is 170 acres and provides significant job opportunities to the
local population as the economic activity in this tropical region revolves almost exclusively around
mango production and export. The company has been denounced by a local environmental NGO
for its low-flying planes routinely dusting the mango plantations with fungicides. These aerial
spraying operations are carried out around 25 times a year. The NGO claims that in these spraying
cycles, workers and the neighboring communities are exposed to toxic chemicals and the crops of
the neighboring community, their schools, homes, domestic animals and the water stored for do-
mestic use are contaminated. Laboratory analysis of water and soil samples from nearby farmland
revealed Carbendazim residues. Carbendazim is a WHO Class la (Extremely Hazardous) fungicide
banned in the United States due to health and safety concerns.



  I M PAC T

  •	 Negative health impacts on workers and local community due to exposure to fungicides

  AVO I D

  •	 Implement integrated pest management programs (IPM) to identify infestations, deter-
    mine if they are economically significant, and apply all feasible non-chemical techniques
    for fungus control
  •	 Eliminate usage of banned agrochemicals and those classified by WHO as extremely haz-
    ardous (Class Ia), highly hazardous (Ib), and if feasible, Class II (moderately hazardous)
  •	 Implement all cultural, crop timing, fertilization, rain water management and other tech-
    niques known in this sector to be effective against fungi
  •	 Replace chemical controls with biological controls

  •	 Purchase and plant fungus-resistant tree species

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Employ data from air monitoring/meteorological stations to define optimum conditions for
    chemical control applications to: enhance effectiveness on target species, reduce/eliminate
    impacts to non-target species, and reduce drift to non-target areas (e.g. surface water,
    other crops and human settlements)
  •	 Demarcate buffer zones for surface waters, neighboring farms and community infrastruc-
    ture, and eliminate chemical control applications in/on all buffer zones
  •	 Establish and communicate the aerial spray schedule in advance to minimize workers’ and
    community exposure
  •	 Implement appropriate procedures for safe storage, handling, application and disposal of
    agrochemicals

  O FF S E T

  •	 Conduct morbidity and mortality studies and identify early warning symptoms of pathol-
    ogy related to exposure of pesticides
  •	 Provide medical and financial assistance for rehabilitation of affected people




            Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production       29
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: GHANA


            Cocoa export company
            RISK: Improper use of equipment and PPE
            The African Future Cocoa Company was established in 1988 in Ghana to produce cocoa for the
            local market and to create the basis for a future export industry. The company’s most recent
            audit by a social/environmental organization reported that the use of machetes, axes, harvesting
            hooks, pruners, ladders and chain saws are posing hazards to farm workers. Most farming tools
            are designed for men and do not meet the physical needs of women and young people. The most
            common injuries sustained by farm workers include: cuts when weeding, harvesting and breaking
            pods; broken bones and other bodily injuries when falling from ladders. In addition, common
            complaints from cocoa farmers include general body and back physical distress and discomfort
            caused by frequent contorting, twisting, bending and carrying heavy loads. When injured, farm
            workers often have limited access to first aid or lack money for medical care.



              I M PAC T

              •	 Bodily injuries including abrasions, strains, wounds and bone fractures sustained by farm
                 workers

              AVO I D

              •	 Regularly purchase and distribute appropriately sized farming tools to male, female and
                 young workers
              •	 Define ergonomically correct use of cocoa farming tools; train farmers in these methods

              •	 Define, issue and train workers in correct use and maintenance of personal protective
                 equipment (PPE)
              •	 Participate in industry sector initiatives to design equipment and tools that reduce hazards
                 of cocoa farming activities

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Mandate adequate rest periods

              •	 Restrict working hours to the legal limit to avoid workers’ fatigue and likelihood of ac-
                 cidents
              •	 Conduct frequent tool box training (orientation to specific assignment and equipment)
                 before work shifts to refresh workers’ knowledge of hazards and accident avoidance
              •	 Train farm workers in the identification of hazards and procedures to control them: e.g.,
                 handling of sharp tools, lifting heavy loads, use of chainsaws only by trained operators,
                 zero tolerance of alcohol and prescription and non-prescription narcotics
              •	 Put in place a team of experienced farm workers responsible to do refresh OHS training to
                 all workers and monitor accident rate

              O FF S E T

              •	 Retroactively identify injured workers and provide injury-related health care and
                 rehabilitation
              •	 Work with local authorities to expand coverage of the local health center to adequately
                 treat workers who experience occupational injuries




            30    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: COSTA RICA


Pineapple plantation
RISK: Farm workers exposure to heat and sun
Ripe Pineapple Company (RPC) is a small pineapple plantation company with most of its planta-
tions in the northern region of Costa Rica at San Carlos. The workers at RPC normally earn slightly
higher wages than the national minimum but usually they work for 70-80 hours a week to earn
this basic wage. In the field, workers are directly exposed to very hot sun and heavy rains, often
with no shelter even during breaks or lunch. Every week, at least one worker collapses due to
heat stress.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Farm workers’ heat related illnesses

  AVO I D

  •	 Conduct heat stress awareness training and encourage workers to consume potable water
    and electrolytes to avoid heat stress
  •	 Provide potable water and containers in locations readily accessible to all farm workers

  •	 Provide electrolytic supplements for potable water

  •	 Implement adequate paid breaks to allow people to reduce body heat and to rehydrate

  •	 Construct shelters to protect workers from hot sun during lunch and other breaks

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Train farm workers to:
     •	 identify risk factors for heat-related stress
     •	 identify symptoms of heat-related stress (e.g. dehydration, heat exhaustion, heat
        stroke)
     •	 provide first aid for victims of heat-related stress
  •	 Record, report and investigate all OHS heat stress related incidents and illnesses

  O FF S E T

  •	 Assist all affected workers with timely treatment for heat-related illnesses

  •	 Compensate for wages lost during injury or ill-health treatment




            Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production      31
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: LIBERIA


            Rubber tree plantations
            RISK: Unrealistic daily-production quotas
            The Flexible Tire Company in Philadelphia has acquired one of the world’s largest rubber planta-
            tions in Liberia and has decided to ensure that the plantations are operating in compliance with
            labor local laws and international conventions. For workers at the plantation there is a daily quota
            of 650 rubber trees that must be tapped. Workers that fail to tap all 650 trees “agree,” by signing
            a form, to have their daily wages cut in half to $1.59. The work is arduous and debilitating. The
            company has received confirmed reports that children are working in the plantation as they are
            often called into the fields by parents in order to meet the quota. Rubber latex causes permanent
            eye damage, even blindness. It appears that the workers, including children, are not provided
            with safety materials such as gloves or glasses. Additionally, toxic pesticides are used and applied
            to the trees. Children apply these pesticides with their bare hands.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Use of child labor by parents to meet unrealistic production quotas

              •	 Children subject to worst forms of child labor

              AVO I D

              •	 Develop company’s policy on prohibition of child labor and forced labor and communicate
                 policy to workers, supervisors and managers; do not allow workers to bring children below
                 the legal minimum age for work into the plantation
              •	 Calculate realistic daily-production quota based on an eight-hour working day; workers
                 that meet the daily-production quota must be paid at least the minimum wage
              •	 Modify contracts to reflect the new daily-production quota and lawful levels of deductions
                 when not-meeting the daily-production quota
              •	 Inform workers of their compensation and how is calculated in a language and terms they
                 understand

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Regularly purchase and distribute new rubber tapping tools to increase worker’s efficiency

              •	 Define, issue and train workers in correct use and maintenance of personal protective
                 equipment (PPE)
              •	 Implement appropriate procedures for safe storage, handling, application and disposal of
                 agrochemicals
              •	 Do not allow any person in the plantation under the age of 18 to undertake hazardous
                 work, including handling toxic chemicals, carrying heavy loads, working at heights, and
                 using dangerous tools.

              O FF S E T

              •	 Provide stipends (as income compensation) to former child workers

              •	 Enroll former child workers in school or vocational skill training programs




            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: USA


Tomato farm
RISK: Use of contract/migrant labor
Green Valley is a tomato farm in Florida that relies on temporary migrant workers managed
by farm labor contractors. Contractors are responsible for recruiting, hiring, transporting and
managing workers on site. Last year a group of workers sued Green Valley accusing it of forced
labor. Green Valley was surprised to discover that one of its contractors retained four months of
workers’ compensation to reimburse excessive recruitment fees and transportation costs. The lack
of reimbursement by Green Valley for recruitment fees and travel costs contributed to workers’
vulnerability to debt bondage and involuntary servitude. Workers typically are isolated from pop-
ulated areas, do not speak English, and cannot access public transportation. As many workers are
undocumented or have temporary immigration status, they are unikely to seek assistance. Many
federal and state laws have exemptions and exclusions for farmworker protection thus contribut-
ing to the susceptibility of farmworkers to trafficking.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Forced labor due to debt bondage

  AVO I D

  •	 Establish, communicate and implement adequately defined hiring and remuneration policies
    and terms of employment for contract/migrant workers
  •	 Ensure organizational policies on social and labor issues are understood and implemented by
    the recruitment agency
  •	 Periodically monitor and audit the recruitment agency’s social and labor performance as per
    the organization’s own policies and procedures and local law
  •	 Reimburse contractors directly for workers’ recruitment fees and transportation costs

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Make sure that contract/migrant workers are informed (in all applicable languages) on
    their rights including wages, benefits and deductions
  •	 Agree with the recruitment agency on reasonable deductions for housing, transport and
    other services provided to contract/migrant workers
  •	 Make sure contract/migrant workers receive contracts and periodic clear records of pay
    calculations in their native language
  •	 Periodically interview contract/migrant workers about complaints and opportunities

  •	 Establish a grievance mechanism accessible to contract/migrant workers

  O FF S E T

  •	 Reimburse workers for illegal deductions made by contractors




            Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production      33
3. Management Programs




                                     WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                                     Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                                     process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and ad-
                                     just the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve
                                     the right internal people and departments.

                                     As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                                     think about:

                                        •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                                        •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                                        •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                                             results (targets)
                                        •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                                        •	   Who – responsible people



                                        Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.

                                     The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the industry. These
                                     are just some of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to your
                                     situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet your company’s specific situa-
                                     tion. As you tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and managers,
                                     experts and external stakeholders, including your suppliers and community.
                                     They can offer insight into important issues and effective actions. They can also
                                     help you obtain commitment for plans you are trying to implement, and provide
                                     candid feedback about how well the plans are working. This will be critical to
                                     the continual improvement of your systems.



                                     For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                                     community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS
                                     Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




            34    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                          3. Management Programs




                WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and
                managers. They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how
                to behave. They enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turn-
                over. Clear, detailed procedures help to embed your social and environmental
                policies into your daily operations.

                It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your
                procedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists, flow-
                charts, or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary depend-
                ing on the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for manag-
                ers and supervisors, while work instructions through illustrations may be useful
                when dealing with less literate or immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as
                short and simple as possible.



                   Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure and the
                   Sample Procedure Flowchart to get started.

                Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is
                the ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new
                procedure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the
                skills and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through
                routine communication and effective training. You will learn more about this
                in the next chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version
                of each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly
                marked as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old
                procedure.




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production           35
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                   A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S       trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management          that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                   ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                   IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                   First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                   commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.        beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an           sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    integrated system. New         the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S        do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.           long-term commitment by your company.

                                   Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                   responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company      anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-         duties, and allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the
    ness training. E&S roles       work involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily     A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for a meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is       with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                   sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                   contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is       In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-      have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                   social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-       tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided    the labor aspects, production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                 and the reduction of waste, procurement manages the qualifications and
                                   performance of suppliers and contractors, and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with         equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-         tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles        The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-    impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    ing to get defined. No         be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all
    systems awareness or
                                   levels of the company, including workers, supervisors and managers.
    repeatable processes.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    36    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                        4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                Once the ESMS Team is selected, they need to select a team leader. This is an
                important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader needs to set the
                tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initiatives in a compa-
                ny face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is no exception.
                The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable hurdles, and
                should have direct access to senior management.



                   Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate
                   for Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit and
                   Case Studies for a list and sequencing of activities to develop and
                   implement an ESMS.




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production          37
                                                          EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                        Quality
                                                                  Human
When selecting a                                                 resources
                                                                                        control


team leader, look                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                              health & safety
for someone who                                Production


has the following                                                           Select a
                                                                          team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                       Procurement/
                                                          Worker
                                                                                           Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                   Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.            Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                   dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                   This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                   There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                   1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                      •	 What is it?
                                      •	 What are its goals?
                                      •	 What do I need to do?

                                   2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                       the company.
                                      •	 How does this help our company?
                                      •	 How does it help my department?
                                      •	 What will change?
                                      •	 What is in it for me?

                                   3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                      their roles.
                                      •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                      •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                      •	 How do I do that?
                                      •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        38   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                       4. Org. Capacity and Competency




     TIP
                                                        Your ESMS Team needs detailed training so they
     Effective Communication and Training
                                                        can develop the necessary knowledge and skills.
                                                        They will need to understand the basics of the
     Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                        Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle and know the nine
     munication or training module is to build
                                                        elements of an ESMS. This Handbook provides
     awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                        the information they will need, but additional
     people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                        help may be necessary. In addition to the detailed
     implement.
                                                        training of the team, everyone will need to receive
                                                        awareness training so there is a shared understand-
                                                        ing of the goals of the ESMS.

                             The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                             general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                             learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                             You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                             tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                             Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                             way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                             and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                             people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                             responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                  CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N




             Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production              39
                                      ELEMENT 5


                                     Emergency Preparedness
                                     and Response

5
    Regular engagement with
    local community and govern-
                                     Even when you have considered all the risks and
    ment for onsite and offsite
    emergency plan. Formal           put the appropriate management programs in
    resource-sharing agreements
    with neighboring companies.      place, accidents and emergency situations can
                                     happen.


4
    Senior management and
    all units and shifts, includ-
    ing contract and tempo-          Your business is a dynamic operation, and many
    rary workers, participate in
    emergency risk assessment,       things change from day to day – people go in and
    preparedness planning
    and mock drills. Continual       out of your workforce, materials and suppliers
    improvement.
                                     enter and exit your supply chain, facilities and


3
    All onsite and off-site emer-
    gency issues have been
                                     equipment are added to and removed from
    identified and an effective
    preparedness plan is in place.   your production line. A management system
    The plan meets the local reg-
    ulatory requirements and the     will help to maintain continuity and consistency
    local industry best practices.
                                     throughout these changes. However, there may
                                     be a momentary lapse or gaps in the system (e.g.

2
    The emergency preparedness
    plan is in place, but there is
    no evidence of consistent        someone not properly trained, someone not
    implementation. Some
    trainings are provided to
    the workers on emergency
                                     following the procedures, a machine breakdown),
    requirements.
                                     or an external force (e.g. natural disaster) that can
                                     lead to an accident or emergency situation at your

1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective, as
    all emergency risks have not     facility. While it is not always possible to prevent
    been identified. Occasional
    trainings are provided to        such situations, you can be prepared to respond
    workers.
                                     effectively to prevent and mitigate any harm to


0
    Very limited emergency con-      your workers, community and the environment.
    trol and personal protective
    equipment. No formal plan
    in place.




       40    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                              5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                The promotion of occupational health and safety
                (OHS) and improvement in working conditions not
                only helps you ensure the well-being of workers; it
                also contributes to productivity. Agriculture work
                is associated with a variety of OHS hazards and
                potential emergencies. Because of the remote
                location of most operations, an effective OHS
                management system and emergency preparedness
                plan are crucial to your operations.

                The nature and severity of your OHS hazards or
                emergency risks will vary depending on the nature
                of your operations: type of crops or plantation;
                geographical and climatic conditions; agricultural
                machinery and tools used; and the agrochemicals
                used in cultivation. A good OHS management
                system will help you identify and control the
                specific hazards on an ongoing basis to protect the
                health and safety of your workers, managers and
                the local community. Proper implementation of
                your emergency response plan will not only protect
                the health, safety and lives of people at or near
                work sites; it will also minimize business losses.




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014    ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production     41
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                         The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                                         help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                                            •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                              communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                              your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                              mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community. This
                                              should be reviewed and updated regularly.
                                            •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                              explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                              everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs to do.
                                            •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                              response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                              people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                              that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                              during accidents and emergencies.
                                            •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                              it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                              working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                                            •	 Communicate so that everyone in your company understands the importance
                                              of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                              monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                              who may be affected.
                                            •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an overview
                                              of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what to
                                              do – ask for input on what needs to be addressed and what can be improved.
                                              Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will need to exercise
                                              individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations. This is more
                                              likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system beforehand.
                                            •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                              you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                                            •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to see how well the system is working and to
                                              re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                              continually improve your system.
                                            •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                              Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                              the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                              response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability and
                                              effectiveness.




                                          Look at the Sample Typhoon Response and Procedure and Sample
                                          Pesticide Leakage Preparedness and Response Procedure Flowchart
                                          for examples.



             42    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                    5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                should include:
                  •	   identification of potential emergencies based on hazard
                       assessment;

                  •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency situa-
                       tions;

                  •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                  •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution;

                  •	   procedures for decontamination;

                  •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation, including a desig-
                       nated meeting place outside the facility;

                  •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                  •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for employees
                       responsible for responding to the emergency (fire-fight-
                       ing equipment, spill response equipment, personal protec-
                       tion equipment for the emergency response teams, first
                       aid kits and stations);

                  •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment and
                       facilities;

                  •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and maintenance
                       of emergency equipment;

                  •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and meeting
                       points;

                  •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local emer-
                       gency response services (fire fighters);

                  •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                  •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols, includ-
                       ing with affected communities when necessary, and pro-
                       cedures for interaction with the government authorities;

                  •	   procedures for periodic review and update of emergency
                       response plans.




Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production     43
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response



            Common OHS Hazards and Emergency Situations in Crop Production
               Common OHS                      Potential Causes
               Hazards/
               Emergency
               Situations in
               Crop Production

                  Physical injuries             •	 Inadequate identification of OHS hazards, absence or poor im-
                  including back                  plementation of safe working procedures, inadequate worker
                  injuries, strains and           training and understanding, absence or poor implementation
                                                  of appropriate PPE
                  sprains, contusions,
                  and fractures                 •	 Slippery surfaces from rain, mud, ice or snow build-up and
                                                  from spilled produce
                                                •	 Falls due to stumbling over plantation stumps (e.g. sugar cane)
                                                  resulting in cuts and tetanus infections
                                                •	 Falls from storage structures (like grain lofts) and due to
                                                  unguarded roofs, floor openings, stairways, lofts and shafts,
                                                  climbing ladders without non-slip safety treads, and unpro-
                                                  tected (absence of guardrail) elevated workplaces like opera-
                                                  tors’ platforms
                                                •	 Being struck by falling objects or objects thrown up from
                                                  vehicle wheels
                                                •	 Tripping over boxes, electrical cords, equipment, or other
                                                  items that are left in aisles and walkways in the grain/harvest
                                                  storage areas
                                                •	 Climbing on or off and driving transportation units (wagons,
                                                  tractors, carts, trucks)

                  Cuts and lacerations          •	 Poorly designed/maintained hand tools, such as sickle, hand
                                                  hoe, knife and scissors (e.g. awkward grip and/or hand posi-
                                                  tion)
                                                •	 Inadequate PPE (e.g. ill-fitting gloves, cut-resistant gloves are
                                                  not cut-proof)
                                                •	 Unsafe cutting and slicing operation during harvesting of
                                                  crops
                                                •	 Cuts or puncture injuries due to sharp crop/plantation (e.g.
                                                  sugar cane, pineapple, roses)
                                                •	 Cut or puncture injuries due to tools, trellis or the supporting
                                                  structure
                                                •	 Distractions at work place (e.g. excessive noise, interruptions
                                                  from supervisors/coworkers, etc.)
                                                •	 Inadequate lighting during night operations
                                                •	 Poorly planned incentive schemes and below minimum or
                                                  living wage production-quota system that impacts safety
                                                  considerations




             44     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common OHS                    Potential Causes
Hazards/
Emergency
Situations in
Crop Production

Musculoskeletal                •	 Repetitive work (e.g. using clipping shears), poor posture and
injuries and physical/           inadequate rest periods while lifting and carrying heavy loads
muscular strains and             associated with harvesting of crops
sprains                        •	 Vibrations from hand tools, machinery and tractors

Accidents and injuries         •	 Inadequate identification and controls on shear point, pull in
due to “struck by”,              point, crush point, wrap point, pinch point and entanglement
“struck against”, and            on agricultural machines
“caught in” agricultur-        •	 Lack of machinery guards
al machinery. Exam-            •	 Removal of machine guards by workers in order to increase
ples may include:                production rates (especially common where there are produc-
                                 tion based incentives)
•	 Soil tillage machines
  (e.g. ploughs, tillers,      •	 Failure to follow safety practices for forklifts, trucks, and
  sub-soilers, harrows,          storage (such as safe shelving)
  rollers, levellers,          •	 Machinery entanglement or tractor rollover
  graders, etc.)
                               •	 Injury due to long hair (around rotating machinery), jewelry
•	 Planting machines             (around moving parts) and loose clothing or gloves being
  (e.g. planters, drills,        caught in moving parts of machinery
  broadcast seeders,
                               •	 Lack of lockout/tagout procedures or poor implementation of
  etc.)
                                 existing procedures
•	 Cultivating machines
  (e.g. rotary hoes,
  cultivators, weeders,
  etc.)
•	 Forage harvest-
  ing machines (e.g.
  mowers, choppers,
  balers, etc.)
•	 Grain and fibre har-
  vesting machines (e.g.
  reapers, binders, corn
  pickers, combines,
  threshers, etc.)
•	 Fruit, nut and veg-
  etable harvesting
  machines
•	 Transport and elevat-
  ing machines
•	 Agricultural chemical
  applicators
•	 Sorting and packing
  machines




         Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production         45
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




               Common OHS                      Potential Causes
               Hazards/
               Emergency
               Situations in
               Crop Production

                  Accidents and                 •	 Poor implementation or absence of safe transportation proce-
                  injury during                   dures
                  transportation of             •	 Overcrowding/overloading of vehicles
                  workers                       •	 Unsafe rural roads
                                                •	 Violation of traffic rules and regulations

               Emergency situa-                 •	 High concentrations of air-borne dust (at grain/oilseed storage
               tions arising due to               areas) combined with flammable conditions caused by over-
               fire and explosion                 heated bearings, belt friction against a housing component,
                                                  electrical short-circuits, faulty wiring, and poor maintenance
               hazards resulting
                                                  of equipment and fuel lines
               from:
                                                •	 Improper handling/storage of crops that are required to be
                  •	 Ignition/explosion           dried to less than 15% moisture thereby creating a potentially
                    in silos (for grain           explosive situation
                    storage)
                                                •	 Unsafe handling, storage and clean-up of fuel, flammable
                  •	 Ignition in ruptured         chemicals, waste and other materials
                    fuel lines (diesel
                    or natural gas for          •	 Inadequate procedures for the maintenance and cleaning of
                    portable power                equipment
                    generation units)           •	 Operating electrical equipment over the normal “sanctioned
                  •	 Spills from fuel             load” thereby creating a potentially flammable situation
                    storage tanks               •	 Poor insulation of electrical wiring or poor grounding of the
                  •	 Fuel spills during           equipment
                    supply or unloading         •	 No de-energizing and locking out electric equipment before
                    (e.g. diesel tankers)         inspecting or making repairs
                  •	 Faulty electrical
                    wiring
                  •	 Overload on electri-
                    cal infrastructure

               Emergency or other               •	 Inadequate housekeeping procedures and training of work-
               chemical hazards                   force on storage, transportation, application and disposal of
               due to spillage and                agrochemicals
               leakage/exposure                 •	 Lack of training or understanding on hazards and emergency
               caused by:                         procedures

                  •	 Chemicals used for         •	 Excessive use of chemicals
                    disinfection and            •	 Dermal exposure and inhalation during preparation of
                    fumigation                    chemicals
                  •	 Agrochemicals such         •	 Dermal exposure and inhalation during application of
                    as fertilizers and            agrochemicals
                    pesticides                  •	 Exposure to pesticides during aerial applications, pruning or
                  •	 Ammonia (an-                 harvesting activities
                    hydrous) used in            •	 Eating or drinking in contaminated environments
                    mechanical refrig-
                    eration systems



             46     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common OHS                      Potential Causes
Hazards/
Emergency
Situations in
Crop Production

Entrapment, engulf-              •	 Improper identification and evaluation of confined spaces and
ment, and hazardous                associated hazards
atmospheric condi-               •	 Inadequate testing for atmospheric hazards: oxygen, carbon
tions in confined                  dioxide, combustible gases or vapors, and toxic gases or vapors
space. Examples of                 in the identified confined spaces
confined space may               •	 Poor controls to prevent unauthorized entry
include:                         •	 Engulfment either in flowing grain or collapsing grain surfaces
•	 Silos                           and collection of carbon dioxide (CO2) above grain surface
                                   resulting in displacement of oxygen
•	 Tanks
•	 Packing areas
•	 Refrigeration units
  and gas storage
  areas

Pulmonary diseases/              •	 Exposure to fine dust and particulate emissions during
exposure to respira-               harvest, storage and transportation of grains, oilseeds and
tory hazards                       other harvested products
                                 •	 Exposure to organic dust, spores, mycotoxins and endotoxins
                                 •	 Irritation and/or allergic, inflammatory or infectious responses
                                   in lungs due to biologically active dust
                                 •	 Exposure to pesticides, dust, ammonia and fumes
                                 •	 Exposure to mouldy hay and compost
                                 •	 Exposure to decomposition gases including ammonia, hydro-
                                   gen sulphide, carbon monoxide and methane

Noise induced                    •	 Absence or poor implementation of safe work procedures and
hearing loss                       lack of use of appropriate PPEs in high noise area
                                 •	 Exposure to noise (i) from large machinery and equipment
                                   used in crop production such as tractors, combine harvesters
                                   and conveying equipment, (ii) from grain movement through
                                   gravity spout, and (iii) from operation of axial-vane fans used
                                   for forcing heated air for grain drying

Injury from                      •	 Presence of venomous snakes and insects in plantation groves
biological agents                •	 Bee stings during harvesting/hand plucking (e.g. grapes)
                                 •	 Bites/stings from spiders, mosquitoes and other vectors

Heat stress                      •	 Exposure to excessive solar radiation, inadequate rest periods
                                   and inadequate drinking of water/fluids in hot climates
                                 •	 Use of alcohol or excessive caffeine




           Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production          47
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement
    is part of regular activities.
                                      Your company may have an impact on the lives
    Awareness and engagement
    at senior levels. Fluent and      of many people and organizations. All of these
    inclusive communication and
    consultation process with         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    Multiple and ongoing public
    consultation and participa-       Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    tion in a culturally appropri-
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group varies considerably,
    ate manner. Stakeholder
    feedback is actively consid-      and you need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate
    ered. Reporting to commu-         risks to your business.
    nities and effective grievance
    mechanism is evidenced by         Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    formal records.                   and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also



3
    Stakeholders have been            provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged in         presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    several events with effective     to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    dialogue. Some procedures
    and assigned responsibility
    for engaging with stakehold-
    ers.
                                                                                    FINANCIAL
                                                                               S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                            ER                   AC
                                                                    U   M
                                                                 NS                             G R TIV




2
    Some public events, limited                             CO                                     OU IS
    ongoing engagement pro-                                                                           PS T
    cess. Sporadic and selective
                                                       ES
                                                UN D




    responses when approached
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    by stakeholders.
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                         NGO
                                            A




                                                                                                                           s




                                                                               COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    Limited channels in place. A
                                                                                                                                 S/




    few meetings and discus-
                                                                                                                     O R NION
                                           WO R K




                                                                                                                              NS




    sions, but not an ongoing
                                                                                                                     C IA E R
                                                                                                                         TI O




    process yet.
                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                           TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                               AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                               T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                          EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                      M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                   RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency with
                                                                               SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




    stakeholders.                                                                           GO
                                                                              CONTRACTORS




      48    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                           6. Stakeholder Engagement




                Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                engage with each of them.



                 INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                   Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                   need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                   and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                   However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                   those used for external stakeholders.




                   Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                   Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.



Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production               49
For effective                           DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                        After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                        to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                           ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                        environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                        At a minimum, even if your company does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                        munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                        receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your manage-
•	 Disclose meaningful                  ment program (see Element 7, External Communication).

   and accurate                         If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to implement
                                        a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, Grievance Mechanism) and actively
   information;                         engage them in consultation, regularly disclosing clear and meaningful infor-
                                        mation on both your impacts and potential benefits, and providing communi-
•	 Use culturally                       ties with opportunities to express their concerns and suggestions.
   appropriate means to                 In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and com-
   reach them;                          munities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                        and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
•	 Provide opportunities                ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                        pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
   for two-way dialogue ;               mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plan.
•	 Document to keep                     Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
                                        your company is putting in place to address the issues identified through the
   track of issues raised;
                                        engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected Commu-
   and                                  nities).

•	 Report back on how                   Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excel-
                                        lent way for you to understand how company operations affect them and to
   their input has been                 get early warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to
                                        stakeholders, ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time.
   considered
                                        Don’t wait until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those
                                        relationships in place to manage the problem.




                                                                    Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                    Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                    with the important stakeholder groups.




           50     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              6. Stakeholder Engagement




                        TIP

                          Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                          ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                               you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                          ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                               significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                               elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                          ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                          ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                               sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                               fected groups and communities.

                          ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                               where they feel comfortable.

                          ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                          ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                               provide important information that should be used to adapt
                               your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                          ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                               in the “outside world.”

                          ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                               expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




DEFINITIONS

Stakeholder               Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                          your company

Affected                  People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                          verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
Communitites
                          personal safety, health or livelihood.




                       For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                       Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                       Engagement,” IFC (2007).



       Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production         51
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your business is perceived and,
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
                                   Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    Grievance mechanism is         establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    fully implemented; how-
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g. phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
                                   External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    ness. No tracking of inter-
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.     on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-          mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is          and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    limited to those directly
                                   responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.
    handling the complaints.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




      52    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                        7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                          In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                            •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                 pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                 are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                 regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                            •	   Assign a person or team in your company who is responsible for receiving,
                                 registering and processing all grievances.
                            •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                 mine resolution and redress options.
                            •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                 ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                 response.
                          Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                          company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                          same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                          such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                          immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                          investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                          lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                          dent mediators.
TIP
                                                         The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
 Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                      dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                         resolution and options for redress.
 ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
      of social and environmental risks and
                                                         The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
      impacts identified in your company.
                                                         ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                         for the local community so that it is easy for them
 ••   Design the process to be easily un-                to raise concerns. This requirement mandates
      derstandable, accessible, trusted and              having the right people leading this effort inside
      culturally appropriate.                            your company. The grievance mechanism must be
                                                         accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
 ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-
                                                         party that originated the complaint and should not
      ance procedure so people know where
                                                         impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
      to go and whom to approach.

 ••   Commit to a response time and keep                 Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
      to it as this will increase transparency           ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
      and a sense of “fair process.”                     ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
                                                         problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
 ••   Keep records of each step to create a              to address.
      “paper trail.”




          Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production                53
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                     Independent
                                                                                     mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Company team                                            Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                        TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).


             54    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
ELEMENT 8




Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                5
                                                                                    Affected communities’
                                                                                    issues and concerns are
                                                                                    proactively addressed.
Affected Communities                                                                There is ongoing com-
                                                                                    munication to avoid risks
                                                                                    and impacts before new
Affected communities will want to know what                                         projects as well as to
                                                                                    address existing issues.
actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                4
                                                                                    Reporting to affected
the issues identified when engaging with them.                                      communities is regu-
                                                                                    larly implemented and
Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical ele-      evidenced in documen-
ment for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know when          tation. Key units are
to expect an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the amount of      involved in the review
time you spend responding to questions.                                             of the key issues.




                                                                                                                3
The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of            When applicable, con-
stakeholders’ concerns, but it should be at least annually. If your company’s       sultation processes have
activities change or new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to      been implemented.
contact stakeholders outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.      External consultants are
                                                                                    involved as required. No
You can also decide to report back to the wider public on your progress in          ongoing review.
meeting your commitments to avoid, reduce and mitigate any negative en-
vironmental or social impacts from your company’s activities. Sustainability




                                                                                                                2
reporting initiatives, guidelines, including sector-specific guidelines, and good
practices are also rapidly emerging in this area. The most notable is the Global    Procedures in place
Reporting Initiative (GRI).                                                         for reporting, usually
                                                                                    assigned to E&S staff.
                                                                                    Primarily reactive.
 TIP

  Ongoing Communication




                                                                                                                1
 ••    Provide an immediate update if new environmental or social
       risks emerge.                                                                Some basic communica-
 ••    Report progress on implementation of your commitments.                       tions with affected com-
                                                                                    munities, mostly limited
 ••    Report monitoring results on issues that interest the community.
                                                                                    to meetings.
 ••    Use the opportunity to communicate the benefits generated by
       your company.
 ••    Translate information into local languages and easily under-




                                                                                                                0
       standable formats.
 ••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals with the community.
                                                                                    No reporting.
 ••    Involve your employees as communication links to the community.
 ••    Consider conducting a stakeholder survey to learn how your
       company is perceived.


 Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities for
 examples of formats and venues you can use.

           Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production         55
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



      56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              9. Monitoring and Review




                 TIP

                   Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                  Intent:
                       1.	Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                  Implementation:
                       2.	Are the action plans being carried out?
                       3.	Are procedures being followed?
                  Effectiveness:
                       4.	Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                       5.	Are you making progress toward your overall objectives
                          and targets?
                       6.	How is the environmental and social performance of the
                          company in general?



                INDICATORS
                A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                environmental and social policy.

                Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                  •	   water consumption;
                  •	   energy consumption;
                  •	   agrochemicals consumption;
                  •	   volume of solid waste disposal;
                  •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                  •	   raw water quality;
                  •	   emissions to air;
                  •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage), incidents and near misses;
                  •	   lost time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates;
                  •	   emergency response incidents;
                  •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                  •	   wages levels;
                  •	   incidences of child labor;
                  •	   incidences of disciplinary complaints; and

                  •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.


Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014                 ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production         57
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and
  Improving                              Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  Remember, you
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
  can’t improve what                     a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
  you don’t measure.                     evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing water and energy conservation;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?




                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability.




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit and Case Studies for
                                           more examples of key indicators common in the crop production
                                           industry.



             58    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                      9. Monitoring and Review




                                 THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                Visual observation                    Interviews
                physical walk-throughs of             consultations with workers,
                your farm or plantation.              managers and external stake-
                Examples of what you might            holders. Examples of topics
                observe: waste disposal, road         you might discuss: Do workers
                conditions, storage and ap-           and managers understand
                plication of agrochemicals,           the policies and procedures?
                housekeeping, surface water           How are they impacted? Are
                flows, worker and manager             there ideas for improvement?
                actions related to water use,         Do workers feel comfortable
                crop production processes,            filing complaints? How are
                hygiene, worker and manager           external stakeholders im-
                body language and interac-            pacted by the company? Are
                tions.                                there ideas for improvement?
                                                      Do external stakeholders feel
                                                      comfortable filing complaints?

                Measuring and                         Document review
                testing                               looking through documents
                checking through calibrated           and records. Examples of
                equipment. Examples of what           what you might review: water
                you might check: ground and           meter logs, water and energy
                surface water levels, water           bills, inspection records, com-
                quality, soil quality, water          plaint logs, wage slips, time
                and energy consumption, air           cards, policies and procedures,
                emissions, noise decibel levels,      training records.
                ambient temperature, chemi-
                cal levels in blood samples.




                             Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                             on how to conduct an audit.



Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production       59
9. Monitoring and Review



                                         Monitoring and auditing are words that are often
                                         used interchangeably, which can be confusing.
                                         Auditing is a formal, on-site evaluation against a
                                         specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
                                         internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
                                         Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various
                                         methods for evaluating performance. These may
                                         include: visual observation, measuring and testing,
                                         questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
                                         and external stakeholders, and document review.
                                         It is important to design your monitoring program
                                         to obtain qualitative and quantitative information.
                                         It is also important that workers and managers are
                                         monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.

                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing, Docu-
                                         ment Review and Interviewing People.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.




             60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                             Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                             Improvement Plan
                                             Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                             environmental, labor and community
                                             problems and remediate negative impacts
                                             ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                             continually improve the management system to
                                             support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                       Ongoing Reporting
                 Risks and Impacts




                                                                     Preparedness and




                                                                                                      Communications
                 Identification of




                                                                                                                                           Monitoring and
                                                  Organizational




                                                                                                      and Grievance
                                     Management




                                                                                                                       Communities
                                                  Capacity and




                                                                                        Engagement




                                                                                                      Mechanisms
                                                  Competency




                                                                                        Stakeholder




                                                                                                                       to Affected
                                                                     Emergency

                                                                     Response
                                     Programs




                                                                                                      External




                                                                                                                                           Review
     Policy




     Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
     improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
     Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
     improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the company
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



              Revision 2.2 June 10, 2014                           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Crop Production                                           61
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and
                                                labor laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and
                                                twelve months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by
                                                senior management




             62    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



June 2014
