                    91504




Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
ANIMAL PRODUCTION
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein may
    not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1, or any
    other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to demonstrate
    a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into company
    management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing its impact
    on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does not
    imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Standards,
    including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply endorse-
    ment by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor the
    organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged in render-
    ing technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates comprising
    the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational purposes only, and
    are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes. Implementation of
    the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final users. The material
    in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can
    be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the
    information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other member of the World Bank
    Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, puni-
    tive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited to, damages for loss of profits,
    goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even if IFC has been advised of the
    possibility of such damages) in any way arising or resulting from use or reliance on
    the Handbook or any such conclusion or determination. The Handbook is distributed
    subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be sold or oth-
    erwise circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeliness,
    completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is not
    responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice, opinions
    and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not necessarily
    represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the World Bank or
    its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in the
Animal Production Industry.........................................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
     Overview...........................................................................................................................12
     Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................................13
     System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
     Using The Handbook And Companion Publications To Develop And
     Implement Your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System............................................................ 17
     1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
         Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
         Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One..........................................18
         Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.................................................19
     2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
         Key Risks in the Animal Production Industry.....................................................................20
     3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................24
         Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................25
         Short Cases......................................................................................................................25
         Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................40
         Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................41
     4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................42
         Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................42
         Communication and Training..........................................................................................44
     5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................46
         Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the Animal Production Industry................49
     6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................52
         Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................53
         Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................54
     7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism............................................56
         External Communication.................................................................................................56
         Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................56
     8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................59
     9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................60
         Indicators........................................................................................................................61
         Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................64
         Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................65
         Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................66
Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014                        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                                         3
                       Welcome & How to
                       Use This Handbook
                       Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                       more and more important in today’s global
                       economy. There are thousands of environmental
                       and social codes and standards in the world
                       today. The codes and standards define the rules
                       and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                       implementation. An environmental and social
                       management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                       integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                       operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                       repeatable processes.

                       This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                       to help companies in the animal production
                       industry develop and implement an environmental
                       and social management system, which should help
                       to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                            In the current economic climate, companies are
                            under pressure to perform or even just survive.
                            New initiatives are often met with resistance as
                            people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
                            day responsibilities. Some people think that an
                            environmental and social management system
                            must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
                            is not really true. To be effective, a management
                            system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
                            the company.

                            If a company has existing management systems for
                            quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
                            to expand them to include environmental and social
                            performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
                            will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                            improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                            employees and stakeholders.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	   5
                        Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                  These sections provide background on environmental
                         Sections I – II          and social management systems (ESMS) in the animal
                                                  production industry.

                                                  This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                  develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                         Section III
                                                  it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                  Toolkit.

                                                  Section I of this companion publication gives tools,
                                                  including forms, templates, checklists, and other useful
                                                  documents, to help you develop and implement the systems
                                                  described in the Handbook. We suggest that you adapt
                                                  each tool for your company.

                                                  Section II includes case studies presenting two companies
                         ESMS Toolkit and         in the animal production industry that implemented an
                                                  ESMS. These hypothetical cases illustrate how to develop
                         Case Studies             and implement an ESMS appropriate to the size and nature
                                                  of your company.
                                                  •	   ABC Company – a family owned poultry production
                                                       farm in Brazil.

                                                  •	   XYZ Company – a midsized cattle farming company in
                                                       Ethiopia.

                         ESMS                     This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                         Self-Assessment          maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                         and Improvement          measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan
                         Guide                    for improvement.



                       Acknowledgements
                       This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                       department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Rob Horner,
                       Larissa Luy and Juan Jose Dada.

                       The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                       the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss and Jane
                       Hwang, as commissioned by IFC. Additional SAI contributors include Eileen
                       Kauffman, Doug DeRuisseau, Yogendra Chaudhry, Dundar Sahin and Caroline
                       Lewis. Graphic design services were provided by Pam Henry.

                       Additional IFC contributors include Debra Sequeira, Ekaterina Grigoryeva,
                       Louis Philippe Mousseau and Jeremy Ansell. The Handbook also significantly
                       benefited from comments from an internal peer review process, which involved
                       a diverse group of individuals who are too many to acknowledge individually.
                       However, the drafting team is very thankful for their valuable and insightful
                       comments and hopes they find their input reflected in this final version.

6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                   I

                              Benefits of an Environmental
                              and Social Management System
                              in the Animal Production Industry




Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	   7
“The economic                     Benefits of an Environmental
impacts of livestock
                                  and Social Management
diseases are difficult
to quantify because
                                  System in the Animal
of the complexity of              Production Industry
the effects that they
                                  Today, animal production companies are confronted with a number of signifi-
may have. We use                  cant environmental and social challenges. None of the challenges is insurmount-
our quality and EHS               able, but if not effectively addressed and managed, they will hurt your core
                                  business operations and profitability.
program as an early
                                  Among these challenges are increasing energy and feed costs, the growing power
warning system for                and influence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies, and rapidly evolv-
disease diagnostics               ing consumer awareness and concerns about environmental and social issues.
                                  These risks are in addition to the primary risk of failing to manage food safety
and management.”                  while building brand and consumer confidence. All of these risks ultimately
CFO - Livestock grower            can have financial consequences. Moreover, export is vital to the success of
                                  many animal production businesses; but exporting brings even more demands
and marketing company,
                                  from international legislation, voluntary standards and consumer requirements
Asia
                                  – increasingly related to environmental and social practices. All of these risks,
                                  requirements and pressures that your business faces are forces that encourage you
                                  to implement a management system.

                                  There are direct business benefits to be derived from implementing an environ-
                                  mental and social management system. Conserving and using energy and mate-
                                  rials efficiently helps to reduce production costs. Reducing waste and discharges



                                 “Poor quality of veterinary services and prevalence of
                                  many epidemic and endemic livestock diseases were
                                  our major challenges. A worker hygiene, sanitation
                                  and quality management program has helped us
                                  reduce our risk by 40-50%.”
                                  General Manager - Livestock producer and exporter, Africa




        8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                 “The livestock sector is increasingly affected by
                                  competition for natural resources, particularly
                                  land and water and by the need to operate in a
                                  carbon-constrained economy. Good environment
                                  practices and community engagement programs
                                  are two key factors in our rapid economic growth.”
                                  Managing Director -
                                  Livestock Merchant Wholesalers in Latin America.




                              can minimize the cost of increasingly expensive, regulated discharges to the
                              environment (such as greenhouse gases and wastewater). In the animal produc-
                              tion industry, there can be financial benefits from waste management. Instead
                              of merely capturing and treating animal waste with no benefit, you can convert
                              organic wastes to biogas for boiler fuel or generate electric power, or organic
                              fertilizer and soil amendments to strengthen crop production sustainability. A
                              management system can elucidate where expenditures exceed industry bench-
                              marks and identify potential production cost savings.

                              The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transpar-
                              ent human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                              workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems. Ef-
                              fective occupational health and safety management procedures work toward the
                              identification of workplace and process hazards, then seek to eliminate or reduce
                              them through engineering controls and employee training on how to avoid job
                              site risks. This serves not only to reduce incidents, accidents and fatalities, but
                              also contributes to reducing insurance premiums for worker compensation.




“While expanding we realized that increasing livestock numbers
will add to the demand for water, particularly in the production
 of livestock feed, so we decided to invest in water saving and
rain water harvesting in the region. The support from regulators
and community is crucial to business like ours.”
Senior VP - Pig farmer and feed company in Asia



Revision 2.2   June 1. 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                      9
                          Management systems are widely used by animal production companies in qual-
                          ity control and food safety. An environmental and social management system
                          simply extends that approach to managing the impact your business has on the
                          environment and the working conditions at your facility.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized,
                          instead of having one system for quality, one for food safety and one for ESMS.
                          Integrated management systems are the goal, but the focus of this Handbook is
                          on helping you implement an ESMS that is appropriate for the size and nature
                          of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                  II
                              Understanding an
                              Environmental and Social
                              Management System




Revision 2.2   June 1, 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Revision 2.2   June 1, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                  13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve            A lot of companies in the animal production industry already have management
                             systems for quality or food safety. If so, you may already have elements of an
what you don’t               ESMS, and there is no need to replace what you already have. In this Hand-
                             book’s companion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide,
measure.                     we provide a self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements. The self-
                             assessment will allow you to measure your current level of system development
                             and implementation. You will answer a series of questions and get your score for
                             each element in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score measures
                             the maturity of your system. Once you understand the maturity of your system,
                             it is easier to target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                       THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                              Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                      chain partners – continual improvement embedded in opera-
                                      tions
                              Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                      routine improvement projects
                              Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                      tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                              Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                      primarily reactive
                              Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                              Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




   14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                              REMEMBER
                              A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                              valuable if it is well-implemented.

                              SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                               One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                               is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                               management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                               lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                              “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                               cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                              Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                              routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                              goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                              that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                              to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                              ment.

                              One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                              development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                              tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                              well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                              mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                              developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                              organization change.

                              The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, Toolkit and
                              Case Studies and Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system
                              development and system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.


                               DEFINITIONS
                               System                     The documented policies and procedures.
                               Development
                               System                     Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                               Implementation             ing the procedures.



An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.

Revision 2.2   June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                     15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK
     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan
                                                                         •	   Learn the nine fundamental
     •	   Learn how other companies                                           elements of an ESMS
          scaled the ESMS to their
          size and complexity
                                                 REDO this graphic
                              ESMS
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                            TOOLKIT &
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                              CASE
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                             STUDIES
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                 III
                            Practical Guidelines for
                            Developing and Implementing
                            Your Environmental and Social
                            Management System

                            This section provides step-by-step instructions
                            on how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                            For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                            way to measure where you are now.


                                     When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                     there is a tool in the companion publication
                                     Toolkit and Case Studies to make it easier
                                     to get started.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies in
    place.                      and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related poli-   it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    cies and procedures.        of the specific risks you face in the animal production industry.




    18   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your        Commitment;
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   and
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.
                                                                                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-       Your senior
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          management
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           can help you to
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
                                                 The key message is that this       accelerate all
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for              will contribute to the com-
 Developing a Company Policy                     pany’s success and that each       three stages.
 Statement to get ideas of what you              person will benefit - but that
 could include in your policy.                   they  will also be held ac-
                                                 countable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
                                                 stages with your senior man-
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter                 agement. Consider accompa-
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to               nying the Policy Statements
 get started.                                    with a message from the CEO.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	            19
                                    ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   You’ve made an important first step by defining
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     your environmental and social policies and gaining
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-
    tors, subcontractors, third
                                   senior management commitment to making
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   them an important part of how your company


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
                                   operates. Now you need to identify the relevant
    itization of E&S risks
    and impacts. Routinely         environmental and social risks and impacts that
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
    changing activities. Wide
                                   your company needs to address.
    awareness and engage-
    ment in company.
                                   In the following pages, we present the key issues


3
    Awareness and engage-
    ment of staff in identifica-   that tend to come up in the animal production
    tion and prioritization of
    E&S risks and impacts.         industry.
    External experts involved
    as required.
                                   KEY RISKS IN THE ANIMAL PRODUCTION INDUSTRY

                                   1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency




2
    Procedures in place for          •	 Generation of large amounts of solid waste and sludge from waste feed,
    identification of E&S risks         animal waste and carcasses, packaging (for feed and pesticides), used bedding,
    and impacts across all key          ventilation equipment, and unused/spoilt medications
    activities.                      •	 Release of effluents containing high BOD, COD, TSS, ammonia, nutrients,
                                        sediment, pesticides, pathogens, feed additives, growth enhancers and antibiotics
                                        from poultry housing and cattle sheds, feeding, watering and manure storage
                                        areas
                                     •	 Cleaning fluids, detergents and disinfectants entering wastewater
                                     •	 Improper or insufficient wastewater treatment prior to its discharge into




1
    Basic identification and            water system
    assessment of E&S risks          •	 Deforestation, land degradation, and desertification from overgrazing
    and impacts, but limited
    to a few activities.             •	 Atmospheric emissions of CO2 and equivalents (nitrous oxide and methane)
                                        responsible for climate change as well as ammonia, bioaerosols and dust




0
    No identification or
    assessment of E&S
    risks and impacts.




      20    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                             2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




                            2.	 Occupational Health and Safety
                              •	 Injuries related to vehicle operation and repair and falls into confined spaces such
                                 as manure pits, silos, grain bins, water tanks
                              •	 Back injuries from repetitive manual work such as handling animals in stables,
                                 shackling birds, and hauling manure
                              •	 Injuries sustained from bites and kicks by livestock and poultry
                              •	 Exposure to pesticides including dermal contact, inhalation from their
                                 preparation and application which can be increased by climatic conditions
                                 (wind) and ingestion via contaminated water
                              •	 Exposure to airborne hazards such as poultry dust, organic and inorganic dust
                                 from mammalian livestock operations leading to acute toxic alveolitis and
                                 farmer’s lung
                              •	 Exposure to dangerous gases such as hydrogen sulfide and ammonia especially in
                                 confined manure storage areas (pits, storage tanks, application tankers)
                              •	 Exposure to disease causing agents transmitted from live animals and manure
                                 (bacteria, parasites and ticks, and viruses including bird flu)

                            3.	 Labor
                              •	 Use of migrant and temporary labor
                              •	 Use of child labor especially as part of family unit of workers
                              •	 Use of recruitment agencies/contractors with associated risk of forced labor
                              •	 Excessive overtime not properly compensated and unrealistic production quota
                              •	 Living or minimum wage is not paid or insufficient for a reasonable standard
                                 of living
                              •	 Restrictions on Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining

                            4.	 Community health, safety and security
                              •	 Improper handling, segregation and disposal of sick or diseased animals
                              •	 Emission of foul smelling odors and pungent hazardous gases such as ammonia
                                 from denitrification of manure
                              •	 Elimination of dissolved oxygen in surface waters leading to anoxic conditions
                                 and loss of aquatic life in streams and rivers due to eutrophication
                              •	 Increased vehicle traffic due to transport of animal feed, waste, raw materials
                              •	 Constraints on local water supplies especially with livestock farming, and potential
                                 contamination of drinking water supplies
                              •	 Danger of surfacing antibiotic-resistant strains of disease causing microorganisms
                                 due to excessive industrial use of antibiotics
                              •	 Public concerns regarding animal welfare and inhumane treatment
                              •	 Danger to health and safety from ingestion of contaminated or adulterated beef,
                                 milk, pork and chicken from pathogenic organisms such as Avaian influenza and
                                 parasitical worms




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                             21
2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




Top 3 risks and
opportunities in the
Animal Production
industry
                                         There are different ways to conduct a risk assessment. One

1   Liquid waste from live-
    stock farming can lead
to environmental pollution.
                                         common method is to map your facility and production
                                         processes – this can highlight OHS and environmental risks.
                                         A common method for risks to workers is to use a checklist
Intensive livestock farming              of risk factors , such as employee demographics, regional
generates large amounts                  labor laws, contracting arrangements, etc.
of organic waste. In addi-
tion to nutrients, these                 The following are key considerations for a robust risk
may contain antibiotics,                 assessment system:
hormones and pesticides.
                                           •	   Cover environmental, OHS, worker and community risks;
From such water pollu-
tion, conflicts with other                 •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;
uses, such as with fisheries
and drinking water extrac-                 •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to op-
tion may result. Pesticides                     erations;
must be handled carefully                  •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as
in order to mitigate risks                      new laws or regulations;
for human health and the
environment.                               •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers;

                                                Include input from affected communities and other ex-
2
                                           •	
    Large-scale farming
                                                ternal stakeholders;
    may lead to deforesta-
tion and desertification.                  •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff does
Large forest areas may                          not have the capability;
have to be cleared for
pastures. Grazing animals                  •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the severity
may prevent forest growth.                      and probability of negative impacts;
Overgrazing, i.e. unsustain-               •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those
ably large animal popula-                       in your company; and
tions on too-small areas,
may lead to desertification,               •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
which turns pasture into                        business.
unproductive wasteland.
Some of these impacts
may be irreversible. Well-
managed livestock farms
ensure that their business is
sustainable in the long run.




           22     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks in the
animal production industry, you can first use the Risk Identification
Worksheet to identify your potential risks and negative impacts based          3   Intensive livestock
                                                                                   farming may put a
                                                                               strain on the local water
on your operations and operating environment. Then you can use
                                                                               supply. Animal farming
the Process Mapping or the Physical Mapping tools to identify in
                                                                               requires considerable
more detail where problems are likely to arise within your production
                                                                               amounts of potable water
process.
                                                                               as well as large land
Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every single        areas for grazing, bios-
environmental and social impact that your company could possibly               ecurity considerations,
have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form to prioritize which risks           and feeding. A reliable
should be addressed first.                                                     and continuous supply of
                                                                               potable water is essential.
                                                                               There may be potential for
For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks                 optimizing the efficiency of
and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at                water use, for preventing
www.ifc.org/sustainability.                                                    shortages and for address-
                                                                               ing conflicts with other
                                                                               users of the same water
                                                                               resources.




                                                                               Source: Livestock Farming
                                                                               Sector Factsheet – www.
                                                                               firstforsustainability.org




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                 23
                                    ELEMENT 3


                                  Management
                                  Programs

5
    Verified progress against
    objectives and targets;
                                  Management Programs are centered on Action
    significant improvements
    in E&S performance. Dem-      Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize
    onstrated commitment to
    continual improvement         or compensate for the risks and impacts that were
    using annual improvement
    plans.
                                  identified.


4
    Routine, consistent imple-
    mentation of actions/
    activities to proactively     For example, if you have a policy commitment
    manage E&S risks and
    impacts. Measurable com-
    pany-wide objectives and
                                  to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you
    targets. Periodic review
    and update.                   have identified this as a risk factor based on the



3
    Actions/activities in place   lack of a system for employees to express their
    to manage E&S risks and
    impacts, following the
    mitigation hierarchy –        complaints, you may implement a complaint
    avoid, minimize, offset/
    compensate. Proactive         procedure as a way to minimize the risk of
    approach to managing
    issues.
                                  discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


2
    Procedures and assigned
    responsibilities to address   is the protection of nearby water bodies and you
    and mitigate E&S risks
    and impacts across all key
    activities. Primarily reac-
                                  have identified this as a risk factor because of
    tive.
                                  the high quantity of manure produced by your
                                  operations, you may take action by building a

1
    A few informal programs
    or activities to mitigate
    E&S impacts. No systems       composting facility to avoid sending manure to
    awareness or repeatable
    processes.                    waste lagoons.




0   No process for mitigating
    E&S risks and impacts.




     24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                        3. Management Programs




                            IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                            It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                            avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                            mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                        First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                        example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                        water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                        differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                        owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a manure handling
                                   practice that exposes workers to toxic gases in confined spaces. You
                                   might avoid this risk by ensuring proper ventilation or minimize by
  Prioritizing Your Actions        training workers on the hazard.

        AVOID                         In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
          ▼                           be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                                      cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, sup-
       MINIMIZE
                                      pose that you are located in an area where women are traditionally
          ▼
                                      given lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace
   COMPENSATE/OFFSET                  they are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. The
                                      local cultural context and the need to hire both men and women is
                                      unavoidable. It is important to pay attention to your recruitment,
                            hiring and training procedures, to make sure that women are hired on equi-
                            table terms and given equal access to training and promotion opportunities.
                            You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure that rules for
                            recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow. Additionally,
                            you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of and follows
                            the procedures.

                            In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                            negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                            positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                            suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                            minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                            comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                            leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.



SHORT CASES

Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/com-
pensate common environmental and social key risks in the animal
production industry. Action Plans can be scaled to the size of your
company and the nature of the risks you face.

Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                      25
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: BELARUS


            Mega Enterprises 	
            RISK: Water Pollution
            Mega Enterprises is one of the leading livestock companies in the Republic of Belarus. The orga-
            nization is well known throughout the country for its large, concentrated animal feeding op-
            erations. Recently, the company was highlighted in the news because of a waterborne disease
            outbreak in communities surrounding one of its farms and, fish kills in local surface waters.
            Collected manure from feedlot operations was allowed to escape confinement and flow to
            surface waters. The farm was visited by the provincial health authorities who found that most of
            the animals were crowded into relatively small areas; their manure and urine are transported to
            massive waste lagoons. In the past few months lagoon walls and confining structures have failed
            several times. These breaches, coupled with frequent leakage and overflows, are responsible for
            discharges of pathogenic bacteria, nitrates and water treatment-resistant pathogenic spores into
            water supplies; and consequent contamination and eutrophication of water bodies.


              I M PAC T

              Impact on raw water sources utilized for community potable water systems

              AVO I D

              •	 Commission engineering feasibility studies to evaluate the following treatment methods:
                  •	 solid animal waste combustion for heat, steam, and electricity generation; use of ash
                     for organic fertilizer and soil amendment
                  •	 liquid-solid separation systems; composting solids to produce organic fertilizer; using
                     liquids for irrigation
                  •	 anaerobic digestion of liquefied manure; collect and combust methane generated;
                     collect and distribute digested sludge and effluent for land application;
                  •	 constructed wetlands
              •	 Seek capital investment for feasible approaches

              •	 Design and construct storm water diversion facilities to prevent liquefaction of solid
                 manure; divert clean storm runoff and run-on to retention ponds that slowly discharge
                 to surface water to avoid siltation and transfer of contaminants; retention ponds should
                 contain the volume generated by a 25-year storm event
              •	 Construct liquefied manure storage facilities that are watertight to prevent leakage
                 and contact with precipitation, and with adequate capacity for cold weather storage
                 (6-8 months)




            26    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Establish setback distances for locating operation facilities from residences

  •	 Establish appropriate setbacks and vegetative buffers between land application areas and
    water courses
  •	 Prohibit applications to land with unsuitable slopes (e.g. greater than 12%)

  •	 Ascertain ground water depth and flow direction quality; use these data to maintain ap-
    propriate setback distances between manure storage and wells, surface water courses,
    sinkholes and springs
  •	 Redesign green and composted solid manure application programs and procedures to
    prevent surface water contamination, provide organic fertilizer for crops, plantations, and
    other vegetation
  •	 Prepare an annual manure management plan addressing specific practices for all-season
    management of animal wastes
  •	 Control volume of wastes produced by formulating diets to reduce manure production

  O FF S E T


  •	 Provide diagnostic and curative medical assistance to the community affected by contami-
    nated water supply
  •	 Identify and provide alternative potable water supply to affected communities until safe
    community water supply is restored
  •	 Audit municipal potable water treatment plant operations and provide funds for retrofit,
    reparation, and improved operation to ensure that raw waters are treated adequately
  •	 Provide guidance for the local authority to monitor raw water quality and to modify
    treatment unit processes when confronted with deteriorating sources of raw water
  •	 Remediate ecosystems affected by manure pollution to renew and revive ecosystem services




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	               27
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: CANADA


            Canadian Livestock Company
            RISK: Greenhouse Gas Emissions
            Canadian Livestock Company is one of the largest livestock producers in Alberta, Canada. The
            company is aiming to increase production by 40 percent in the next five years. A recent report by
            a researcher from a local university claims that Alberta’s livestock industry contributes about 1%
            of Canada’s total GHG emissions. The report indicates that the main gases emitted by the live-
            stock industry are methane from animals, and methane and nitrous oxide from manure handling
            and storage. Methane and nitrous oxide are very potent in terms of their greenhouse effect
            compared to carbon dioxide. Methane is 21 times more potent and nitrous oxide is 310 times
            more potent than carbon dioxide, per unit of gas. During the annual general meeting last month,
            shareholders emphasized the need to minimize total GHG emissions from the company’s opera-
            tions. The Board wants the organization to develop programs to minimize GHG emissions and
            start reporting its environmental performance through annual sustainability reports. A new envi-
            ronmental manager has been appointed to develop a GHG monitoring and mitigation program.


              I M PAC T

              High GHG emissions from livestock production

              AVO I D

              •	 Increase calf crop percentage by improving production efficiencies so minimizing the
                 number of cows needed to achieve the same number of calves
              •	 Anaerobically digest animal manure in closed system and combust resulting methane and
                 other gases
              •	 Combust collected gases from anaerobic digestion in CHP (combined heat and power)
                 engine

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Improve digestibility with higher quality feeds (better pastures, high grain diets)

              •	 Add plant-derived edible oils to feed; oil added to cattle feed will not only add energy to
                 the diet but also inhibit methane production
              •	 Include ionophores as a feed additive to reduce methanogenic bacteria in the rumen

              •	 Apply manure to land more frequently rather than stockpiling or storing it in lagoons for
                 long periods; however, also avoid excessive manure applications and optimize application
                 timing to reduce nitrous oxide emissions
              •	 Aerate manure during composting

              O FF S E T

              •	 Periodically report GHG emissions through the use of greenhouse gas calculators

              •	 Offset GHG emissions by purchasing carbon credits

              •	 Support local or regional initiatives and programs on carbon sequestration or climate
                 change adaptation.




            28    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: INDONESIA


Java Cattle Farms
RISK: Gender discrimination
Java Cattle Farms (JCF) is a family owned commercial cattle smallholding in East Java, Indonesia.
The region has one of the highest population densities in the country and livestock farming is one
of the major economic activities in the area. Close integration of crop and livestock production
is one of the key reasons for increasing cattle growth in such a densely populated and intensely
farmed region. JCF creates employment for various family members, particularly women and
children. Additional labor demand is mostly sourced from the neighboring villages. JCF prefers to
employ women as the need for workers is often temporary and the business can pay them less.

  I M PAC T

  Gender discrimination in wage payments

  AVO I D

  •	 Revise Human Resources procedures to stipulate JCF requirements to comply with labor
    regulations and ensure that equal remuneration is paid to the workers for the same job
    irrespective of their gender
  •	 Periodically train and re-train all managers, supervisors and workers on the revised Human
    Resources procedures addressing company practices on hiring and wage payments and
    gender sensitivity issues
  •	 Implement zero tolerance disciplinary procedures against supervisors and managers re-
    sponsible for gender discrimination and low wage payment to female workers

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Create an employee grievance mechanism and robust, effective communication channels
    to monitor and resolve gender discrimination cases involving payment of low wages to
    female workers
  •	 Establish and implement time bound objectives to minimize gender discrimination, gender
    sensitization and redress of reported complaints
  •	 Regularly report to company workers, supervisors and managers on gender/wage related
    complaints and the status of corrective and preventive actions

  O FF S E T

  •	 Identify and pay back wages to all affected female employees
  •	 Ensure timely redress of all reported wage related complaints




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	              29
3. Management Programs
                                           CASE STUDY: ETHIOPIA

            Sheep and Goat Company
            RISK: Use of large amounts of freshwater
            Sheep and Goat Company (SGC) is a medium size commercial livestock company in Southern Ethiopia.
            The main feed resources of the area are natural pastures (herbaceous vegetation composed mainly
            of grasses and shrubs, tree leaves and pods), which show marked seasonal variation in availability and
            quality based on variability of rainfall distribution. Productivity of animals in terms of milk produc-
            tion, growth rate and reproductive performance is generally low. The company exports both live
            animals and meat to various African countries, as well as the Middle East, where live animals are
            demanded due to religious and cultural practices. In general the area is characterized by low avail-
            ability of surface water. The sources of water in the region include wells (elas), ponds and bore holes.
            The local villagers complain that due to high water consumption by SGC there is always a shortage of
            water supply for the local communities. The shortage is more serious during the dry season and as a
            result people are forced to travel long distance (up to 5 hours walk) in search of water.

                 I M PAC T

                 Shortages of water for local communities

                 AVO I D
                 •	 Do a water audit: install water meters, collect data for 5-10 days, and compare with animal
                   drinking needs to detect problems
                 •	 Adjust ball valves on troughs to prevent overflow
                 •	 Use smaller troughs that require less water for cleaning
                 •	 Replace troughs with on-demand drinkers
                 •	 Check drinkers’ flow rates to ensure water flow exclusively when demanded
                 •	 Fit drinkers with catch basins to retain overflow
                 •	 Assess the diet; feeding a diet containing excessive protein or excessive mineral levels results in
                   increased thirst and water consumption
                 M I N I M IZE
                 •	 Perform regular maintenance of water devices to prevent and repair leaks
                 •	 Minimize water for washing processes, by using:
                    •	 broom and scrape before washing;
                    •	 pressure washers instead of volume washers;
                    •	 collected water trough overflow as cleaning water;
                    •	 water-saving nozzles and/or trigger taps on hoses;
                    •	 brush and bucket for some cleaning
                 •	 Minimize the time animals spend standing in the yard to reduce the amount of manure that
                   needs to be cleaned up
                 •	 Dry clean yards to maximum feasible extent; collect manure for composting
                 •	 Create low volume footbaths or mats (to replace footbaths) to reduce water consumption for
                   disease control
                 •	 Store water used for cleaning the animals in treatment storage ponds and recycle for yard
                   washing or irrigation
                 O FF S E T
                 •	 Install Ranney wells to help increase water supply for the local community
                 •	 Engage with local communities and NGOs to rehabilitate elas and promote the adoption of
                   rainwater harvesting technologies (e.g. roof water, ponds)
                 •	 Distribute purchased potable water to affected communities during the dry season; provide
                   containers for storage of delivered water

            30      Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: VIETNAM

Piglet Breeding Company
RISK: Use of restricted substances in animal production
Piglet Breeding Company (PBC) is a small pig farming company in Thanh Hoa Province of North-
ern Vietnam. The company is a family owned business and is in the process of modernizing its
facility to improve productivity. The local breeds are gradually being replaced or crossbred with
exotic breeds by the company. Recently it was reported by the local media that some husbandry
units in the neighboring province were feeding controlled substances to their pigs and as a result
consumer demand has fallen in the last few days. The provincial officials found the beta-agonist
Ractopamine (Ractopamine has been banned in the European Union, mainland China and Russia),
a growth promoting and lean meat enhancing drug only recently approved for use in Vietnam, in
some pig-rearing households in Dong Nai during surprise checks. After the “lean meat” story was
published, most of PBC’s customers have started demanding “some sort of quality certification”.
The Quality Manager is not aware of regulations related to controlled substances and is therefore
planning to hire an external consultant to advise them on the issue. The company has been in-
formed about Global Good Agriculture Practices (GAP) certification and will further evaluate this
program with the external consultant.


  I M PAC T

  Food safety and negative impact on consumers’ health

  AVO I D

  •	 Establish a list of approved veterinary drugs; consult the Codex Alimentarius Commission,
    a UN food standards-setting body, for maximum residue limits (MRLs) for veterinary drugs,
    and specific tolerances for local and export markets (e.g. FDA-established safe levels)
  •	 Establish procedures and animal drug approval mechanisms; and train procurement and
    production departments to prevent purchase and use of banned substances
  •	 Strictly monitor and control veterinary drug purchase, management and administration

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Immediately audit all livestock veterinary and feeding processes to identify any possible
    use of banned substances in the operations
  •	 If the use of banned/controlled substances is identified, test a sample of live animals for
    each lot
  •	 Isolate and quarantine animals testing positive for banned/controlled additives to ensure
    they are not slaughtered until drug residues comply with safe levels
  •	 Establish procedures and train workers to ensure that drug administration is managed
    overall by a veterinarian according to label directions and good veterinary practices (see
    Global GAP all farms and pork modules)
  •	 Regularly test animal tissues for veterinary drug residues to ensure levels are below MRL

  O FF S E T

  •	 Recall all products from the market that are affected/contaminated with banned sub-
    stances or approved substances whose concentration is above MRL




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                 31
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: ARGENTINA


            Hogs Company
            RISK: Odor and air emissions from farm operations
            Hogs Company is a leading pig farming company operating in the province of Buenos Aires,
            Argentina. The company has been facing criticism from local environmental groups for some time
            because of the air emissions and foul odors generated by its operations. The surrounding com-
            munity has often complained to the company that the environmental emissions and odors from
            the farms are affecting the community health and wellbeing and are often a nuisance to the
            people. A local news channel, which ran the story last week, claimed that people who are living
            near the farms are breathing in hundreds of gases, formed as manure decomposes. The stench is
            often unbearable, but worse still the gases contain many harmful chemicals. The news channel
            claimed that gases like hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and ammonia released by the farm are dangerous
            even at low levels. The effect from these gases could be irreversible and range from sore throat to
            seizures, comas and even death in the case of high occupational exposure. Some of the common
            effects claimed by the people living in the vicinity are headaches, shortness of breath, wheezing,
            excessive coughing and diarrhea.


              I M PAC T

              Impact on community health due to air emissions and foul odors

              AVO I D

              •	 Separate liquid from solid waste; compost solid waste to produce organic fertilizer; trans-
                 port liquid waste to a covered anaerobic lagoon with a system for gas collection and
                 combustion (biogas can be combusted in a furnace/boiler or used to run a CHP engine); use
                 liquid effluents from the anaerobic digester as liquid fertilizer
              •	 Revise operations to dry bedding and employ solid waste for production of organic fertil-
                 izer through composting
              •	 Revise swine diet to reduce manure production and odor emission: reduce crude protein
                 content and supplement with amino acids; supplement diet with enzymes to improve nutri-
                 ent utilization; add fat to the feed to reduce production of particulate which carries odor
              •	 Consider appropriate setbacks from nearby homes and public facilities when selecting site




            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Place permeable cover or biocover (straw) over manure pits/tanks/small lagoons (bottom
    load the manure); covers limit volatilization and provide a high surface area for filtering
    and aerobic degradation of odors and other gases emitted from the slurry
  •	 Separate liquid from solid waste; compost solids to produce organic fertilizer; inject liquid
    fraction of manure into the soil for crop production
  •	 If outdoor lot for solid manure storage is used:
     •	 cover solid manure pile with impermeable material to prevent liquefaction of solids;
     •	 maintain good drainage and add leachate to liquid manure fraction for fertilization
        purposes;
     •	 divert storm water run-on and eliminate all runoff affecting solid manure pile
  •	 Use shelterbelts: plant rows of trees and other vegetation around the facility, thus creating
    a barrier for both dust and odorous compounds emitted from the facility
  •	 Remove mortality waste promptly; send to rendering facility within 24 hours
  •	 If prompt removal of mortality waste is not feasible, then incinerate, refrigerate, compost,
    or bury if allowed by regulation
  •	 Keep facilities and animals clean and dry

  O FF S E T

  •	 Engage with local communities and news media to educate the public about the character-
    istics of hydrogen sulfide (H2S); H2S gas can be detected at very low concentrations (0.0005–
    0.3 ppm [parts per million]) but allowable workplace maximum concentrations are 10 ppm
    and IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) concentrations are ≥100 ppm
  •	 Measure H2S ambient air concentration in affected housing areas and put the actual con-
    centrations of emissions into perspective for community and news media to alleviate fears
    while remedial measures are ongoing
  •	 Provide financial assistance to affected community members for proper medical diagnosis
    and treatment if needed
  •	 Consider resettlement and rehabilitation for the community members affected by measured
    ambient air concentrations of H2S that approach allowable occupational exposure limits




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                  33
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: BRASIL


            Brazil Swine Company
            RISK: Atmospheric hazards in confined spaces
            Brazil Swine Company is a large pig farm located in Santa Catarina in the southern region of
            the country. The company is currently under investigation by the local health and safety regula-
            tors after one of its contractor’s employees was exposed to high concentration of manure gases
            during a routine cleaning work. The worker is reported to be in a critical condition and is under-
            going treatment in the district hospital. The incident happened when the contractor’s employee
            was working in one of the animal housing facilities where the manure pit was located below
            the facility floor. The investigations revealed that the manure pit was agitated when the worker
            was in the barn. Trapped manure gases produced during agitation may have been pulled from
            the manure pit to the animal housing facility trough the transfer pipes. This resulted in the pres-
            ence of toxic gases and the displacement of oxygen, causing poisonous reactions in the exposed
            worker and asphyxiation. The company faces charges that it failed to provide information,
            instruction, training and supervision to workers to allow them to work safely.


              I M PAC T

              Fatalities/illnesses due to exposure to manure decomposition-associated gases including
              hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, carbon dioxide and methane

              AVO I D

              •	 Modify manure collection practices to ensure continuous flow (transport) or active
                 pumping of manure from animal housing facilities to exterior manure storage
              •	 Install back flow preventers to avoid the migration of dangerous gases from exterior
                 manure storage to animal housing facilities through conveyance piping
              •	 Keep at least one foot of space between the highest manure level collected in any gutter
                 or pit underneath the animal housing facility and the level of the slotted floors; this will
                 reduce the amount toxic gases accumulation
              •	 Ensure that low places are vented to the exterior as most of the associated toxic gases are
                 heavier than oxygen and when generated will fill depressions, pits and similar places
              •	 Incorporate gas evacuation extractors with external vents to actively evacuate gases gener-
                 ated by manure decomposition in manure pits/tanks
              •	 Install gas detectors and audible, visible alarms for specific gas concentrations exceeding
                 allowable workplace concentrations
              •	 Remove all animals and people during agitation of manure pits and keep them at a safe
                 distance until gas detectors show that concentrations levels are below allowable workplace
                 concentrations
              •	 Engineer new manure storage systems to provide access to all serviceable parts from the
                 outside, eliminating the need to enter confined spaces
              •	 Commission an audit of waste management practices to ensure best practices, such as
                 active liquefied manure transport to closed digestion system and combustion or beneficial
                 use of gases generated by manure digestion
              •	 Commission a cost benefit study for conversion to dry bedding accompanied by collection
                 and composting of solid wastes for use as organic fertilizer
              •	 Define benefits accruing from reduced water demand, reduced waste generation and
                 elimination of OHS hazards posed by generation of toxic gases from manure liquefaction
                 and digestion


            34    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Conduct job hazards analyses for all aspects of animal rearing including organic waste
    management
  •	 Develop robust safe practices procedures for entry into confined spaces of places with haz-
    ardous atmospheres. These should address:
     •	 Mandatory ventilation of closed, confined spaces prior to preparation for entry;
     •	 Consideration of alternative options for maintenance of manure storage areas;
     •	 Restriction of preventive maintenance to periods when the primary hazards have been
        eliminated or reduced to insignificance (e.g. all manure is removed);
     •	 Prohibition of entry to manure storage areas during or just after agitation;
     •	 Installation, operation and calibration of gas detection devices equipped with audible
        and visual alarms according to manufacturer‘s instructions
     •	 Mandate use of hazard-specific PPE including full face supplied air respirators or self-
        contained breathing apparatus, dermal protection, safety belt or harness with lifeline
        tied to mechanical lifting device, and an external team supporting any such entries;
     •	 Provide individual who has entered the confined space with the means to alert surface
        team to problems mandating his/her extraction such as bells, whistles operated by sup-
        plied air, etc.;
     •	 Team roles (e.g. a standby person should be in constant contact and ready to lift the
        worker to safety with mechanical lifting equipment)
  •	 Train employees, contractors and subcontractors on associated hazards, preventive mea-
    sures, correct use and maintenance of appropriate PPE, and specific prohibitions
  •	 Provide follow-up OHS training to ensure that the level of job hazards awareness is high
    and assigned employees are aware of specific hazards and how to avoid them
  •	 Repeat confined space entry training programs on a regular basis
  •	 Develop job specific skill matrix and ensure that only trained and qualified workers are
    authorized for entry into confined spaces or places with hazardous atmospheres; provide
    identification to these workers; put in place robust prohibitions to prevent entry by un-
    trained personnel
  •	 Assign first responders and train them on first-aid suitable to the specific workplace
  •	 Post signs alerting all employees to confined spaces and associated dangers due to toxic
    gases at access points of manure storage pits or under floor manure transfer chambers.
    Signs in more than one language may be necessary. Signs should be understandable to
    workers who cannot read.
  •	 Deter entry to manure pits/tanks by unauthorized people by:
     •	 removing access ladders;
     •	 installing covers (weighing at least 20 kg ) over manure tanks;
     •	 enclosing all open liquid manure storage vessels with a permanent safety fence or wall
        with a minimum height of 1.5 m and having gates with locks

  O FF S E T

  •	 Provide timely assistance and medical care for workers who are injured in the workplace
  •	 Compensate workers for lost wages, loss of ability to work, and loss of life in line with local
    labor regulations and company’s policies

Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	               35
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: MEXICO


           Modern Enterprise
           RISK: Handling large animals
            Modern Enterprise is one of the largest cow-calf enterprises in the Chihuahua State of Mexico.
            The company is engaged in the production of meat, milk, breeding stock, animals for work,
            and animals for recreation, including fighting bulls and rodeo cattle. Company management is
            concerned about the increasing number of accidents related to the handling of large animals. In
            the last three months the company had several minor and major safety incidents where workers
            were kicked or knocked down by animals. In one of the incidents last week, a worker was
            pinned against a wall by a steer; the incident resulted in a serious fracture and head injuries to
            the worker. In another unrelated incident, a worker was kicked and severely injured by a cow
            when he tried to approach it from behind. The incident investigation reveals that the worker
            was new and he was trying to move the cow away from feed for its medical examination.


              I M PAC T

              Physical injuries due to management of large and potentially aggressive animals

              AVO I D

              •	 Design and install cattle working facilities and equipment to perform the necessary cattle
                 management activities while providing safe working conditions for staff
              •	 Install panic bar man-gates or other safe means to easily climb a solid fence to facilitate
                 ready escape when animals exhibit aggressive behavior
              •	 Ensure that animals are properly restrained during medical treatment or examination

              •	 Apply humane and non threatening means to move animals around and to restrain them
                 as needed for examination and treatment
              •	 Train workers on safe handling of animals

              •	 Mandate that only workers with the required level of training, orientation and demon-
                 strated competence handle large farm animals

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Perform job hazard analyses for all animal management activities

              •	 Incorporate job hazard analyses and preventive and emergency measures for animal han-
                 dling and management into operations and OHS procedures, subcontractor specifications,
                 and employee training
              •	 Ensure all workers coming into potential contact with animals wear personal protective
                 equipment designed and purchased in response to the findings of job hazard analyses,
                 such as steel toed footwear, etc.
              •	 Periodically train all new and existing supervisors and workers, including contractors and
                 subcontractors, on procedures for safe handling of large animals, warning signs of each
                 animal type, mandatory protective equipment, and means of escape from aggressive
                 animals

              O FF S E T

              •	 Provide medical care and timely assistance for workers who are injured in the workplace

              •	 Compensate workers for lost wages, loss ability to work, and loss of life, in line with local
                 labor regulations and company’s policies
              •	 Immediately sell consistently bad tempered, aggressive and dangerous animals as beef cattle


            36    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: ECUADOR


Ecuador Poultry Farms
      
RISK: Excessive overtime due to short term work demand
Ecuador Poultry Farms is a well-known poultry company operating in the outskirts of Guayaquil City,
Ecuador. The company is one of the oldest in the country, engaged in raising chickens both for eggs
and for meat. The company has over 300 employees and is undergoing a rapid expansion program
with the aim to double production in the next 2-3 years. The expansion plan includes purchasing and
installing additional hatchery equipment and a complete up-grading of the ventilation system. Since
this expansion program was not planned in advance, management is facing a shortage of skilled
workers required for equipment commissioning and other specialized work related to the ventila-
tion system. The engineering and maintenance employees who are the skilled workers have com-
plained twice in the last two weeks that they are being forced to work excessive hours. One accident
last week was attributed to fatigue due to long working hours. Upon further investigation, some
workers have claimed that they have been working for two shifts every day for the last 10 days.

  I M PAC T

  Workplace injuries/illnesses caused by workers’ fatigue due to excessive overtime

  AVO I D

  •	 Establish Human Resources procedures addressing company policies on terms of employment
    and working conditions
  •	 Communicate Revised HR procedures to managers, supervisors and workers in dedicated
    training sessions
  •	 Ensure that the revised Human Resources procedures stipulate that workers may not be re-
    quired to work more than a 48-hour work week or a 60-hour work week including overtime
    for more than two weeks and a one day off in seven
  •	 Ensure that all future expansion programs are planned in advance and that suitable numbers
    of skilled manpower are available before commencing a new project
  •	 Maintain a list of pre-approved, qualified contractors to cater to short term or unexpected
    work demands
  •	 Increase the project timeframe or target completion date to prevent excessive overtime if
    sub-contracting is not feasible

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Increase awareness among senior management, supervisors and worker representatives on
    labor regulations regarding working hours and linkages between excessive overtime and
    increased risk of workplace illnesses/injuries
  •	 Monitor working hours and OHS records; take corrective actions where excessive overtime is
    recorded
  •	 Implement an employee grievance mechanism and complaint resolution procedures for
    addressing worker concerns on excessive working hours and other issues
  •	 Ensure overtime bonus is paid

  O FF S E T

  •	 Retroactively compensate workers for overtime work at the established overtime rate
  •	 Provide health checks and medical assistance to workers suffering from fatigue or work-
    related stress due to excessive working hours
  •	 Provide medical assistance for cases of workplace related injury/illnesses
  •	 Compensate injured workers for wages lost, loss of ability to work and loss of life due to
    workplace injuries/illnesses

Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                37
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: COSTA RICA


            Alajuela Beef Company
            RISK: Migrant labor / Freedom of Association
            Alajuela Beef Company is a small beef and dairy operation run by a local business family in
            Costa Rica. The 600 hectares of property have been owned by the family for three genera-
            tions. The company has traditionally relied on migrant workers from Nicaragua and currently
            employs over 60 of these workers. The workers have complained about poor working condi-
            tions and long working hours. Problems escalated last month when about eight workers were
            fired for approaching the company owner demanding better working conditions and a rise in
            their existing wage. The workers were told that the company does not want to engage in trade
            unionism as it is not ‘healthy’ for the company and that if any worker has a concern he can talk
            to his manager. The fired workers have approached a local trade union which has promised to
            help them. The union has advised the workers that Costa Rica passed new legislation providing
            greater protection for migrant workers who now have the right to join and form unions and are
            entitled to social security, basic health care and safe working conditions.

              I M PAC T

              Restriction on freedom of association and collective bargaining rights of migrant workers

              AVO I D

              •	 Revise human resources manual and implementing procedures to address non-discrimina-
                 tion against workers that form or join workers’ organizations; examples of discrimination
                 include terminating contracts, refusal to hire, demotions, intimidation, harassment, con-
                 ducting illegal/unreasonable searches, using violence, and using courts to bring illegitimate
                 claims
              •	 Communicate revised HR Manual content and implementing procedures through training
                 for managers, supervisors, workers and local workers’ organizations
              •	 Regularly train management, supervisors and workers on the right to organize and bargain
                 collectively
              •	 Ensure that job descriptions prepared by Human Resources for managers and supervisors
                 address responsibilities for keeping workers informed of their rights
              •	 Appoint a senior manager as liaison to dispel workers’ fears of reprisal if they choose
                 worker representatives or join a union or organization
              •	 Allow workers to meet freely without management present

              •	 Allow union representatives to access workers in the workplace during breaks and before
                 and after work
              •	 Accept to bargain collectively and in good faith, do not limit the issues that can be
                 negotiated
              •	 Respect collective agreements; working conditions and terms of employment under
                 collective agreements must be at least as good as those required by law
              •	 Deduct union dues from workers’ wages when required or allow authorized workers’
                 representatives to collect dues regularly on company premises
              •	 Do not offer workers bribes to withdraw from unions

              •	 Do not deduct more wages than those corresponding to the days lost during a strike

              •	 Do not use security forces or police to break a peaceful strike




            38    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Retrain management and supervisors to ensure that traditional anti-union attitudes, and
    violence against trade union leaders is eliminated and punitive action taken if it occurs
  •	 Establish and maintain ongoing dialogue between workers and management to identify
    and address all labor issues in a timely manner
  •	 Establish and implement a grievance mechanism to receive workers’ complaints – open or
    anonymously – including reporting cases of direct or indirect threat against workers who
    exercise their right of association
  •	 Periodically review reported grievances and records of contract termination/dismissals to
    identify instances of discrimination against workers
  •	 Establish a zero tolerance policy for managers or supervisors who ignore company HR
    policy and procedures regarding freedom of association collective bargaining rights

  O FF S E T

  •	 Re-instate fired workers and compensate for lost wages




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	               39
3. Management Programs




                                        WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                                        Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improve-
                                        ment process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results,
                                        and adjust the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start
                                        to involve the right internal people and departments.

                                        As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                                        think about:

                                          •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                                          •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                                          •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the ex-
                                               pected results (targets)
                                          •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                                          •	   Who – responsible people

                                         Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.


                                        The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the industry.
                                        These are just some of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to
                                        your situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet your company’s specific
                                        situation. As you tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and man-
                                        agers, experts and external stakeholders, including your suppliers and commu-
                                        nity. They can offer insight into important issues and effective actions. They
                                        can also help you obtain commitment for plans you are trying to implement,
                                        and provide candid feedback about how well the plans are working. This will
                                        be critical to the continual improvement of your systems.


                                       For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                                       community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG
                                       EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




            40   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           3. Management Programs




                            WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                            Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and manag-
                            ers. They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how to behave.
                            They enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turnover. Clear,
                            detailed procedures help to embed your social and environmental policies into
                            your daily operations.

                            It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your pro-
                            cedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists, flowcharts,
                            or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary depending on
                            the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for managers and
                            supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with less literate or
                            immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as short and simple as possible.


                            Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure and the Sample
                            Procedure Flowchart to get started.

                            Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is the
                            ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new proce-
                            dure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the skills
                            and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through routine
                            communication and effective training. You will learn more about this in the next
                            chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                            Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version of
                            each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly marked
                            as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old procedure.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                      41
                                     ELEMENT 4


                                    Organizational Capacity
                                    and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                    A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S        trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management           that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                    ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                    IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                    First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                    commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.         beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an            sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte-grated system. New         the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S         do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.            long-term commitment by your company.

                                    Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                    responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company       anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-          duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles        involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily      A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is        with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                    sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                    contracts and purchasing, human resources.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is        In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-       have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                    social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-        tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided     the labor aspects, production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                  and the reduction of waste, procurement manages the qualifications and
                                    performance of suppliers and contractors, and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with          equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-          tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles         The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-     impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    ing to get defined. No          be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all
    systems awareness or
                                    levels of the company, including supervisors and workers, as they are key
    repeatable processes.
                                    frontline identifiers of problems.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    42    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                            As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                            and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                            departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                            The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                            exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                            consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                            Once the ESMS Team is selected, they need to select a team leader. This is an
                            important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader needs to set the
                            tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initiatives in a compa-
                            ny face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is no exception.
                            The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable hurdles, and
                            should have direct access to senior management.


                              Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate
                              for Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit and
                              Case Studies for a list and sequencing of activities to develop and
                              implement an ESMS.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                  43
                                                           EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                         Quality
                                                                   Human
When selecting a                                                  resources
                                                                                         control


team leader, look                                                                              Environmental
                                                                                               health & safety
for someone who                                 Production


has the following                                                            Select a
                                                                           team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                        Procurement/
                                                           Worker
                                                                                            Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                    Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                 COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.             Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                    dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                    This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                    There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                    1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                       •	 What is it?
                                       •	 What are its goals?
                                       •	 What do I need to do?

                                    2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                        the company.
                                       •	 How does this help our company?
                                       •	 How does it help my department?
                                       •	 What will change?
                                       •	 What is in it for me?

                                    3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                       their roles.
                                       •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                       •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                       •	 How do I do that?
                                       •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        44   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                           Your ESMS Team needs detailed training so they
      Effective Communication and Training
                                                           can develop the necessary knowledge and skills.
                                                           They will need to understand the basics of the
      Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                           Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle and know the nine ele-
      munication or training module is to build
                                                           ments of an ESMS. This Handbook provides the
      awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                           information they will need, but additional may be
      people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                           necessary. In addition to the detailed training of
      implement.
                                                           the team, everyone will need to receive awareness
                                                           training so there is a shared understanding of the
                                                           goals of the ESMS.

                                The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                                general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                                learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                                You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                                tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                                Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                                way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                                and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                                people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                                responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                  Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                  tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                     CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N




    Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                        45
                                    ELEMENT 5


                                   Emergency Preparedness
                                   and Response
                                   Even when you have considered all the risks and
    Regular engagement with        put the appropriate management programs in


5
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and         place, accidents and emergency situations can
    offsite emergency plan.
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neigh-
                                   happen.
    boring companies.

    Senior management              Your business is a dynamic operation, and many


4
    and all units and shifts,
    including contract and         things change from day to day – people go in and
    temporary workers, par-
    ticipate in emergency risk     out of your workforce, materials and suppliers
    assessment, preparedness
    planning and mock drills.
    Continual improvement.
                                   enter and exit your supply chain, facilities and

    All onsite and off-site
                                   equipment are added to and removed from


3
    emergency issues have
    been identified and an         your production line. A management system
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan     will help to maintain continuity and consistency
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local     throughout these changes. However, there may
    industry best practices.
                                   be momentary lapses or gaps in the system (e.g.
    The emergency prepared-



2
    ness plan is in place, but     someone not properly trained, someone not
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-
    tion. Some trainings are
                                   following the procedures, a machine breakdown),
    provided to the workers
    on emergency require-          or an external force (e.g. natural disaster) that can
    ments.
                                   lead to an accident or emergency situation at your


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,     facility. While it is not always possible to prevent
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.      such situations, you can be prepared to respond
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.           effectively to prevent and mitigate any harm to



0
    Very limited emergency         your workers, community and the environment.
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No
    formal plan in place.


     46   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                             5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                            The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                            help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                               •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                 communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                 your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                 mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community.
                               •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                 explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                 everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs to do.
                               •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                 response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                 people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                 that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                 during accidents and emergencies.
                               •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                 it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                 working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                               •	 Communicate so that everyone in your company understands the importance
                                 of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                 monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                 who may be affected.
                               •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an overview
                                 of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what
                                 to do – ask for and obtain input on what needs to be addressed and what can
                                 be improved. Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will
                                 need to exercise individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations.
                                 This is more likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system
                                 beforehand.
                               •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                 you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                               •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to test how well the system is working and
                                 to re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                 continually improve your system.
                               •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                 Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                 the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                 response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability
                                 and effectiveness.




                             Look at the Sample Fire Response Procedure and Sample Epizootic
                             Disease Response Procedure Flowchart for examples.




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                                47
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                      An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                      should include:
                                        •	   identification of potential emergencies based on hazard
                                             assessment;

                                        •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency
                                             situations;

                                        •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                        •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution such as toxic
                                             emissions;

                                        •	   procedures for decontamination;

                                        •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation, including a desig-
                                             nated meeting place outside the facility;

                                        •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                                        •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for employees
                                             responsible for responding to the emergency (fire-fight-
                                             ing equipment, spill response equipment, personal protec-
                                             tion equipment for the emergency response teams, first
                                             aid kits and stations);

                                        •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment and
                                             facilities;

                                        •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and maintenance
                                             of emergency equipment;

                                        •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and meeting
                                             points;

                                        •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local emer-
                                             gency response services (fire fighters);

                                        •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                        •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols, includ-
                                             ing with affected communities when necessary, and pro-
                                             cedures for interaction with the government authorities;

                                        •	   procedures for periodic review and update of emergency
                                             response plans.




             48   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in Animal Production
  Common Hazards/ Potential Causes
  Emergency
  Situations in
  Animal Production
  Physical injuries      •	 Inadequate procedures and oversight of activities such as heavy
  including musculo-        lifting and carrying, leading to injury from poor posture and inad-
  skeletal injuries, and    equate rest periods
  physical/muscular      •	 Inadequate procedures and training in proper handling of animals
  strains, sprains and      and birds, leading to injuries from kicks, bites and scratches
  cuts                   •	 Improper design and maintenance of pens, gates and chutes,
                             stables, hen houses, etc., leading to accidents from slippery sur-
                             faces, unguarded stairways, lofts, shafts, and ladders
                            •	 Inappropriate provision or lack of use of PPE such as gloves and
                             aprons
                            •	 Inadequate training and qualification in operating farm machinery

  Chemical hazards          •	 Inadequate training of workforce on storage, handling, mixing and
  due to exposure            use of chemicals, and on hygiene practices to avoid exposure of
  caused by chemicals        family members (e.g. pesticide residue)
  (including clean-         •	 Inadequate procedures and oversight for avoiding or minimiz-
  ing, disinfectants         ing use of banned or restricted chemicals (e.g. in dipping vats and
  and pesticides)            sprayers)
  potentially affecting     •	 Inadequate reviewing of less toxic alternatives
  workers and wider
                            •	 Inadequate provision of PPE (respiratory protection and imper-
  community                  meable clothing) to prevent dermal exposure and inhalation of
                             chemicals
                            •	 Inadequate training and oversight related to eating and drinking in
                             contaminated environments

  Danger of                 •	 Inadequate risk identification and evaluation of confined spaces,
  confined space in-         including testing for adequate oxygen concentration, combustible
  cluding entrapment,        and toxic gases
  engulfment, and           •	 Gaps in worker awareness and training on these issues
  hazardous atmo-           •	 Inadequate venting of spaces to eliminate accumulation of
  spheric conditions         dangerous gases
  in manure pits, silos,
                            •	 Incomplete access restriction to prevent personnel access without
  grain bins, water
                             proper training and preparation
  tanks
                            •	 Poor system of oversight and control to prevent unauthorized
                             entry




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                 49
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




               Common Hazards/ Potential Causes
               Emergency
               Situations in
               Animal Production
               Exposure to                •	 Ineffective oversight and management of hazards
               biological hazards             •	 exposure to organic dust, causing acute toxic alveolitis or
               (organic dust,                    organic dust toxic syndrome
               pathogens) with                •	 exposure to pathogens such as Brucella, Campylobacter and
               consequences for                  Salmonella, causing foodborne disease, as well as skin and re-
               both workers and                  spiratory tract infections
               the wider commu-           •	 Lack of appropriate PPE (air-supplied breathing apparatus, prop-
               nity                          erly fitted masks, protective clothing and footwear) and local air
                                             extraction devices at dust generating equipment such as silos and
                                             grinders for feeding animals
                                          •	 Inadequate veterinary inspections and animal treatment and
                                             controls to minimize the risk of passing zoonoses (animal diseases
                                             transmitted to humans) to outside communities
                                          •	 Inadequate segregation and inappropriate disposal of animal mor-
                                             tality waste (dead animals) in pens or transport vehicles




             50   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




  Common Hazards/ Potential Causes
  Emergency
  Situations in
  Animal Production
 Contamination of air       •	 Poor segregation of wastewater due to inadequate separation
 and water sources           of organic solids from wastewater through screening drains and
 affecting workers           collection systems, potentially contaminating surface and ground
 and wider commu-            waters and community water supplies
 nity                       •	 Emissions of ammonia and other gases from accumulated animal
                             manure and bedding causing respiratory irritation
                            •	 Poor maintenance and protection of transport, feeding and
                             storage systems, leading to spills and exposure to wind and rain

 Food safety impact         •	 Inadequate veterinary pharmaceuticals controls, monitoring of
 from antibiotic             application and lack of contingency planning in event of disease
 resistant pathogenic        outbreaks
 bacteria or from           •	 Improper storage of antibiotics and use by unauthorized, untrained
 unintentional con-          staff
 sumption of antibi-        •	 Inadequate assessment and oversight of use of manure and
 otic residues in food       bedding materials for agricultural purposes without preliminary
                             digestion or composting. These materials may contain hazardous
                             chemical and bacterial constituents leading to crop contamination




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	               51
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement           Your company may have an impact on the lives
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      of many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group is different, and you
    is actively considered.
                                      need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate risks to
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    effective dialogue. Some          to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                                   FINANCIAL
                                                                              S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                           ER                   AC
                                                                   U   M
    Some public events, lim-                                    NS                             G R TIV




2
                                                           CO                                     OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                                                          PS T
    process. Sporadic and
                                                      ES




    selective responses
                                               UN D
                                                  ITI
                                           M M C TE




    when approached by
                                         CO F F E




                                                                                                                        NGO




    stakeholders.
                                           A




                                                                                                                          s




    Limited channels in place.                                                COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                                S/
                                                                                                                    O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                             NS
                                                                                                                    C IA E R
                                                                                                                        TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                       EU
                                                                                                                        K
                                                                                                                  AD
                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                 SO
                                                                                                          TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                              AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                              T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                         EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                     M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                  RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                                 SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                           GO
    with stakeholders.                                                       CONTRACTORS




     52    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing Your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                       6. Stakeholder Engagement




                            Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                            by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                            groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                            the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                            MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                            The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                            them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                            negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                            Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                            ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                            these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                            more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                            those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                            Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                            them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                            engage with each of them.



                             INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                              Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                              need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                              and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                              However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                              those used for external stakeholders.




                              Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                              Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.


Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                        53
For effective                         DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                     After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                     to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                        ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                     environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                     At a minimum, even if your company does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                     munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                     receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your manage-
•	 Disclose meaningful               ment program (see Element 7, External Communication).

   and accurate                       If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to implement
                                      a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, Grievance Mechanism) and actively
   information;                       engage them in consultation, regularly disclosing clear and meaningful infor-
                                      mation on both your impacts and potential benefits, and providing communi-
•	 Use culturally                     ties with opportunities to express their concerns and suggestions.
   appropriate means to               In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and com-
   reach them;                        munities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                      and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
•	 Provide opportunities              ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                      pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
   for two-way dialogue ;             mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plan.
•	 Document to keep                   Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
                                      your company is putting in place to address the issues identified through the
   track of issues raised;
                                      engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected Commu-
   and                                nities).

•	 Report back on how                 Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excel-
                                      lent way for you to understand how company operations affect them and to
   their input has been               get early warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to
                                      stakeholders, ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time.
   considered and used
                                      Don’t wait until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those
                                      relationships in place to manage the problem.




                                                                 Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                 Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                 with the important stakeholder groups.




          54   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 6. Stakeholder Engagement




                            TIP

                             Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                             ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                  you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                             ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                  significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                                  elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                             ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                             ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                  sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                                  fected groups and communities.

                             ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                  where they feel comfortable.

                             ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                             ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                  provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                  your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                             ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                  in the “outside world.”

                             ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                  expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                             your company

  Affected                   People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                             verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                             personal safety, health or livelihood.




                            For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                            Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                            Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                 55
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your business is perceived and,
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-
                                   mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is
    limited to those directly      and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    handling the complaints.       responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




     56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                            In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                              •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                   pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                   are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                   regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                              •	   Assign a person or team in your company to be responsible for receiving,
                                   registering and processing all grievances.
                              •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                   mine resolution and redress options.
                              •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                   ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                   response.
                            Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                            company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                            same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                            such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                            immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                            investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                            lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                            dent mediators.
 TIP
                                                           The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                       dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                           resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and
                                                           The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your company.
                                                           ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                           for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily un-                 to raise concerns. This requirement mandates
       derstandable, accessible, trusted and               having the right people leading this effort inside
       culturally appropriate.                             your company. The grievance mechanism must be
                                                           accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
  ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-
                                                           party that originated the complaint and should not
       ance procedure so people know where
                                                           impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
       to go and whom to approach.

  ••   Commit to a response time and keep                  Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       to it as this will increase transparency            ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       and a sense of “fair process.”                      ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
                                                           problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
  ••   Keep records of each step to create a               to address.
       “paper trail.”




Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                          57
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                        Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                        Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                    Independent
                                                                                    mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Company team                                            Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                       TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).


             58   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
       ELEMENT 8




       Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                            Affected communities’
                                                                                            issues and concerns are
                                                                                            proactively addressed.
       Affected Communities                                                                 There is ongoing com-
                                                                                            munication to avoid risks
                                                                                            and impacts before new
       Affected communities will want to know what                                          projects as well as to
                                                                                            address existing issues.
       actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                            Reporting to affected
       the issues identified when engaging with them.                                       communities is regu-
                                                                                            larly implemented and
       Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical            evidenced in documen-
       element for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know             tation. Key units are
       when they will receive an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the    involved in the review
       amount of time you spend responding to questions.                                    of the key issues.




                                                                                                                        3
       The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of stake-      When applicable, con-
       holders’ concerns, but it should be at least annual. If your company’s activities    sultation processes have
       change or new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to contact          been implemented.
       stakeholders outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.               External consultants are
                                                                                            involved as required. No
TIP                                                            You can also decide          ongoing review.
                                                               to report back to the
 Ongoing Communication
                                                               wider public on your




                                                                                                                        2
••    Provide an immediate update if new                       progress in meeting
                                                               your commitments             Procedures in place
      environmental or social risks emerge.
                                                               to avoid, reduce and         for reporting, usually
••    Report progress on implementation of your                                             assigned to E&S staff.
                                                               mitigate any negative
      commitments.                                                                          Primarily reactive.
                                                               environmental or social
••    Report monitoring results on issues that                 impacts from your
      interest the community.                                  company’s activities.
                                                               Sustainability reporting



                                                                                                                        1
••    Use the opportunity to communicate the
      benefits generated by your company.                      initiatives, guidelines,     Some basic communica-
                                                               including sector-specific    tions with affected com-
••    Translate information into local languages
                                                               guidelines, and good         munities, mostly limited
      and easily understandable formats.
                                                               practices are also rapidly   to meetings.
••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals with             emerging in this area.
      the community.                                           The most notable is the
••    Involve your employees as communication links            Global Reporting Initia-



                                                                                                                        0
      to the community.                                        tive (GRI).
••    Consider conducting a stakeholder survey                                              No reporting.
      to learn how your company is perceived.


           Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities for
           examples of formats and venues you can use.



       Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                   59
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



     60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          9. Monitoring and Review




                             TIP

                              Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                             Intent:
                                   1.	 Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                             Implementation:
                                   2.	 Are the action plans being carried out?
                                   3.	 Are procedures being followed?
                             Effectiveness:
                                   4.	 Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                   5.	 Are you making progress toward your overall objectives and
                                      targets?
                                   6.	 How is the environmental and social performance of the com-
                                      pany in general?


                            INDICATORS
                            A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                            titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                            might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                            environmental and social policy.

                            Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                              •	   water consumption;
                              •	   energy consumption;
                              •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                              •	   volume and nutrient content of animal waste (manure, urine);
                              •	   emissions to air;
                              •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage), incidents and near misses;
                              •	   lost time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates;
                              •	   emergency response incidents;
                              •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                              •	   wage levels;
                              •	   incidences of child labor;
                              •	   incidences of disciplinary and discriminatory complaints; and
                              •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.



Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                      61
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          You can also use this information when reporting to a wider public on your
                                         ESMS performance. When selecting your key performance indicators, you
  Improving                              may refer to voluntary guidelines such as the GLOBALGAP good agricultural
                                         practices, which provides a list of indicators relevant to the animal production
  Remember, you                          industry.
  can’t improve what                     Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  you don’t measure.
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
                                         a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
                                         evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing for water and energy conservation;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?

                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability.




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit and Case Studies for
                                           more examples of key indicators common in the Animal Production
                                           industry.



             62   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 9. Monitoring and Review




                                          THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                            Visual observation                   Interviews
                            physical walk-through of             consultations with workers,
                            buildings and surrounding            managers and external stake-
                            land. Examples of what you           holders. Examples of topics
                            may observe: physi­ cal ob-          you might discuss: Do workers
                            structions and blocked exits,        and managers understand
                            storage of feed, medicines           the policies and procedures?
                            and hazardous materials,             How are they impacted? Are
                            pest traps, stocking densities,      there ideas for improvement?
                            housekeeping, management             Do workers feel comfortable
                            of animal waste, disposal of         filing complaints? How are
                            hazardous waste and animal           external stakeholders impact-
                            mortality, soil cover, worker        ed by the company? Are there
                            actions related to water use,        ideas for improvement? Do
                            hygiene, use of PPE, worker          external stakeholders feel
                            and manager body language            comfortable filling com-
                            and interactions.                    plaints?

                            Measuring and                        Document review
                            testing                              looking through documents
                            checking using equipment             and records. Examples of
                            that is properly calibrated.         what you might review: water
                            Examples of what you might           meter logs, water and energy
                            check: effluents levels, air         bills, records of purchased
                            emission, water consumption,         medicines and controlled
                            ground and surface water             substances, OHS records,
                            quality, temperature and             inspection records, com­ plaint
                            humidity in animal housing,          logs, wage slips, time cards,
                            dust levels around silos, grind-     policies and procedures,
                            ers and bird houses, residue         training records.
                            levels for controlled substanc-
                            es in animals.




                                      Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                      on how to conduct an audit.



Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	               63
9. Monitoring and Review



                                         Monitoring and auditing are words that are often
                                         used interchangeably, which can be confusing.
                                         Auditing is a formal, on-site evaluation against a
                                         specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
                                         internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
                                         Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various
                                         methods for evaluating performance. These may
                                         include: visual observation, measuring and testing,
                                         questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
                                         and external stakeholders, and document review.
                                         It is important to design your monitoring program
                                         to obtain qualitative and quantitative information.
                                         It is also important that workers and managers are
                                         monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.

                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing, Docu-
                                         ment Review and Interviewing People.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.




            64    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                           Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                           Improvement Plan
                                           Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                           environmental, labor and community
                                           problems and remediate negative impacts
                                           ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                           continually improve the management system to
                                           support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                     Ongoing Reporting
               Risks and Impacts




                                                                   Preparedness and




                                                                                                    Communications
               Identification of




                                                                                                                                         Monitoring and
                                                  Organizational




                                                                                                    and Grievance
                                   Management




                                                                                                                     Communities
                                                  Capacity and




                                                                                      Engagement




                                                                                                    Mechanisms
                                                  Competency




                                                                                      Stakeholder




                                                                                                                     to Affected
                                                                   Emergency

                                                                   Response
                                   Programs




                                                                                                    External




                                                                                                                                         Review
     Policy




      Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
      improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
      Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
      improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the company
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



Revision 2.2 June 1, 2014                       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Animal Production	                                                         65
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




            66    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



June 2014
