                    91510




STORIES OF IMPACT

AGRIBUSINESS
FOREWORD
By 2050, it is estimated that the world’s agricultural system will need to produce
approximately 50 percent more food to feed an estimated 9 billion people. In
emerging markets, agriculture is the most important economic sector and source
of employment; more speciﬁcally, 75 percent of the world’s poor live in rural areas
and depend on agriculture for their incomes. With volatility in food prices putting
additional pressure on social and political systems, increasing global demand for
scarce resources, widespread droughts, and rising concerns over food safety issues,
sustainable agricultural development is an urgent priority.
IFC combines investment and advisory services to offer commercially viable
solutions to agribusiness companies and their supply chains. At the end of June
2014, IFC’s investment portfolio in agriculture and forestry totaled over $4.5
billion and we had 33 active agribusiness advisory projects. In 2013 alone, our
investments helped our clients reach approximately 3 million farmers.
We bring global knowledge to our clients and among other things help them to
become industry leaders for responsible agricultural production. For instance, IFC is
helping Ecom across multiple countries in their commodity trading and processing
so as to improve the productivity of smallholder coffee farmers in their supply chain.
We also work with companies to address food safety issues, strengthening the
quality of supply lines such that the end product meets international standards.
For example, we helped a global leader in food processing in India as well as
other companies in Belarus, Georgia and Ukraine to raise their food safety quality
procedures, which in turn helped them each expand their exports into new markets.
Our work extends to some very challenging places to do business. For example,
we worked with raisin and pomegranate farmers in Afghanistan to signiﬁcantly
increase their output and improve their access to regional markets.
IFC also contributes to transforming agribusiness at the country level by working
with groups of smallholders and industry associations. For instance, IFC has
helped to upgrade the operations of Cambodian rice farmers and millers so that
their national industry can compete on an international level.
In the following pages, you will ﬁnd numerous illustrations of the work that we
do with our private sector clients, typically combining ﬁnance and advice. This
powerful combination of money and knowledge helps our clients not only sustain
but also grow their businesses, thereby paving the way for robust job creation,
growth, and positive environmental and social beneﬁts.
Sincerely,
              Mary Porter Peschka                          Atul Mehta
              Acting Director, Advisory                    Director, Manufacturing,
              Services, IFC                                Agribusiness and Services
                                                           Department, IFC
Ab o u t IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution
focused exclusively on the private sector in developing countries.


Ac k n o w l e d g e m    e n t s
IFC would like to thank the governments of Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Norway, and Switzerland for their support in producing this magazine.


No t e a b o u t t h e r e s u l t s p r e s e n t e d i n t h i s r e p o r t
Results and figures reported in this publication are based on the most updated data
available in June 2014.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
            EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
      6   | Integrating Women into the Coffee Supply Chains in Indonesia
            and Vietnam
1 0       | Transforming the Rice Industry and Building Export Capacity
            in Cambodia
 1 4      | Supporting Small Farmers in Meeting International Certification
            Standards in the Philippines

            EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
2 0       | Improving Food Safety to Boost Food Exports in Ukraine,
            Belarus and Georgia

            LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
2 6       | Improving the Agricultural Practices of Coffee Farmers in
            Central America

            MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
3 2       | Helping Local Companies Increase Olive Oil Exports in the
            West Bank and Gaza
3 6       | Working with Raisin and Pomegranate Farmers to Increase
            Productivity and Access to Markets in Afghanistan

            SOUTH ASIA
4 2       | Making the Agricultural Sector More Sustainable in
            Bangladesh
4 6       | Improving Productivity in the Poultry Sector in Bangladesh
5 0       | Strengthening Poultry Supply Chains in Nepal
5 4       | Improving the Productivity of Sugar Farmers in India
5 8       | Addressing Water Security in the Agricultural Sector in India
6 2       | Addressing Food Safety and Traceability in India

            SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
6 8       | Improving the Productivity of Smallholder Coffee Farms in Kenya
7 2       | Increasing the Efficiency of the Largest Exporter of Fruit in
            South Africa
7 6       | Empowering Farmers and Small and Micro Entrepreneurs in
            the Democratic Republic of Congo
E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




                               4
    E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




EAST ASIA AND
  THE PACIFIC




5
EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC




Integrating Women into
the Coffee Supply Chains in
Indonesia and Vietnam
IFC is working with ECOM in Indonesia and
Vietnam to set up Farmer Training Centers
(FTCs) to promote quality awareness and best
practices for sustainable coffee cultivation.
The FTCs help farmers improve coffee
productivity and quality, reduce costs and
obtain internationally recognized certification
for sustainable production.
Over the last three years, around 4,000 farmers
from Vietnam who obtained the certifications
have increased their total income by about
$6.6 million, and about 6,000 farmers from
Indonesia experienced total increased incomes
of about $3.8 million.



IFC CLIENT: Ecom




                            6
                                        E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




The Opportunity
Indonesia and Vietnam are among the world’s largest coffee
producers with millions of people relying on coffee for their
livelihoods. In order to meet an increasing demand for high-
quality coffee beans that are produced sustainably, the two
countries must strengthen the supply chains in their respective
coffee industries.
Women make up 80 percent of coffee farm workers in North
Sumatra, Indonesia, and about 50 percent in Lam Dong, Vietnam.
Although they play a key role in coffee cultivation, processing
and marketing, they are often excluded from training and other
development opportunities.
When women farmers have better access to technical training and
productive input, they are more likely to adopt good agricultural
practices. When women farmers are included in agricultural
development opportunities, they receive critical knowledge, skills
and assets that help them improve their household productivity.




“Our focus was to train our ﬁeld staff and their managers to work
directly with farmers and to help train them in good agricultural
and sustainability practices.”

     —Serge Mantienne, Sustainability Manager for Ecom in Vietnam




                               7
E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




IFC’s Approach
IFC took the following measures in Indonesia and Vietnam
to increase women farmers’ skills and improve overall coffee
productivity and quality:
  • Identiﬁed women’s role in on-farm supply-chain work.
  • Deployed women trainers and women volunteers; engaged
    leaders of women’s unions, farmers’ associations, and village
    heads.
  • Adjusted the training schedules to accommodate women’s
    needs.
  • Developed gender-speciﬁc training materials, and provided
    training for trainers for ECOM staff and local communities.
  • Introduced more visual aids, such as videos and pictures, to
    accompany traditional training materials.
  • Introduced a simple ﬁnancial management tool to help
    women farmers document and analyze household and farm
    expenditures, given women’s traditional role in managing
    household income.
The project’s approach to involving more female coffee farmers
can be replicated with other commodities in which women are
known to play a key role.




                                  8
                                     EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 In Indonesia, nearly 1,600 women were trained. The
   share of women who received training increased from 16
   percent to 27 percent.
•	 In Vietnam, more than 2,300 women were trained, more
   than doubling the level of female participation in training
   workshops to 25 percent from 12 percent in 2010.
•	 In Indonesia, the state-owned Bank Sumut decided to
   open loan facilities to cater to the needs of coffee farmers
   after witnessing the successful collaboration among
   different stakeholders in the country’s coffee supply
   chain.
•	 In North Sumatra, Indonesia, a survey of coffee farmers
   showed that training groups consisting of both male and
   female farmers reported a 92 percent increase in their
   productivity level. Farmers who did not receive training
   from the ECOM–IFC supported program reported only a 37
   percent increase in productivity.
•	 $154 million has been invested by IFC in Ecom globally
   since 2006.




                            9
EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC




Transforming the Rice Industry
and Building Export Capacity in
Cambodia
IFC is strengthening the Cambodian rice sector
by helping to add value along every step of the
supply chain, with key interventions at the
farming, milling and export stages.
Through the Rice Sector Support Project, IFC is
working with and through local millers to help
farmers access higher-value seed varieties and
increase the efficiency and yield of their farms.
To boost Cambodian rice competitiveness on
the international market, IFC is also working
with 70 percent of the nation’s rice exporters.



IFC CLIENTS: AMRU Rice and others




                            10
                                         E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




The Opportunity
Agriculture, led by rice production, represents approximately
one third of Cambodia’s GDP and employs 80 percent of the
population. The use of a phrase meaning “white gold” to
describe the grain in Cambodia reﬂects its economic and cultural
importance.
However, relative to neighboring countries Thailand and Vietnam,
Cambodian rice paddy yield is low. Cambodian rice farmers
cultivate one crop per year, compared to farmers in Vietnam who
are able to produce crops three times a year. According to the
Asia Foundation, the lower output levels are due to the high costs
associated with expensive fuel and limited transportation options
and port facilities.
Despite low yield, Cambodian farmers produce a surplus of
rice every year. According to ﬁgures released by the Cambodian
Ministry of Commerce, exporters only brought 10 percent of that
excess product to market in 2012.
Lower-quality rice varieties, outdated and inefﬁcient milling
technology and a lack of compliance with international food
safety standards have limited the ability of Cambodian exporters
to ﬁnd international buyers.




“The fact that I am the number one rice exporter [in Cambodia]
today can be attributed to a great extent to what I learned and the
opportunities I seized in the course of the project implemented by
IFC. It has also helped [my company] in terms of reputation and
credit-worthiness.”

          —Song Saran, Chief Executive Officer, AMRU Rice Cambodia




                               1 1
E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




IFC’s Approach
IFC works to bring about transformational change by pursuing
a comprehensive, sector-wide strategy in the Cambodian rice
industry. IFC aims to contribute to increasing national rice
exports by 300,000 metric tons annually, at a value of $180
million.
In addition, the goal of the project is to increase and improve
sustainable farming opportunities for 30,000 farmers.
IFC’s holistic approach targets key processes along the value
chain by:
FARMER LEVEL
  • Increasing access to improved rice seed to increase their yield
    and the quality of the paddy.
  • Offering training on farm management.
RICE MILLER LEVEL
  • Advising on equipment and technology upgrades to improve
    efﬁciency and quality.
  • Introducing food safety management systems and certiﬁcation.
  • Strengthening management through the use of mill software
    and ﬁnancial literacy training.
RICE EXPORTER LEVEL
  • Developing and implementing a strategy to increase rice
    exports, especially for high value, aromatic rice products.
  • Supporting rice industry associations in building capacity of
    exporters.
  • Strengthening brand identity of Cambodian rice on the
    international market by participating in international rice
    events.
At the national level, IFC, together with the World Bank, advised
the Cambodian government on developing and promulgating its
ﬁrst milled rice standard since 1956.



                                   1 2
                                       EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 Advised around 100 medium-sized and large rice millers
   and exporters in eight provinces on:
   •	 Upgrading production facilities.
   •	 Efficient mill management.
   •	 Complying with food safety standards.
•	 Built the capacity of Cambodian rice millers and exporters
   to participate in international trade fairs and market their
   products successfully.
•	 Improved the international perception of Cambodia’s rice,
   resulting in the country’s premium jasmine rice winning
   the “World’s Best Rice” award in 2012 and 2013 at the Rice
   Trader World Rice Conference.
•	 Facilitated $14.5 million of rice exports in 2013: twice the
   value and volume of the previous year.




                            13
EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC




Supporting Smallholder
Banana Farmers in Meeting
International Certification
Standards in the Philippines
IFC partnered with Unifrutti, an international
fruit exporter with a local presence in the
Philippines, to help build the management
capacity of local farmers and provide technical
training that helps growers maintain soil quality,
recycle water, and produce quality crops.
This partnership has allowed Unifrutti to
command a higher price for its produce in
specialized markets and has led to led to
the adoption of more sustainable farming
practices, increased the income of farmers, and
to economic growth.



IFC CLIENT: Unifrutti




                            14
                                         E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




The Opportunity
When IFC began working with Unifrutti Group, the smallholder
Filipino banana growers that supplied the international fruit
company were not well positioned to comply with Rainforest
Alliance and other international certiﬁcation standards.
Local farmers did not follow regulations on proper use of fertilizers,
waste and water management, or wage requirements for workers.
As a result, the bananas they produced were mainly exported
to markets that did not have stringent quality or standards
requirements.
The Philippines was undergoing a national land reform policy
that involved selling corporate plantations to smallholder farmers,
making large export companies such as Unifrutti increasingly
reliant on smallholders to supply bananas. To sell bananas to
specialized markets, such as Japan, Unifrutti needed smallholders
to become certiﬁed.
But growers considered certiﬁcation a cost burden because it
required investments such as installing hazard-proof chemical
storage and mixing areas, ﬁltering systems, and showers and
toilets for workers. By providing technical and business training
to farmers in areas of waste management and water conservation,
among other areas of farm management, IFC helped increase the
number of qualiﬁed smallholder banana growers in Unifrutti’s
supply chain, enabling the company to command higher prices.
Unifrutti, in turn, gave farmers a price premium to encourage
adoption of certiﬁcation standards, which helped farmers to cover
costs and increase their proﬁt.

“Safety. Environmental sustainability. Employee welfare. When we
started this business, no one talked about these things. But now the
markets are always asking, ‘how do you grow the bananas?’”

                        —Hermi B. Martin, President, Unifrutti Group




                               1 5
E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC




IFC’s Approach
IFC worked with Unifrutti Group to enable the company to
provide extension services to banana farmers in its supply chain
so that farmers could comply with international certiﬁcation
requirements. Extension services included information on
water recycling, reducing dependency of agrochemicals (e.g.
by manually weeding rather than relying on herbicides), and
generating new income from sorting and selling recyclable wastes,
among other sustainable farming techniques.
The training led to increased conﬁdence among farmers and a
better negotiating position with Unifrutti and the banks they
approached for ﬁnancing because certiﬁed farms are perceived to
be well-managed and disciplined—and sustainable over time—
making them better bets for bank loans. By becoming certiﬁed,
smallholder farmers demonstrate they can be environmentally and
socially responsible.
In June 2008, IFC created a 14-month pilot project that
introduced 416 farmers to the new farming techniques and began
to change mindsets that made many farmers cling to old ways.
The pilot resulted in improved social and environmental practices
and the farmers received Rainforest Alliance (RA) certiﬁcation;
98 percent reported improved business management skills.
During the second phase, a price premium was established for
highland growers, whose high quality bananas were identiﬁed
during the pilot phase as a priority for Unifrutti’s premium
market. Lowland farm bananas weren’t of a high enough quality
to make the premium cut, but the farmers still covered the
increased costs associated with obtaining RA certiﬁcation through
cost savings derived from water conservation, recycling, and other
sustainable farming practices.




                                  1 6
                                         E AST ASIA AND T HE P ACIFIC



IFC and Unifrutti shared training costs, with Unifrutti providing
the RA technical training and IFC facilitating the business
management training. IFC also worked with Rainforest Alliance
to train local auditors, which will enable farmers to have easier
access to annual audits needed to maintain their RA certiﬁcation
after the IFC–Unifrutti partnership ends.




   RE SUL T S AND   IM P ACT

   • Over 1,000 farmers have been trained in strategic
     planning, change management, and other business skills
     related to farming.
   • Locally trained auditors have audited more than 8,000
     hectares of Philippine farmland, including at least 1,000
     hectares managed by smallholders.
   • Now, Unifrutti and other companies are replicating the
     success of getting bananas certified by the Rainforest
     Alliance, with plans to certify 8,000 hectares of Philippine
     coconut farms. So far, 400 hectares of smallholder cocoa
     farms have become certified.
   • Highland farmers command 5 to 25 percent higher
     prices for their crops as a result of Rainforest Alliance
     certification and meeting other premium market
     requirements.




                               1 7
E URO P E AND   CE NT RAL ASIA




                                 1 8
      E URO P E AND   CE NT RAL ASIA




 EUROPE AND
CENTRAL ASIA




1 9
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA




Improving Food Safety to
Boost Exports from Belarus,
Georgia and Ukraine
Agricultural exports from Belarus, Ukraine and
Georgia have been limited, primarily due to food
safety concerns.
IFC is helping food producers in all three
countries to adopt better food safety
procedures and standards and increase their
competitiveness.
As a result, investments in IFC’s client food
producers have risen by $157 million, while
their sales and exports have increased by $173
million since 2008. IFC has helped to increase
awareness of food safety as a priority for the
nations’ food industries and worked with
journalists to raise the prominence of the
issue in national media coverage.



IFC CLIENTS: Globino, MHP, Korobivsky and others


                            20
                                        E URO P E AND   CE NT RAL ASIA




The Opportunity
Belarus, Georgia and Ukraine have long and rich histories as
producers of agricultural products. However, despite favorable
natural resources, their performance in this sector remains weak.
Belarus has strong export potential in agricultural produce
and foodstuffs. Few Belarusian companies have food safety
management systems in place or adequate ability to respond to
food safety threats. In order to continue exporting to Russia, its
traditional trading partner, Belarusian food companies must meet
stringent food safety requirements.
Outdated food safety regulations and practices have hindered
exports and investment and therefore limit Georgia’s potential in
agribusiness. After Georgia gained its independence in1991, all
food safety regulatory systems gradually disappeared. Updating
the country’s food safety regulatory system was a strategic priority
for Georgia, as it was a key prerequisite to launching free trade
negotiations with the European Union.
In Ukraine, exports of processed fruits and vegetables to the
European Union market are limited despite its proximity, while
exports of meat and dairy are virtually nonexistent. In 2008,
only an estimated 1 percent of the 20,000 food enterprises in
Ukraine had implemented Hazardous Analysis Critical Control
Points (HACCP), the globally recognized food safety management
system.
Food safety remains a key challenge in all three countries and
poses an underestimated threat to public health and to the
competitiveness of one of the region’s most important industries.


“Participation in IFC’s program signiﬁcantly contributed to
doubling our sales.”

                —Oleksander Miahivskiy, Sales Manager, Korobivsky,
                                         meat processing company



                              2 1
E URO P E AND   CE NT RAL ASIA




IFC’s Approach
IFC aimed to increase the competitiveness of Belarusian, Georgian
and Ukrainian food producers by:
  • Working with food companies to upgrade their food safety
    systems in farming, processing, and retail.
  • Working with local food safety consultants to set and
    implement international standards at food processing
    companies.
  • Working with government ofﬁcials to improve selected
    government regulations and harmonize with EU food safety
    regulations.
The projects focused on the following sectors, chosen due to their
investment potential and because they needed improvement in
food safety practices: meat, dairy, bakery, and fruit and vegetable
processing. More speciﬁcally, IFC worked with key stakeholders
to:
  • Increase public awareness of food safety issues and facilitate
    favorable conditions for companies to implement food safety
    management systems.
  • Provide advice to support the implementation of food
    safety management systems at selected partner companies
    on a cost-sharing basis. IFC’s services include diagnostic
    visits, trainings, and consulting support for evaluation and
    certiﬁcation.
  • Harmonize local food safety regulations with international
    best practices. IFC actively works with governments to
    develop effective food safety regulations. IFC also conducts
    training workshops for state inspectors on how to conduct
    inspections according to international requirements and EU
    practice.




                                  2 2
                                      EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 Financial institutions increased investments in IFC client
   companies by $157 million as a result of better food safety.
•	 IFC client companies increased domestic sales and
   exports by $173 million.
•	 52 companies increased their access to global markets by
   implementing recommended changes.
•	 The Veterinary Agency of Ukraine adopted five checklists
   based on the EU approach to food safety inspections.
•	 As a result of IFC’s Investment Climate suggestions, a
   mandatory governmental certification was eliminated,
   removing a bureaucratic layer that did not guarantee
   food safety and saving Ukrainian food businesses $7
   million a year.
•	 Building on the success of this program, IFC has expanded
   its activities to other countries in Europe and Central Asia.




                            23
L AT IN AM   E RICA AND T HE CARIBBE AN




                                    2 4
 L AT IN AM   E RICA AND T HE CARIBBE AN




LATIN AMERICA
      AND THE
   CARIBBEAN




 2 5
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN




Improving the Agricultural
Practices of Coffee Farmers in
Central America
In 2006, IFC partnered with Ecom
Agroindustrial Ltd., a global leader in
commodity trading, to help coffee suppliers
in Central America improve their incomes
through the adoption of sustainable practices
and international quality standards.
The success of this program led to replication;
IFC has provided both investment and
advisory services to Ecom in several regions
of the world.



IFC CLIENT: Ecom




                             26
                               L AT IN AM   E RICA AND T HE CARIBBE AN




The Opportunity
Coffee is a heavily traded global commodity, and high-quality
arabica beans are the fastest-growing segment of the market. The
demand from consumers for certiﬁed coffee is also growing, and
the price they are willing to pay has caught the attention of traders
and producers. In order to meet market demand, coffee farmers
have had to adapt farming practices to qualify for certiﬁcation.
The various standards available include a range of criteria that
evaluates farmer performance in relation to environmental
protection, social issues and economic sustainability.
These certiﬁcations have the potential to create value for
smallholders, as certain certiﬁed coffee carries a market
premium. However, complying with rigorous and sometimes
varying certiﬁcation criteria tends to place additional burdens on
small farmers, who need guidance to understand and properly
implement required practices.
Ecom is an international commodity trading company, ranked third
among the world’s largest coffee dealers with 13% of the world’s
market share. Ecom’s major customers include Nestlé, Starbucks,
Kraft, Procter & Gamble, and Sara Lee. The company sources from
over 250,000 smallholders in 30 countries. Despite its success, Ecom
faces a number of challenges in its coffee supply chains, including:
  • Absent or ineffective agricultural extension services at origins.
  • Low productivity from aging trees and poor farming practices.
  • Lack of understanding of consumer demands and market
    requirements (ie: sustainability programs).
  • Limited access to ﬁnance for farmers, which hinders the
    ability to invest at the farm level.

“We knew that by collaborating with multiple stakeholders and
IFC, we would be challenged to see how good we could get.
Through continuous learning and building new sets of tools and
abilities, we’ve been able to strengthen our local capacities and
provide a better service to our producers.”
           —Eric Ponçon, Ecom’s Regional Director in Central America


                               2 7
L AT IN AM   E RICA AND T HE CARIBBE AN




IFC’s Approach
IFC and Ecom, in partnership with Nestlé (Nespresso, Nestec,
Nestlé UK) began working together in 2006 in Central America
to strengthen farmers’ coffee growing practices in order to meet
industry quality demands, environmental and social standards,
and increase productivity.
Over the course of six years, IFC assisted coffee farmers in
Mexico, Guatemala, Costa Rica and Nicaragua to improve their
production and increase income for the Ecom-Nestlé supply
chain, by:
  • Strengthening sustainable practices on farms while providing
    preferential market access and price premiums through
    certiﬁcation programs;
  • Increasing farmer productivity through improved pruning and
    integrated pest management practices and adoption of hybrid
    varieties;
  • Improving Ecom lending practices and provision of a $25
    million loan to Ecom to on-lend to farmers for short-term
    ﬁnance and medium-term sustainability improvements.
Based on the program’s positive results in Central America,
IFC expanded ﬁnancing and advisory support to Ecom’s supply
chain development initiatives in Indonesia, Vietnam, Papua New
Guinea, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Several farmer training
centers have been established at the country level to provide
training and advise farmers on complying with good agricultural
practices.




                                    2 8
                                 LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 $24 million in IFC financing to Ecom in Latin America and
   the Caribbean since 2006.
•	 More than 4,000 coffee farmers have been trained, with
   1,800 entities obtaining certification.  
•	 Over 14,000 hectares managed utilizing sustainable
   practices, compared to less than 405 hectares in 2008.
•	 Over 23,000 metric tons of certified coffee sold by those
   certified farmers and purchased by Ecom.
•	 $11.8 million in additional sales revenue for the
   smallholder farmers.*

*Figure based on compilation of quality and certification premiums




                                29
M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA




                                          3 0
      M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA




      MIDDLE EAST
      AND NORTH
          AFRICA




3 1
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




Helping Local Companies
Increase Olive Oil Exports in
the West Bank and Gaza
IFC worked with eight olive oil companies—
representing the majority of the sector in the
West Bank and Gaza—to develop supply chains,
improve quality, and increase exports.
IFC advised the companies on how to access
international markets, obtain financing,
find ways to use byproducts from olive oil
processing, and reduce negative environmental
impacts.
As a result, olive oil exports increased by 35
percent in the first three years of this project’s
implementation.



IFC CLIENTs: Al’Ard Palestinian Agri-Products, Al Reef For
Investment And Agricultural Marketing Company, Kanaan
Fair Trade, Agri-Technochemical, Zaytoon, Uawc–Olive
Mountain, New Farm, Tayeba



                               32
                                      M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA




The Opportunity
Agribusiness and agriculture account for about two-thirds of total
employment in the West Bank and Gaza. Olive oil production, in
particular, is a major driver of economic growth in the region and
provides jobs to more than 100,000 families.
The olive oil sector has great export potential. Production exceeds
local consumption and olive oil, as a non-perishable product, is
less affected by political turbulence.
However, the olive oil industry in West Bank and Gaza faces
several constraints, such as weak quality control, poor packaging
and labeling, inadequate supply chain links, and a lack of
marketing know-how. Furthermore, the historically fragmented
agricultural sector and post-conﬂict economic challenges make
it difﬁcult to consolidate a larger number of small growers
and achieve consistent quality across the sector. In addition,
current olive processing practices are particularly harmful to the
environment.




“IFC’s level of involvement and concern has been a key ingredient
in the success of this project, assisting our company to increase its
olive oil exports six-fold by accessing new markets.”

         —Dr. Osama Odeh, General Manager of Agri Technochemical,
            one of the eight olive oil companies that worked with IFC




                                3 3
M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA




IFC’s Approach
IFC aims to address key challenges faced by the olive oil sector
in conﬂict-affected West Bank and Gaza such as limited access to
ﬁnance, markets and best practices. Towards this end, IFC works
with farmers, millers, bottlers, producers, and related businesses
and creates important linkages in the industry.
More speciﬁcally, IFC worked with eight Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) in the West Bank and Gaza, namely Al’ Ard
Palestinian Agri-Products, Al Reef for Investment and Agricultural
Marketing Company, Kanaan Fair Trade, Agri-Technochemical,
Zaytoon, UAWC–Olive Mountain, New Farm, Tayeba.
IFC’s work with these companies aimed to:
    • Increase their compliance with international food standards
      and implement basic traceability programs.
    • Establish a framework for marketing olive oil for export.
    • Enhance access to ﬁnance for producers and related
      businesses.
    • Improve their environmental performance through waste
      minimization and recycling, as well as utilization of industry
      byproducts.
As a result of the project, a 500 ml bottle of olive oil under
the newly developed brand Daskara was sold for $23 from
distributors. Prior to IFC’s program, the same sellers received an
average wholesale price of $14 for the same amount and quality.
Several shipments at the new price have already been made to the
US, where the new brand was launched.




                                          3 4
                                 MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




RESULTS AND IMPACT
•	 Increased olive oil exports by 35 percent in the first three
   years of project implementation, from $3 million to $4.4
   million.
•	 Established cooperation between a US importer and SMEs
   in the West Bank and Gaza.
•	 Established a unified marketing framework through a
   new brand called Daskara which represents the industry
   in international markets.
•	 Eight local SMEs were trained on:
   •	 Financial management, credit, and other aspects of
      financing, and gained exposure to global markets.
   •	 Traceability standards, using a specially-developed IFC
      Traceability Manual. 360 farmers in the supply chain of
      these SMEs also received this training.
•	 Eight local SMEs almost doubled the retail price of their
   product, going from $14 per bottle to $23, thanks to
   stronger branding and marketing.
•	 Five out of eight SMEs that worked with IFC became ISO
   and HACCP certified, by complying with international
   food safety standards.
•	 110 employees of bottling companies and their suppliers
   were trained on testing, packing, and export procedures
   for olive oil.
•	 Completed an environmental assessment on the use of
   waste water as a fertilizer.




                            35
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




Working with Raisin and
Pomegranate Farmers to
Increase Their Productivity
and Access to International
Markets in Afghanistan
IFC helped raisin and pomegranate farmers
increase the quality and quantity of their crops
through farm extension services and farm
management training. The training provided
them with information about harvesting,
grading, and storing their products, and enabled
them to access new markets in Afghanistan and
abroad.
The project engaged with hundreds of
farmers across five districts in Afghanistan’s
Kandahar Province, helping them to increase
productivity and contribute to the region’s
economic growth.




                               36
                                    M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA




The Opportunity
Agriculture is a major source of employment in Afghanistan, and
raisins and pomegranates, in particular, are commodities with
high growth potential. However, Afghan farmers face a number
of challenges, including limited presence in international markets
and lack of technical expertise in harvesting, sorting, and drying
their crops. As a result, farmers produce sub-optimal harvests,
and see lower returns on their investment.
IFC focused on raisin and pomegranate farmers in Kandahar
Province because of their potential for producing superior-
quality crops. IFC conducted a scoping mission and found that
modernizing the raisin drying houses would allow farmers to
complete two production cycles per season, instead of just one.
The scoping mission also found that by focusing on quality and
packing, pomegranate farmers could increase productivity and
sales.
In 2006, IFC began a pilot project with 10 raisin farmers and 50
pomegranate farmers, building modern drying houses and training
the farmers to improve post-harvest activities such as cleaning,
sorting, grading, and packing their crop. The farmers participated
in a trade mission to Dubai to view international wholesale
markets and learn about the products offered by other countries.
In 2008, the project was scaled up to reach 100 grape farmers and
1,400 pomegranate farmers. The farmers were able to improve
their post-harvest practices, sell their product at a much higher
price, and export to new markets in New Delhi and Mumbai.


“(Thanks to IFC), new linkages were established and new effective
markets were identiﬁed at national and international levels,
especially in India. Technical problems of exporters have been
solved, which led to new agreements between Afghan exporters and
importers from India.”

                           —Haji Shahzada, owner of a drying house


                              3 7
M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA




IFC’s Approach
IFC initially identiﬁed 40 agricultural graduates and provided
them with six months of technical training in harvesting and
producing crops, to form an extension team able to provide
technical support to farmers.
IFC connected with local small businesses to provide the materials
needed to build modern drying houses and used IFC’s Business
Edge management training workshops to train extension workers
on the basics of budgeting and accounting. Workshops were
conducted in Pashtu and used local examples. Two technical
manuals were produced (one for each commodity) that cover
aspects of farming related to quality, with speciﬁc attention to
post-harvest activities.
During the project, extension workers worked to build a
successful business model that could be replicated in ﬁve districts
of Kandahar Province. IFC also partnered with Afghan exporters
and identiﬁed potential Indian importers interested in working
with the Afghan exporters. The farmers learned sorting and
packaging techniques that would appeal to international markets,
and were linked to exporters.
As a result, the time needed to produce raisins was cut by 50
percent, and waste was reduced to 15 percent from roughly 35
percent. Increased production and higher quality resulted in sales
to India of roughly $4 million worth of raisins and pomegranates
produced by these farmers. Women beneﬁted indirectly:
while none received training directly, male family members
who participated in the project trained them in post-harvest
production, a process to which women on family farms often
contribute.
To make the project sustainable, Afghan extension workers
formed an association. They have continued to provide fee-based
training and technical assistance to raisin and pomegranate
farmers in Kandahar Province since the completion of the project
in 2012.

                                          3 8
                                     M   ID D L E E AST AND   NO RT H AFRICA



Building on the success of the program, IFC will begin working
with a large Afghan fruit processing and exporting company to
enhance its supply chain and integrate farmers that were able to
implement recommended practices. The new project will also help
to gain access to wider market opportunities and attract ﬁnancing.




   RE SUL T S AND   IM P ACT

   • 1,500 farmers and 40 extension workers were trained in
     modern production techniques. All came from remote
     locations in Kandahar Province with very limited access
     to technical support/knowledge.
   • Doubled local farmers’ raisin output, and reduced waste
     by introducing 125 new drying houses. Thanks to the
     success of this program, farmers are now also willing to
     invest in the drying houses themselves.
   • Established linkages between farmers and Afghan
     exporters, who were introduced to new markets in India.
   • $4 million worth of raisins and pomegranates exported to
     Indian markets by farmers involved in the project.




                               3 9
SO UT H ASIA




               4 0
            SO UT H ASIA




      SOUTH ASIA




4 1
SOUTH ASIA




Making the Agricultural Sector
more Sustainable and Resilient
in Bangladesh
IFC is working with leading seed companies in
Bangladesh to promote sustainable farming
practices, such as the production, distribution,
and adoption of stress-tolerant seed
varieties that withstand prolonged periods of
submergence, high levels of salinity, and
drought conditions.
As a result of IFC’s engagement, over
145,000 farmers were exposed to practices
that increase productivity, facilitate access
to supply chains, and knowledge and are
environment friendly.



IFC CLIENTS: ACI Ltd., Lal Teer Ltd., Supreme Seed Ltd.
and others




                              42
                                                          SO UT H ASIA




The Opportunity
Agriculture is a major economic driver in Bangladesh, accounting
for 16 percent of the country’s gross domestic product and
providing employment for 65 percent of its labor force. However,
Bangladesh is losing 1.75 percent of its arable land each year—
faster than its population growth of 1.5 percent. By 2025, the
agriculture sector will have to feed 19 million more people with
considerably less land under cultivation.
Climate change poses an especially serious challenge to
Bangladesh’s agricultural output, and puts its food security at
risk. As a low-lying country situated on a delta, Bangladesh
experiences salt water intrusion, land erosion, and drought and
can expect increased ﬂooding, and more intense natural disasters.
Women are largely invisible players in the agricultural sector.
They are often left out of capacity building programs, and their
potential impact on household income is hardly recognized.
It is imperative for farmers to change traditional farming methods
and adopt climate-smart practices (e.g., stress tolerant seed
varieties) for sustainable agriculture and ensure food security.
Similarly, agribusinesses will have to adjust to increased supply
chain disruptions, decreased productivity, and workforce
instability (e.g., displacement, illness).




“We have very much appreciated IFC’s role in supporting the
private sector’s efforts to contribute to the nation’s food security.
The scope of our collaboration in recent times has been expanded
to supporting farmers in stress-prone areas, which is critical to
adapting to climate change.”

                       —Mahbub Anam, Managing Director of Lal Teer,
                one of the four leading seed sector firms in Bangladesh




                                4 3
SO UT H ASIA




IFC’s Approach
IFC is actively promoting climate-smart agricultural practices in
Bangladesh, working with both the private and the public sectors
to build greater efﬁciencies in the use of their resources.
More speciﬁcally, IFC works with:
  • Bangladesh’s some of the largest private seed companies
    (e.g., Supreme Seed Ltd., ACI Ltd., and Lal Teer Ltd.) to
    demonstate the business case for stress-tolerant and high
    yielding seed varieties, provide extension services to farmers
    on seed production and on-farm management practices, and
    encourage more investment in the business.
  • Farmers to increase their awareness of climate-smart
    agricultural practices that can improve their yield and revenue
  • Women farmers to formalize their role in post-harvest
    activities in speciﬁc communities and train them on seed
    production, micro-entrepreneurship and market-linkages.
  • Dealers and retailers to expose them to new seed varieties,
    understand their applications in speciﬁc cropping seasons and
    environmental conditions
  • The Bangladesh government to bring together public and
    private sector representatives to a constructive dialogue and
    collaboration in promoting stress-tolerant seeds and other
    adaptive inputs.
IFC’s objective is to support farmers in adapting to climate change
as well as strengthening food security and social inclusion by:
  • Increasing the production, distribution, and adoption of
    stress-tolerant and promoting them to farmers who can
    beneﬁt from them but are not aware of their availability or
    the respective farming practices.
  • Promoting high-yielding seed varieties, which boost
    agricultural output.
  • Including rural women in seed production in remote areas
    and linking them to formal seed supply chains.


                                  4 4
                                                     SOUTH ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 139,000 farmers trained on stress-tolerant and high-
   yielding seeds varieties (Some on seed use; others on seed
   production).
•	 67 percent of project-supported farmers adopted
   recommended varieties.
•	 14 percent paddy yield increase for project-supported
   farmers compared to 10.9 percent for control farmers.
•	 88 percent vegetable yield increase for project-supported
   farmers compared to 5.5 percent for control farmers.
•	 15 percent revenue increase for project-supported
   farmers.
•	 3,602 farmers produced better quality seeds and linked to
   seed supply chain; 2,200 of them are women.
•	 71.9 percent cumulative increase in lead firms’ sales
   revenue.




                           45
SOUTH ASIA




Improving Productivity in the
Poultry Sector in Bangladesh
IFC worked with Bangladeshi farmers to help
them adopt clean energy technology that
converts cow and chicken waste to biogas,
which is then used to generate electricity.
By using local clean energy, farmers save on
energy costs and generate extra income from
the sale of fertilizer and excess electricity.
Simultaneously, IFC helped build the capacity
of the local supply chain.
With IFC support, dozens of farmers were
able to access bank financing to install small
waste-to-energy plants on their farms, helping
to create a market for biogas equipment and
generators.




                        46
                                                          SO UT H ASIA




The Opportunity
In Bangladesh, the poultry sector employs over 5 million people,
making it the second largest source of rural jobs. Despite
continuous growth over the last decade, low productivity and
poor waste management do not allow the sector to reach its full
potential.
Ninety-ﬁve percent of poultry farmers lack awareness of farm
management and struggle to survive and stay proﬁtable. Poultry
farmers face two key problems in Bangladesh: the large amount of
animal waste on their farms—about 4,500 million tons generated
daily by poultry farms—and the high cost of using diesel-based
back-up power whenever their unreliable grid electricity failed.
Although biogas could address both of these problems, there
were a few barriers to overcome ﬁrst. For instance, there were
few commercial suppliers of biogas equipment in Bangladesh for
farm use. In addition, bankers were reluctant to provide lending
to farmers interested in purchasing biogas waste-to-energy plants
because their commercial viability was untested in the local
market.



“IFC’s timely initiative helped us resolve energy access, bio-security,
and waste management issues.”

                     —Mujibur Rahman, Owner, Golden Poultry Farm,
                                               Ramu, Cox’s Bazar




                                4 7
SO UT H ASIA




IFC’s Approach
IFC helped identify biogas as a clean energy alternative to the
diesel fuel the farmers were previously using to provide electricity
on their farms, and provided technical expertise in building,
operating and maintaining small-scale biogas energy plants.
IFC also worked with farmers and SMEs to improve productivity
through training and capacity building.
More speciﬁcally, IFC developed and disseminated Poultry
Workbooks—good practice guides for farmers and SMEs, and
conducted training sessions on farm management, disease and
bio-security management.
IFC also organized events and demonstrations of the biogas
technology to illustrate the technical and commercial feasibility of
the biogas technology.
In addition, IFC worked with market stakeholders to promote
clean energy by introducing waste-to-energy technologies.
Overall, IFC helped build linkages between farmers, SMEs, service
and technology providers, and ﬁnancial institutions. In particular,
IFC works with:
  • Farmers, SMEs and energy providers to install small scale
    waste-to-energy generation plants.
  • Service providers to develop capacity to tap the upcoming
    market demand.
  • Government, industry, NGOs and other stakeholders to
    create awareness and a business-enabling environment.
  • Financial institutions to educate them on the ﬁnancing of
    renewable energy projects.
By catalyzing investment in this type of clean energy in
Bangladesh, IFC helped create a market for the materials needed
to build the waste-to-energy plants.




                                   4 8
                                                     SOUTH ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 Trained over 15,000 small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
   and poultry farmers.
•	 Sold 11,367 Poultry Workbooks, good practice guides for
   SMEs and farmers to improve their productivity.
•	 Facilitated $1.2 million in investment for 16 poultry farms.
•	 Installed waste to electricity plants at 250 poultry and
   dairy farms.
•	 Generated over 6,700 MWh/year of electricity from waste
   to electricity plants.
•	 More than 12,000 SMEs and farmers implemented
   recommendations received from IFC resulting in
   improved performance for 8,012 entities.
•	 IFC client companies increased sales by $104 million.




                           49
SOUTH ASIA




Strengthening Poultry Supply
Chains in Nepal
IFC worked with Small and Medium Enterprises
(SMEs) and farmers in the Nepalese poultry
sector to strengthen their technical skills,
increase profitability, and expand access to
markets.
Through building the capacity of three local
poultry companies and 4,050 poultry farmers,
IFC addressed industry-wide challenges, such
as lack of veterinarian skills and bio-security
standards, low production efficiency, and
limited farm management skills.



IFC CLIENTS: Probiotech Feed Mill, Avinash Hatchery
and others




                             50
                                                           SO UT H ASIA




The Opportunity
The poultry sector in Nepal is estimated at $240 million and
employs over 70,000 people. However, the industry loses up
to $32 million in proﬁts. This loss is primarily due to the fact
that local SMEs lack formal training on farm management and
struggle to stay proﬁtable.
More speciﬁcally, Nepalese poultry producers face multiple
challenges like inefﬁcient feeding practices and low quality of
baby chickens—the two key inputs that together represent up to
90 percent of their costs.
Another issue is bio-security and disease management, which are
critical to the sustainability of the industry. Local specialists lack
adequate training and the Nepalese poultry sector needs to build
capacity in these areas.




“We value IFC’s integrated approach to improve efﬁciencies
through technical assistance and to pave the way for investment.
IFC helped us improve the productivity and the loyalty of our
broiler farmers through an innovative fee-based extension services
model which is led by the private sector. IFC has also started
helping us with farmer capacity building in the maize sector.”

    — Anand Bagaria, Managing Diector, Probiotech Industries, Nepal




                                5 1
SO UT H ASIA




IFC’s Approach
To achieve the most impact, IFC is focused on the following
interventions:
  • Assessing poultry feed process quality and advising on how to
    improve nutrition practices.
  • Developing a Standard Operating Practice—a good practice
    guide for the poultry sector aimed at increasing overall
    production efﬁciency.
  • Analyzing bio-security and diseases in parent and grower
    farms, and providing industry-wide recommendations for
    improvement.
  • Training small and medium poultry farms’ staff and build
    local veterinarian capacity by training the trainers.




Lasing Lamar owns a poultry farm and, along with 4,000
other poultry farmers in Nepal, has received management
training from IFC.




                                 5 2
                                                     SOUTH ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 Provided fee-based training on farm management to
   4,050 chicken growers, 42 percent of whom are women.
•	 Trained 32 (30 percent women) veterinarians as trainers to
   build local capacity.
•	 Developed a Standard Operating Practice—a guide for
   stock farms, hatchery, and broiler growers.
•	 Developed a Training Aid and Broiler Production Guide to
   facilitate adoption of new skills and knowledge by poultry
   farmers.
•	 Probiotech feed mill, one of IFC’s clients, won the “Nepal
   Standard” quality award from the Nepal Bureau of
   Standards and Metrology in 2011.
•	 Women farmers trained by the project have reduced the
   cost of chicken production by 18 percent versus 7 percent
   by men farmers.
•	 In May 2014, IFC signed an agreement with poultry feed
   manufacturer Probiotech Industries to invest $1.9 million
   equity in the company to enhance farm productivity
   and boost incomes in rural Nepal. This is IFC’s first
   agribusiness investment in Nepal.




                           53
SOUTH ASIA




Improving the Productivity of
Sugar Farmers in India
IFC worked with DSCL Sugar, the fifth largest
sugar company in India, to improve the
productivity of farmers in its supply chain by
training them in advanced farming techniques.
As a result, the productivity of farmers
who received training is estimated to have
increased by 80 percent, compared with a 20
percent increase among farmers who did not
receive training. This successful business model
is expected to reach 50,000 farmers in DSCL’s
supply chain and also be replicated by other
companies in India’s sugar sector.



IFC CLIENT: DSCL Sugar




                         54
                                                         SO UT H ASIA




The Opportunity
In India, more than 50 million farmers depend on sugarcane
cultivation for their livelihood.
While some states in India have a high farm yield of more than
100 tons per hectare, the four million farmers in the low-income
state of Uttar Pradesh produce only around 50–55 tons per
hectare on average, resulting in reduced incomes from sugarcane
cultivation.
DCM Shriram Consolidated Ltd. (DSCL), an IFC investment
client, is one of the major sugar producers in the state, with four
sugar plants and more than 150,000 farmers in its entire supply
chain.
DSCL is under pressure to increase the productivity of farmers in
its supply chain. Current capacity utilization is low and if it falls
any lower, it will hurt the company’s proﬁts. In the past, measures
undertaken by the company to enhance productivity had limited
success because the programs were fragmented, rather than
holistic in their approach.




“By helping farmers increase their farm productivity, this project
has not only increased farmers’ incomes, but the company has
boosted its sugarcane supply. This is a true manifestation of
good corporate social responsibility, where the company’s and
community’s interests are mutually aligned.”

                —Sunil Radhakrishna, Senior Executive Director, DSCL




                               5 5
SO UT H ASIA




IFC’s Approach
IFC worked with DSCL to increase the productivity of farmers in
its supply chain by bringing in expertise on developing a package
of practices based on the crop’s speciﬁc agro-climatic needs.
More speciﬁcally, IFC supported the training of farmers who
supply sugarcane to DSCL’s sugar plants in advanced farming
practices related to seed management, soil improvement, water
usage, planting, monitoring, and reporting.
These practices were incorporated into a training manual for
DSCL and an easy-reference pictorial ﬂipchart for farmers that
demonstrates farming practices to be followed during each month
of the crop cycle.




                                           Sugar farms in Uttar
                                           Pradesh, India, where
                                           IFC worked with DSCL,
                                           one of the largest
                                           sugar producers in the
                                           country.




                                 5 6
                                                    SOUTH ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 After two years, trained farmers obtained sugarcane
   yields that were 79 percent higher than the yields of those
   who did not receive any training.
•	 Initially, 2,000 farmers received training—this has been
   scaled up to over 17,500 farmers. The project is expected
   to be expanded to reach 50,000 additional farmers in
   DSCL’s supply chain.

REPLICATION

•	 The project is expected to be replicated by DSCL to
   ultimately reach all 150,000 farmers in its supply chain.
•	 The project is being replicated by four other sugar
   companies in India and is expected to reach over
   200,000 farmers.




                           57
SOUTH ASIA




Addressing Water Security in
the Agricultural Sector in India
IFC worked with Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd., an
IFC investment and advisory client, to conduct
a Water Footprint Assessment which helps
companies reduce water-related risks, improve
water efficiency, and mitigate social and
environmental impact.
This was the first time that a business
conducted such an assessment in a developing
country and it paved the way for similar
assessments for IFC clients in countries that
face water scarcity.



IFC CLIENT: Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.




                              58
                                                          SO UT H ASIA




The Opportunity
Water scarcity is an alarming 21st century issue. It is estimated
that by 2025, two-thirds of the world’s population will be
living in water-stressed conditions. Businesses around the world
recognize this challenge as a threat to their reputations as well as
their bottom lines.
Water footprinting is a method similar to carbon footprinting
that determines how much water a company uses in its operations
as well as in its supply chain. It can also identify the social and
environmental impact associated with that consumption. It is
particularly useful for agribusiness, which consumes 70 to 85
percent of total fresh water.
India is one of the world’s most water-affected countries. India-
based IFC client Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. is one of the world’s
largest manufacturers of drip irrigation systems and operates
in an area where water scarcity is an imminent issue. It is also
one of the world’s largest producers of dehydrated onions and
mango pulp, puree, and concentrate. It was the ﬁrst business in
a developing country to conduct a Water Footprint Assessment,
which led to a reduction in its water consumption as well as a
strategy to increase local water availability.



“This water footprint assessment has exceeded our expectations. At
a local level, the strategy validates our efforts to make a profound
difference in farmers’ lives by providing extra income and sustaining
rural livelihoods. At a regional level, the strategy will help increase
water supply and decrease demand for water. The water footprint
assessment attests to the leadership that both IFC and Jain
Irrigation Systems are taking in the area of sustainable management
and consumption of water resources.”

            —Anil Jain, Managing Director, Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.




                               5 9
SO UT H ASIA




IFC’s Approach
IFC worked with Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. to produce a
Water Footprint Assessment which assessed the production of
its dehydrated onions and the manufacturing of its micro-
irrigation system (MIS). Among the most important ﬁndings
was that onions grown under drip irrigation have a 42 percent
smaller water footprint than those grown using traditional
irrigation methods.
IFC views water footprinting as an integral part of its climate
change strategy given that it can help its clients reduce water-
related risks, improve water efﬁciency, and limit their water-
related social and environmental impact.
Overall, this Water Footprint Assessment serves as an example of
an effective tool for managing water-related risks and paves the
way for similar assessments for IFC clients in countries that face
water scarcity.
More broadly, IFC has been engaged in addressing water scarcity
issues as a founding partner of the Water Footprint Network,
a platform for private sector, academics, research institutions,
international organizations and NGOs interested in furthering
research in this ﬁeld.




                                   6 0
                                                      SOUTH ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 Increased its water savings through a solid understanding
   of the water footprint of its operations.
•	 Increased uptake of its sustainable drip irrigation system
   by farmers in both its supply chain and in the broader
   region, replacing traditional flood irrigation systems.
•	 Formulated strategies for alleviating water scarcity
   and improving the sustainability of water use in the
   surrounding onion-growing region.
•	 Encouraged local onion farmers to use drip irrigation to
   reduce water consumption and pollution.
•	 Established a forum for local water stakeholders to
   work together toward sustainable water resource
   management.
•	 IFC has invested $133 million in Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.
   since 2007.




                            61
SOUTH ASIA




Addressing Food Safety and
Traceability in India
IFC partnered with Jain Irrigation Systems
Ltd., an Indian company that is a leading
international producer of processed fruits
and vegetables, to increase farmers’ water
efficiency and help fruit and vegetable
suppliers meet international food safety
standards.



IFC CLIENT: Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.




                              62
                                                          SO UT H ASIA




The Opportunity
Water scarcity and food safety are alarming 21st century issues.
Agribusinesses around the world recognize limited natural
resources and uncertiﬁed suppliers as threats to their reputations
as well as their proﬁtability.
India-based Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. has partnered with
IFC on a variety of projects relating to food safety and water
efﬁciency. Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. is one one of the world’s
largest producers of dehydrated onions and mango pulp, puree,
and concentrate.
As part of a previous successful partnership with IFC, Jain
Irrigation Systems Ltd. was the ﬁrst business in a developing
country to conduct a Water Footprint Assessment, which led
to a reduction in its water consumption as well as a strategy to
increase local water availability.
India is also one of the largest and lowest cost producers of fruits
in the world, yet its share in global exports (both and processed)
is less than 2 percent of the total world trade.
One of the major constraints faced by Indian food processors
and exporters is the lack of local compliance with stringent food
safety standards demanded by the major importing countries of
the world.




“[Implementing Jain GAP] is a win-win for everybody. The farmer
will get more products, more ﬁnancial returns, and better safety
and occupational health. We will also get better quality materials,
assured supply, and more satisﬁed clients.”

                         —Dilip Kulkarni, President, Agrifood Division,
                                           Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.




                               6 3
SO UT H ASIA




IFC’s Approach
IFC partnered with Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. to help local
suppliers meet food safety standards that the international market
demands.
The farms of Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. are certiﬁed by
GLOBALGAP, a non-governmental organization that sets
voluntary standards for certiﬁcation around the globe. However,
the company has noted increased interest from its buyers in the
farm-level practices of its suppliers and in its ability to trace the
origins of its products.
To assess the practices of small-scale Indian farmers, IFC
performed a diagnostic of Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.’s mango
and onion supply chains, which noted varying levels of GAP
compliance at the farm level.
IFC and Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. joined forces to develop and
pilot a “Jain GAP” standard to apply to the ﬁrm’s supply chain.
This tailor-made standard is a modiﬁed and simpliﬁed version of
GLOBALGAP that brings a measure of food safety and standards
to Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.’s supply base while minimizing the
associated costs of compliance to both farmers and Jain Irrigation
Systems Ltd..
Jain GAP is an entry-level standard that includes critical elements
of Global GAP, such as traceability, food safety, hygiene,
sanitation, and occupational health.
To support the implementation of this standard, IFC provided
experts who:
  • Trained Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. staff on managing the
    standard
  • Trained extensionists on speciﬁc practices so that they could
    train farmers on meeting the standard
  • Trained Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd. auditors on veriﬁcation
    processes



                                    6 4
                                                      SOUTH ASIA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 Developed JAIN GAP food safety standard that includes
   74 of the 256 total GLOBALGAP criteria.
•	 Achieved GLOBALGAP recognition of the JAIN GAP
   standard as a “Primary Farm Assurance” Standard.
•	 Trained 4,162 JISL farmers on GAP practices.
•	 1,340 farmers complied with the JAIN GAP practices.
•	 5,573 acres of land cultivated under the JAIN GAP system.
•	 IFC has invested $133 million in Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd.
   since 2007.




                            65
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




                     6 6
      SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




SUB-SAHARAN
      AFRICA




6 7
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




Improving the Productivity
of Smallholder Coffee Farms
in Kenya
IFC is working with Ecom, a global leader in
commodity trading, to raise the productivity
of smallholder farms, improve the quality of
their coffee, and have a positive impact on the
livelihoods of farmers in Kenya.
More specifically, IFC is working with Ecom
to develop new farmer training tools and
methods, adopt more sustainable farming
practices, and meet international standards for
quality.
IFC has partnered with Ecom since 2006,
providing both investment and advisory
services. The IFC program in Kenya was
launched in 2011.



IFC CLIENT: Ecom




                        68
                                               SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




The Opportunity
According to World Bank data, the agricultural sector contributes
to 30 percent of Kenya’s GDP while an estimated six million
Kenyans are employed directly or indirectly in agribusiness.
Coffee trade is one of the main earners of foreign exchange,
bringing in 3.2 percent, yet 75 percent of Kenya’s coffee is
produced by small farmers with only 0.3–0.5 hectares of land.
The major coffee growing regions are around Mount Kenya and
the Aberdare Range, where the altitude and soil provide excellent
conditions for growing premium coffee.
However, since 1989, production has fallen drastically, from
130,000 tonnes to less than 60,000 tonnes by 2009. This is
attributed to a lack of agricultural training systems and weak
public sector support of the industry, especially in terms of
material inputs such as seeds and fertilizers.
In 2006, Ecom established Sustainable Management Services
(SMS), a wholly-owned company, as a vehicle to manage the
collection, training, and farm inputs along its coffee supply chain.
SMS, with support from the Dutch humanitarian NGO HIVOS,
successfully started training promoter farmers on how to spread
best agricultural practices amongst coffee growers. SMS now
wishes to signiﬁcantly expand these activities and build capacity
at the coffee association/co-operative level.




“Through the training facilitated by IFC we learned how to use
seed varieties that are resistant to leaf rust and how to use mulch to
prevent soil erosion and the loss of water. Thanks to this training,
my farm will look very different 2–3 years from now.”

                                —Patrick K. Kabue, Farmer and Trainer




                               6 9
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




IFC’s Approach
IFC is working with SMS, a subsidiary of Ecom that is responsible
for the management of coffee supply chains in Kenya, to improve
both the quantity and the quality of coffee that local farmers
produce.
More speciﬁcally, IFC helps SMS to offer training on:
  • Adopting Good Agricultural Practices (G.A.P.) that result in
    food that is safe and wholesome. (For instance, how to use
    organic manure).
  • Obtaining international certiﬁcation and accessing new
    markets.
  • Improving ﬁnancial literacy skills. This training builds on
    IFC’s Business Edge management training workshops for
    farmers.
IFC also works with the Coffee Research Foundation (CRF), a
non-proﬁt whose mandate is to research, develop and disseminate
appropriate technologies for enhanced productivity, quality and
value addition. IFC is helping CRF with quality management
and training at the factory level—a ﬁrst in the history of the
foundation.
Finally, IFC is helping Ecom Kenya assess the credit worthiness
of coffee producers in its supply chain, allowing the company
to move away from an informal lending system to a more
sustainable, objective and standardized process. This mitigates
Ecom’s lending risks and, also, allows the disbursal of more funds
to farmers. The farmers can then use the capital to increase their
productivity through the purchase of necessary equipment and
materials such as fertilizers, pesticides and new seed varieties.




                                  7 0
                                          SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 More than 16,000 small farmers improved the quality
   of their coffee and more than doubled their crop yield
   as a result of adopting the agricultural practices
   recommended by this project since it was launched in
   2011.
•	 350 promoter farmers were trained in good agricultural,
   certification, financial literacy and farm management
   practices. Each promoter farmer is transferring his or her
   knowledge to ~50 smallholder growers through training.
•	 12 coffee associations (also known as co-operatives)
   and staff from 22 different wet mills learned about the
   financial benefits of producing better quality coffee that
   can fetch a higher price on international markets.
•	 Completed an IFC diagnostic study which evaluated
   the financing needs of farmers in Ecom’s supply chain
   in Kenya. Based on its findings, a new business model is
   being developed that will improve access to finance for
   suppliers.
•	 $154 million has been invested by IFC in Ecom globally
   since 2006.




                           71
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




Increasing the Energy Efficiency
of the Largest Fruit Exporter in
South Africa
In South Africa, demand for energy has
outpaced national supply as there has been
little investment in energy infrastructure.
Country-wide power outages and an
increasingly insufficient supply have led to
escalating energy prices.
IFC works with the Karsten Group to increase
energy efficiency, reduce operating costs, and
boost productivity.
IFC has partnered with the Karsten Group
since 2006, providing both advisory and
investment services.



IFC CLIENT: Karsten Group




                            72
                                              SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




The Opportunity
Ranked the 18th largest issuer of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
worldwide, South Africa has an abundance of energy resources in
addition to large deposits of coal, which generate 80 percent of
the country’s consumed primary energy. As a result, until 2009 the
country’s energy prices were among the cheapest on the continent.
Beginning in 2002, South Africa’s GDP steadily increased more
than the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa. However, investment in
energy infrastructure and supply systems did not match the years
of steady economic growth. By 2007, electricity demand could not
be met at all times and intermittent power outages set in.
The government introduced a new tariff structure favoring energy
efﬁciency with lower tariffs and capacity restrictions.
Before the power shortage became evident, private sector ﬁrms
had little incentive to prioritize energy efﬁciency processes
within their operations. However, following the 2007 blackouts,
businesses realized the need to seek long-term resource efﬁciency
solutions.
As the energy landscape changed, companies began seeking advice
from outside energy specialists and pursuing funding to maximize
energy efﬁciency within their operations.
Karsten Farms’ management understood the value of making its
operations more energy efﬁcient. It also knew that it was better to
do so sooner rather than later and engaged a partner with whom
it had already worked.



“We like working with IFC. If all farming businesses in the region
did what we’ve done, we would achieve signiﬁcant success in
improving people’s lives.”

               —Piet du Plessis, Karsten Group Chief Executive Officer




                               7 3
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




IFC’s Approach
An IFC investment client since 2006, the Karsten Group was
eligible for IFC’s Cleaner Production Lending Facility (CPLF).
The Facility is available to IFC portfolio clients in good standing
to help ﬁnance projects that support more efﬁcient use of energy,
water and materials, resulting in the use of natural resources
and in the reduction of GHG emissions. The Facility also allows
clients to pilot investments in energy efﬁciency and renewable
energy that they may roll out more widely in their operations.
IFC’s Sustainable Business Advisory and Karsten’s energy team
jointly identiﬁed opportunities in resource efﬁciency. Drawing
upon the Facility, Karsten received $1 million for a long-term loan
and advisory services to install efﬁcient lighting and refrigeration
systems on its farms. The loan also helped Karsten install solar
water heaters in approximately 300 farming worker homes on ten
farms, improving the living standards of its employees.
As a result, the project is saving Karsten $300,000 annually due
to a reduction in energy costs and an increase in productivity,
while lowering its annual energy consumption by 1,500 mwh, or
5 percent of current consumption.
IFC’s advice was not only practical, but the hands-on nature of
the partnership provided solutions that could be implemented
immediately, leading to cost savings as early as one year after
implementation.
Immediate improvements and cost savings further incentivize
companies to consider energy efficient solutions for a
sustainable future.




                                   7 4
                                            SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




RESULTS AND IMPACT

•	 $1.2 million in total financing facilitated for Karsten
   Group.
•	 $1 million invested by IFC in Karsten Group.
•	 1,500 mwh of energy savings annually, or 5 percent of
   Karsten’s annual consumption.
•	 $300,000 saved annually due to a reduction in energy
   costs and an increase in productivity.
•	 The annual cost savings Karsten Group achieved paid back
   their investment in energy efficiency after four years.




                            75
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




Empowering Farmers and
Small and Micro Entrepreneurs
in the Democratic Republic of
Congo
IFC worked with Minoterie de Matadi, a
flour and feed milling company in the
Democratic Republic of Congo known as
MIDEMA, to strengthen its value chain by
providing IFC’s Business Edge training to
farmers and Small and Medium Enterprises
(SMEs) and facilitated their links to financial
institutions and their access to finance.
Many farmers and SME owners who increased
their business revenue through their
partnership with MIDEMA were women.



IFC CLIENT: Minoterie de Matadi (MIDEMA)




                           76
                                            SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




The Opportunity
Small business owners in the Democratic Republic of Congo
often lack the ability to supply large companies because they
don’t have adequate business management skills or access to
the bank ﬁnancing that could help their enterprise grow. As a
result, MIDEMA, a large milling company, was often forced
to go abroad to ﬁnd suppliers to satisfy its milling needs. IFC
worked with the company to provide Business Edge management
training to the farmers and small businesses most likely to become
suppliers. The training focused on writing successful business
plans to better access ﬁnance, marketing, accounting, and business
productivity.
IFC also invested more than $12 million in Advans Bank,
Rawbank, and ProCredit Bank to enable them to provide credit
to farmers and small business owners so that they could expand
their businesses, operate more efﬁciently, and become attractive
business partners for MIDEMA. With the support of IFC, these
ﬁnancial institutions have also provided non-ﬁnancial services to
their customers utilizing Business Edge workshops. For instance,
Rawbank’s initiative, known as “Lady’s First,” has helped train
more than 500 female entrepreneurs and helped 110 of them
secure more than $7.2 million in bank ﬁnancing.




“I have been able to expand drastically my bakery as a result
of improving my knowledge and practices in the Business Edge
training workshops I attended. My sales have gone up from 450
ﬂour sacks to 2,340 per month. The bakery has repeatedly accessed
loans from Advans Bank Congo for a total of $57,000, thus
allowing it to renew and purchase modern production equipment
and raw materials.”

            —Ngimbi Tembo Dimbungu, female owner of NTB Bakery




                              7 7
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




IFC’s Approach
IFC partnered with MIDEMA to provide IFC’s Business Edge
management training to the suppliers in its corporate value
chain so that they could build well-managed and efficient small
businesses. IFC also invested in local banks to ensure that
they were well-positioned to provide financing to the small
businesses that could supply MIDEMA. The project sought
to increase the profits of both MIDEMA and its suppliers by
strengthening the ability of local farmers and small businesses
to beat the competition, become sustainable, and reverse the
trend of bakeries going out of business. MIDEMA in return
could rely on local producers for its mills and help consolidate
jobs in local communities. The project with MIDEMA was so
successful that its parent company, the Seaboard Corporation,
has asked IFC to replicate the project in other African countries
and in Haiti.
IFC is committed to working with clients such as MIDEMA to
strengthen the small and medium enterprises that make up its
corporate value chain. By providing small business owners and
employees with the business skills needed to manage efﬁciently
and access bank ﬁnancing, IFC helps to ensure these businesses
remain proﬁtable and able to contribute to economic growth —
a key IFC development goal. Like other developing countries,
small and medium enterprises in the Democratic Republic of
Congo have the potential to become the backbone of the private
sector and their growth helps fuel the economy. The partnership
with MIDEMA showcases IFC’s ability to work with key clients
in developing countries to provide the tools small businesspeople
need to succeed.




                                 7 8
                                             SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA



Since 2002, IFC has used Business Edge management training
solutions to help around 200, 000 individuals strengthen their
management skills, grow their businesses, and stay competitive in
more than 50 developing countries. Offered in 20 languages, the
workshops cover key management topics: marketing, governance,
human resources, quality and operations management, ﬁnance
and accounting, and personal productivity skills.




   RE SUL T S AND   IM P ACT

   • 5,403 SME personnel trained, of whom 2,022 were
     women, with satisfaction rate of over 90 percent.
   • 696 entities reported performance improvements.
   • $33.8 million in sales revenue for local bakeries.
   • 400 SMEs accessed $11.4 million worth of financing,
     achieved through SME linkages to financial institutions.
   • IFC–MIDEMA partnership proved successful in supporting
     317 locally owned bakeries in MIDEMA’s distribution chain.
   • The program is highly regarded as being transformational
     in the SME realm. It has achieved strong demonstration
     effects, with strong demand and recognition on the
     ground from corporates, financial institutions, and SMEs.




                               7 9
Cr e d i t s :
Executive Editor: Daniel James Crabtree
Managing Editor: Emmanouela (Emmy) Markoglou
Senior Editor: Vanessa Karlo
Creative Direction and Design: Rikki Campbell Ogden

Special thanks for their valuable input, feedback and comments to Ernest Bethe,
Kimberlee Brown, Sara Clancy, Ian Crosby, Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal, Muhammad Taif Ul
Islam, Leticia Kawanami, Raina Lang, Sarah Ockman, Jane Onoka, Anupa Aryal Pant,
Jeeva Perumalpillai-Essex, Bas Rozemuller, Anup Jagwani, Patrick Luternauer, Sergii
Nevmyvanyi, Micheline Ntiru, Bradford Roberts, Mrinal Kanti Sircar, Carla Mae Zamora-
Galinato, and Sylvia Zulu.

We are also very grateful to IFC’s portfolio and results team comprising Helle Lilly
Andersen, Juliana Arbelaez, Marina Fedorova, and Thuy T. Nguyen for their incredible
support and help with making sure that all figures reported in this publication were
updated and validated.


P h o t o Cr e d i t s :
IFC (pages 10, 14, 20, 36)
Tran Thiet Dung (page 6)
Ortigarri S.A. (page 26)
Ocean Photography / veer.com (page 32)
Zahidul Naim Zakaria (page 42)
Bijay Gajmer (page 50, 52)
Bradford Roberts, IFC (page 54, 56, 58, 62)
Daskara Palestina Prima (page 66)
Emmanouela (Emmy) Markoglou, IFC (page 68)
Eva-Lotta Janson (page 72)
Gregor Pfeifer, IFC (page 76)


Cover Photo: John Bill / Shutterstock.com
ifc.org/agribusiness
AskSustainability@ifc.org
