                                                   91850

Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen
climate resilience
Preliminary assessment of the potential benefits
of conservation agriculture




                    FAO INVESTMENT CENTRE
                    DIRECTIONS IN INVESTMENT
FAO INVESTMENT CENTRE
Ukraine: Soil fertility to
strengthen climate resilience
Preliminary assessment of the potential
benefits of conservation agriculture

Turi Fileccia
Senior Agronomist, Investment Centre Division, FAO
Maurizio Guadagni
Senior Rural Development Specialist, World Bank
Vasyl Hovhera
Economist, Investment Centre Division, FAO

with contributions from:
Martial Bernoux
Soil Scientist, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD)




DIRECTIONS IN INVESTMENT
prepared under the FAO/World Bank Cooperative Programme




Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Rome, 2014
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a co-publication of The World Bank and Food and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO). The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily
reflect the views of FAO, The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific companies or
products of manufacturers, whether or not these have been patented, does not imply that these have been
endorsed or recommended by FAO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.



Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank and FAO encourage dissemination
of their knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
TABLE OF CONTENTS


Foreword	                                                              v
Acknowledgements	                                                     vi
Acronyms and abbreviations	                                          viii
Executive summary	                                                    ix

1	   The resource base	                                                1
     Soils	1
2	   Crop production	                                                  3
3	   Soil erosion in Ukraine	                                          5
4	   Climate change uncertainties over Ukraine’s breadbasket role	     7
5	   Soil fertility and climate change resistance	                   10
6	   Approaches to address soil erosion	                             12
7	   CA feasibility in Ukraine	                                      14
     CA experiments in Ukraine	                                      14
8	   CA adoption in Ukraine	                                         16
9	   Potential benefits from CA adoption	                            18
     Specific advantages for Ukraine	                                18
10	 Soil carbon sequestration	                                       21
     Phasing CA adoption	                                            22
11	 Benefits and economics of CA	                                    23
     Farm/enterprise level	                                          23
     National level	                                                 24
     Global level	                                                   25
12	 Next steps	                                                      27
     Verification of preliminary estimates	                          27
     Land markets	                                                   27
     Agricultural technology/advisory services	                      27
     Financial services	                                             27
     Risk management	                                                27
     Food security	                                                  27


Annex 1	     Ukrainian soils	                                        29
Annex 2	     Erosion of Ukrainian soils	                             36
Annex 3	     Land, cropping structure, and yields	                   40
Annex 4	     Climate change in Ukraine	                              47
Annex 5	     Resource-saving technologies in Ukraine	                59
Annex 6	     Carbon sequestration and climate change mitigation	     64
Annex 7	     Financial and economic analysis	                        71
Annex 8	     Institutional settings	                                 77

                                                                            iii
Foreword


The findings of this preliminary assessment are the result of field visits to Ukraine
in March to June 2013 and interaction with relevant institutional interlocutors,
national and international scientists (see Acknowledgments and Annex 8), the donor
community, farm managers and owners, agriculture machinery suppliers, technicians
and practitioners. A wealth of up-to-date information and data, including important
unpublished works, has been collected and analyzed.


This preliminary assessment provides an order of magnitude of the impacts and
potential benefits of soil fertility and requires more specific analyses and validations.


This report was prepared prior to the referendum held in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol on 16 March 2014, and covers the entire
territory of Ukraine; in preparing this report the World Bank and FAO do not intend
to make any judgment as to the legal or other status of any disputed territories or
prejudice the final determination of the parties’ claims.




                                                                                            v
     Acknowledgements


     This report was prepared by a team of specialists of the World Bank and the Food
     and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The team was coordinated
     by Maurizio Guadagni, World Bank Senior Rural Development Specialist (ECSAR),
     and was led by Turi Fileccia, Senior Agronomist, Investment Centre Division, FAO.
     The team included Vasyl Hovhera, Economist, Investment Centre Division, FAO;
     Martial Bernoux, Soil Scientist, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD);
     Dmitry Prikhodko, Economist, Investment Centre Division, FAO; Stefania Manzo,
     Agriculturalist, Investment Centre Division, FAO; Rostyslav Lytvyn, PhD candidate
     in Economics; Rodion Rybchynski, Statistics Analyst; Ana Elisa Bucher, World Bank
     Climate Change Specialist; and Sandra Corsi, Soil Scientist.


     The report was reviewed in FAO by Claudio Gregorio, Service Chief, Europe, Central
     Asia, Near East, North Africa, Latin America and Caribbean Service; Roble Sabrie,
     Economist; Bjorn Conrad, Climate Change Officer; and Benjamin O’Brien, Agricultural
     Officer, all in the Investment Centre Division, FAO. It also benefited from the
     comments of Amir Kassam, AGPC; Theo Friedrich, FAO Representative in Cuba; and
     Louis Bockel, ESAS. In the World Bank, the report was reviewed by Erika Jorgensen,
     Economic Adviser, PREM, ECA; Ademola Braimoh, Senior Natural Resources
     Management Specialist, AES; and Erick Fernandez, Adviser, Agriculture and Rural
     Development, LAC.


     The team would like to thank the following people for their contribution. Officials:
     Oleksandr Sen, Deputy Minister Chief of Staff, Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food
     of Ukraine (MAPFU); Oleksandr Gordienko, Director, Department of Engineering and
     Technical Support and Agricultural Engineering, MAPFU: Valery Adamchuk, Director,
     Institute of Mechanization and Electrification, National Academy of Agrarian Sciences
     of Ukraine (NAASU); Tetyana Adamenko, Head, Agrometeorology Department,
     Ukrainian Hydrometerological Centre; Anatolii Balaiev, Chief of Department of Soil
     Sciences and Soil Conservation, National University of Life and Environmental
     Sciences of Ukraine; Sviatoslav Baluk, Director, Institute for Soil Science and Agro-
     chemistry Research, NAASU; Oleksandr Dotsenko, PhD, Institute for Soil Science
     and Agro-chemistry Research; Nikolai Kosolap, Agronomist, National University of
     Life and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine; Volodymyr Kravchuk, Director, Ukrainian
     Research Institute of Forecasting and Testing of Equipment and Technologies for
     Agricultural Production; Oleksy Krotinov, Agronomist, National University of Life
     and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine; Oleksandr Kruglov, PhD, Institute for Soil
     Science and Agro-chemistry Research; Arkadiy Levin, Expert, Institute for Soil
     Science and Agro-chemistry Research; Anatoly Malienko, Head of Department of
     Tillage and Weed Control, NSC “Institute of Agriculture of NAASU”; Denys Nizalov,
     PhD, Economist, Kyiv School of Economics; Nikolai Pavlyshyn, Kyiv Polytechnic
     Institute; Dmytro Timchenko, PhD, Institute for Soil Science and Agro-chemistry
     Research; Oksana Tonkha, Soil Expert, National University of Life and Environmental
     Sciences of Ukraine; Roman Truskavetsky, Professor, Institute for Soil Science
     and Agro-chemistry Research; Victor Zuza, Head of Research Station, Institute for


vi
Soil Science and Agro-chemistry Research. From the private sector: Arnaud de La
Salle, agricultural enterprise “AGRO KMR Ltd”; Olha Dudkina, Senior Agronomist,
Agro-Soyuz Holding Company; Volodymyr Khorishko, Co-Owner and Co-Director,
Agro-Soyuz Holding Company; Alex Lissitsa, President, Ukrainian Agribusiness Club;
Volodymyr Lubomskyj, Director, agricultural enterprise “Agrarne”; Neonila Martyniuk,
Responsible for International Development, Agro-Soyuz Holding Company; Sergey
Prokayev, Co-Owner, Chief Executive Director, Agro-Soyuz Holding Company; Alan
Renard, agricultural enterprise “AGRO KMR Ltd”; Edward Romankov, Executive
Director, Agro-Soyuz Holding Company; Ihor Shabliko, Director, agricultural
enterprises “Wind” and “Zoria”; Ihor Snehur, Development Officer, Agro-Soyuz
Holding Company; and Andriy Vorobyov, Director, Great Plains Ukraine.




                                                                                       vii
       Acronyms and abbreviations


       AEZ	      agro-ecologic zones
       ABP	      agribusiness partnership
       CA	       conservation agriculture
       CEC	      cation exchange capacity
       CGIAR 	   Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
       CIMMYT	   International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center
       EEA	      European Environment Agency
       EXW	      ex-works (the seller’s premises)
       FAO	      Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
       FSRP	     Food Systems Restructuring Program
       FSU	      Former Soviet Union
       GCM	      General Circulation Models
       GDP	      gross domestic product
       GEF	      Global Environmental Facility
       GFDL	     Geophysics Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
       GHG	      greenhouse gases
       GISS	     Goddard Institute for Space Studies
       IPPC	     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
       IRR	      internal rate of return
       MAPFU	    Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine
       NAAS	     National Academy of Agrarian Sciences of Ukraine
       NPV	      net present value
       NULES	    National University of Life and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine
       RHH 	     rural households
       SAT	      single agricultural tax
       SCLR 	    State Committee of Land Resources
       SOM	      soil organic matter
       SSAI	     Soil Sciences and Agro-chemistry (research) Institute
       UHMC	     Ukrainian Hydrometeorological Centre
       UNFCCC	   UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
       USDA	     United States Department of Agriculture
       WRB	      World Reference Base




viii
                                                                    Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




Executive summary


Highly favourable agro-ecological conditions and an
advantageous geographical location give Ukrainian agriculture
its competitive edge
Ukraine is renowned as the breadbasket of Europe thanks to its black soils
(“Chernozem” black because of the high organic matter content) which offer
exceptional agronomic conditions. One-third of the worldwide stock of the fertile black
soils, which cover more than half of Ukraine’s arable land, a large variety of climatic
zones, and favourable temperature and moisture regimes, offers attractive conditions
for the production of a large range of crops including cereals and oilseeds. Ukraine’s
proximity to large and growing neighbouring markets – the Russian Federation and the
European Union – and access to deep sea ports at the Black Sea, provide direct access
to world markets, especially large grain importers in the Middle East and North Africa.


Erosion triggered by land tillage is threatening both comparative
advantages and competitiveness of Ukrainian crop production
systems
Over the years, the Chernozem soils have been widely degraded by poor land
management and the resulting soil erosion. It is estimated that more than
500 million tonnes of soil are eroded annually from arable land in Ukraine1 resulting
in loss of soil fertility across 32.5 million hectares and equivalent to around
USD 5 billion in nutrient equivalent. This represents a significant loss of the country’s
main agricultural productive asset: its soils. The value of eroded soil each year is
around one-third of the agricultural gross domestic product (GDP). This means that
for each dollar of added agricultural value generated, one-third is lost through erosion;
or ten tonnes of soil are eroded for each tonne of grain produced2.

Soil erosion is the major challenge that threatens the comparative advantage of crop
production systems of Ukraine. Other major natural damage caused by soil erosion is
likely to include siltation of rivers, harbours, and dam reservoirs (feeding hydroelectric
power stations).While the above estimates are national averages, the problem is
much more acute in specific areas, particularly in the south-east of the country
where soil has been eroded to a desertification extent.

There is evidence to suggest that the intensity of erosion and resulting loss of soil
fertility is accelerating. Loss in soil fertility inevitably increases production costs of
field corps by requiring additional resources to maintain the same productivity (for
instance, additional fertilizers to keep the same yield).




1	 Source: Official statistic of the Ministry of Agriculture. This assessment is based on two field surveys
   carried out in 1961 and 1985 in state land of Ukraine (at that time a Soviet Republic). In 2006, Dr. Bulygin
   made an estimate of 760 million tonnes based on a hydromechanical soil erosion model built on average
   weighted values for runoff length, slope, soil erodibility, and crop management. The more conservative
   amount of 500 million has been selected as a cautionary measure.
2	 Team estimates based on 500 million tonnes annual erosion versus an average cereals and oilseeds
   production of 49.8 million tonnes (2006-12 average, source FAOSTAT).

                                                                                                                          ix
    Soil degradation processes driven by erosion imply a number of interlinked issues.
    Organic matter works like glue that keeps soil particles together, improving their
    structure. Thus organic matter increases the resistance of soil to mechanical
    disturbance, such as those produced by rain falling on the ground or a tractor wheel.
    That is why fertile soils with higher organic matter content are less prone to erosion
    or compaction, and have higher infiltration. Organic matter also increases soil
    capacity to hold water. Loss of organic matter reduces its capacity to retain moisture,
    which is always essential especially during dry years.

    During the last 15 years, drought events have increased both in intensity and
    frequency in Ukraine due to a changing climate. Droughts are now occurring on
    average once every three years, causing crop productivity decline. It is expected that
    climate change, and the projected increase of extreme events, will exacerbate these
    phenomena in the near future. In some major productive areas of the country (the
    so-called Steppe area, in the southern part of the country) these impacts are more
    severe than elsewhere. This region produces 50 percent of the grain of Ukraine.

    Paradoxically, the high agricultural quality of Ukrainian soils and the prevailing perception
    of their inherent productivity resilience is delaying much needed remedial measures
    that should be put in place to first stop and then reverse soil degradation. Without
    action, the cost to reverse soil degradation is increasing rapidly and in some areas soils
    have become so degraded that it is now extremely expensive to recover them.

    Excessive land tillage is well known to be the major driver of soil erosion. The
    Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine (MAPFU) is fully aware of this and is
    prioritizing erosion prevention and the use of resource-saving technologies. Ukrainian
    soil scientists and academics - albeit with limited resources and means - are focusing
    their research on stopping and reversing soil erosion, including the projected negative
    impacts of climate change. Farmers are under pressure to reduce their production costs
    to be competitive in the global market and so have begun introducing resource-saving
    strategies and innovative soil conservation technologies such as minimum tillage.

    The considerable expansion of the use of minimum tillage during the last decade
    (see Table 28) is testimony of the effort towards change. This is a move in the
    right direction that has already provided a number of important benefits. However
    minimum tillage technology alone provides only a partial remedy to soil erosion and
    the loss in soil fertility. Conservation agriculture (CA) with no-till is a more sustainable
    and effective Climate Smart Agriculture practice which reduces soil erosion,
    maintains soil fertility, and enhances drought resilience3 and significantly reduces
    production costs by minimizing fuel consumption4.

    CA has now been successfully implemented in Kazakhstan, where, with support of
    the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
    and the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT,
    1 of 15 international agricultural research centres part of the Consultative Group on
    International Agricultural Research [CGIAR] Consortium), the technology has been
    gradually adopted and reached 1.85 million ha in 2012, contributing to significant
    productivity and environmental benefits5.


                                                                .
    3	 See section “Soil fertility and climate change resilience”
    4	 See Annex 7 .
    5	See http://www.eastagri.org/publications/pub_docs/Info%20note_Print.pdf and http://www.worldbank.
       org/en/results/2013/08/08/no-till-climate-smart-agriculture-solution-for-kazakhstan.

x
                                                                                       Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



During the last ten years or so, some progressive farmers of Ukraine -- with
international exposure -- have also satisfactorily adopted conservation agriculture
on about 2 percent of the arable land of the country, mainly in the Steppe area.
Unfortunately, this is still happening too sparsely to stimulate wide emulation.

Misconceptions regarding CA technology adaptation, such as the belief that
Ukrainian soils are not suitable to the technology, are creating obstacles to
widespread adoption. Improved research networking is required to facilitate
knowledge sharing on appropriate application and technology effectiveness.

However, the wave of change and the genuine professional interest of agriculture
enterprises appear to be increasing. This ought to be further encouraged and
leveraged. Should dedicated resources and specific development initiatives be made
available, it is likely that agricultural enterprises - beginning with the Steppe area
where the erosion issues are more pressing - will start championing a virtuous cycle
towards large-scale adoption.

FAO, with World Bank support, carried out a first analytical attempt to quantify
the benefits that large scale CA adoption could generate in Ukraine. The country-
specific preliminary assessment provides remarkable estimates on the potential
benefits at different levels: farm, national and global. The national annual benefits
potentially accruing from CA/no-till adoption on 17 million hectares could reach an
impressive USD 4.4 billion, or 34 percent of agricultural GDP, and almost stop the
USD 5 billion natural capital depletion caused by soil erosion (without counting global
environmental and food security benefits). The potential benefits of three scenarios
are summarized in the Table 1.

Table 1: Ukraine: Potential impact from the adoption of conservation agriculture

                                                                    Benefits for 3         Benefits for        Benefits for
Level                                Type            Per 1 ha          million ha          9 million ha       17 million ha
                                                                     (short-term)       (medium-term)          (long-term)
Annual farm               Incremental net
                                                     USD 136      USD 0.41 billion      USD 1.23 billion    USD 2.31 billion
benefits                         income
                     Off-farm additional
Annual national        output value and
                                                     USD 123      USD 0.37 billion       USD 1.11 billion   USD 2.10 billion
benefits           additional soil fertility
                                     value
Total national benefits                             USD 259       USD 0.8 billion       USD 2.3 billion     USD 4.4 billion

% share of agricultural GDP                                                       6                   18                  34
                         Improved food
                     security (additional
                                                                                             16.1 million       30.4 million
                      people fed during            2.4 people    5.4 million people
                                                                                                  people             people
                    drought years, non-
Annual global         monetary benefit)
benefits
                                                                         1.5 million         4.4 million         8.3 million
                                               0.5 tonnes CO2    (equivalent to the       (equivalent to      (equivalent to
                     Reduced emission
                                                      per year    emissions of 0.3     the emissions of     the emission of
                                                                       million cars)    0.9 million cars)   1.7 million cars)
                          Investments in
Total                    farm equipment
investment                and herbicides,            USD 200       USD 0.6 billion        USD 1.8 billion    USD 3.4 billion
requirements           plus research and
                               extension


The above table represents a rough estimate of the benefits which could accrue from
large-scale CA adoption in Ukraine. These estimates, which include the benefits of
the area already under CA, were based on the following assumptions:

                                                                                                                                             xi
      •	 The potential areas were estimated on the basis of specific technical and
          organizational feasibility, soil and crop types. CA would have the maximum potential
          in the short-term (a few years) to cover an area of about 3 million hectares in the
          Steppe region (farms of 4 000 hectares and above). The Steppe region has the
          potential in the medium-term (six to ten years) of reaching 9 million hectares (the
          entire suitable area in the Steppe region). Ultimately, a gradual move into the Forest
          Steppe area could be foreseen so that, in the longer term, a total area of 17 million
          hectares could be converted to CA. The estimates were obtained by multiplying the
          benefits per hectare for the potential adoption area.
      •	 The incremental net income at farm level is a function of reduced costs for fuel
          and mechanization, increased long-term yields (after decreasing yields during the
          first years of technology adoption), higher investment costs for new equipment
          but lower equipment depreciation, increased costs for herbicides and fertilizers
          over the first years of technology adoption.

      •	 The off-farm national benefits are estimated as a function of the additional
          national benefits derived from the following assumptions: (i) the reduction of crop
          production variability with the introduction of CA/no-till would benefit traders and
          intermediaries (additional production for the price difference between export and
          farm gate prices); and (ii) 75 percent soil erosion reduction6 quantified in terms
          of the value of NPK nutrients loss avoided. The off-farm benefit from reduced
          siltation of fluvial infrastructure and reduced import of fuel were not included in
          these national benefits.
      •	 According to World Development Indicators, the 2008-12 average agricultural
          GDP of Ukraine is 11.8 billion at current prices.
      •	 Improved food security was estimated in terms of increased supply of cereals on
          the basis of an average annual consumption of 130 kg of cereals/per capita/per year.
      •	 Carbon sequestration has been estimated on the basis of the global estimates
          of soil carbon sequestration rates7 by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
          Change (IPCC) in 2007, see Annex 6.


      While climatic conditions are generally favourable in Ukraine,
      climatic variability, which is expected to increase with climate
      change, is a considerable risk for agriculture
      The volatility of agricultural production is caused by high dependency on natural
      precipitation since only 2 percent of cropland is irrigated. Although several climatic
      models predict that a warmer climate would be beneficial overall for agriculture in
      Ukraine, geographic distribution of benefits is unlikely to be uniform. Increasing
      temperatures may have some positive impact in the colder and more humid regions
      in the north of Ukraine. However, in the south of the country, where most fertile
      chernozem soils are concentrated and where water availability is a limiting factor,
      increasing temperatures and increasing variability in rain are expected to increase the
      frequency of droughts and have a negative impact on agriculture.


      Soil erosion exacerbates the impact of climatic variability, while simultaneously
      extreme weather will increase soil erosion. This double link is expected to impose


      6	 This value was selected on the basis of international experience.
      7	 Annual mitigation of 0.33 tCO2-eq /ha /yr (this is the average of 0.15 tCO2-eq/ha/yr-1 for the Cool Dry
         zone and 0.51 tCO2-eq /ha /yr-1 for the Cool Moist zone) for soil sequestration + 0.16 t CO2/ha/year of
         avoided emission from fuel burning.

xii
                                                                                 Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



a further threat to Ukraine’s extraordinary soil fertility and its inherent resilience to
climate change. Climate change is expected to lead to increasing frequency, intensity,
coverage, duration, and timing of extreme weather and climatic events (IPCC
2012). Extreme climatic events, such as alternating droughts and intense rainfalls,
are expected to have a negative impact on agriculture, including but not limited to
increased soil erosion. Fertile soils, with abundant organic matter, are more resilient
to wind and water erosion than unstructured soils, with low organic matter. Intense
rainfalls increase water erosion, while dry soils are more susceptible to wind erosion.

Agricultural productivity depends on natural precipitation and temperatures which
are affected by significant inter-annual and seasonal variability. It is expected that
climate change will further exacerbate the already high volatility of agricultural
production and negatively affect food security. High production variability in Ukraine
may have implications for global trade and world price volatility. The 2009 drought
and consequent loss of almost 30 percent of Ukraine’s wheat crop was an important
trigger in the global food price rise.

Figure 1: The climate of Ukraine is changing, 1961-2012
Average annual air temperature deviation from the norm

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
       1961
       1962
       1963
       1964
       1965
       1966
       1967
       1968
       1969
       1970
       1971
       1972
       1973
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988
       1989
       1990
       1991
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
       2005
       2006
       2007
       2008
       2009
       2010
       2011
       2012




-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2

Source: World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal.



Most future climate predictions are based on General Circulation Models (GCM) which
predict an overall increase in precipitation in the region. However, there are conflicting
estimates on the potential impact of these changes on agriculture. The difference in the
estimates highlights the lack of robust climate analysis in terms of seasonal variability,
timelines, baselines used, and overall assessment of a range of climate models outputs
and associated uncertainties for the interpretation of predicted impacts. It is therefore
important to recognize the inherent uncertainties of each model in its ability to predict a
changing climate. Additional modelling studies8 indicate that although large portions of
Ukraine might increase their agricultural potential under warming scenarios, agriculture
in the semi-arid southern zone could suffer a dramatic increase in frequency of droughts.

Any projection of agricultural expansion based on climate change scenarios should be
viewed with caution, if they do not take into account other regional socio-economic




8	Alcamo et al. (2007) and Dronin and Kirilenko (2008).

                                                                                                                                      xiii
      factors such as land degradation, access to improved seeds, etc.9 Expansion of climatic
      zones suitable for agriculture does not necessarily imply that the local population
      currently employed in other sectors would seek out new opportunities in agriculture,
      or will be prepared to change agriculture practices such as use of market-preferred
      improved seeds varieties. On the other hand, declining productivity due to increasing
      aridity in the southern area of Ukraine may result in the loss of human capital as skilled
      farmers may be forced to switch to other activities. Assessment of human vulnerability
      and adaptation to climate change needs to become a key component of agricultural
      policies. Adaptation, such as large-scale implementation of soil-water conservation
      measures (i.e. no till), introduction of drought resistant crop varieties and development
      of irrigation are crucial to increase climate resilience and food security.


      Suggested steps to address these concerns
      Several of the next steps proposed below require additional financing. With regard
      to the global benefits that the proposed actions could generate, there are some
      sources of international financing for which Ukraine could apply. For instance, grant
      funding from the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and from the Adaptation
      Fund is available for Ukraine. The GEF will start a new funding period in July 2014
      (called GEF-6), where funds are available for Ukraine to address issues related to
      climate change (USD 17.4 million) and land degradation (USD 2.9 million). The GEF
      does require co-financing, usually at least four times that of the GEF grant amount.
      The Adaptation Fund has a grant of up to USD 10 million available for Ukraine. The
      Adaptation Fund has financed agricultural adaptation investments in many countries,
      in line with the actions suggested above. The suggested next steps are as follows:


      (i)	 Verification of preliminary estimates: This preliminary assessment would benefit
          from a more detailed follow-up investigation to address areas such as detailed
          on-farm productivity; economic and environmental analyses for technology
          comparison; assessment of agricultural machinery capacity and market;
          evaluation of erosion impact on river systems and siltation.
      (ii)	 Land markets: Increase confidence in long-term use of land so as to create
          incentive for farmers who use arable land to invest in soil fertility.
      (iii)	Agricultural technology/advisory services: Develop a programme of agricultural
          technology/advisory services to address soil fertility concerns.
      (iv)	Financial services: Consider developing a programme to facilitate access to
          finance for those farmers who invest in environmentally friendly approaches such
          as Conservation Agriculture. Work with agricultural insurance so that CA does not
          pay higher premiums.
      (v)	 Risk management: Work with the research and farm community to improve the
          quality of climate change estimated potential impact on agriculture, differentiating
          risks and adaptation approaches by agro-ecological region.
      (vi)	Food security: Strengthen incentives for adopting technologies to maintain soil
          fertility and reduce the volatility of agricultural production, such as CA with no-till.

      The potential benefits presented in this study (Table 1) and the risks caused by a
      changing climate should constitute a strong incentive to increase soil fertility efforts
      and strengthen climate resilience.




      9	 Lioubimtseva, 2010.
xiv
                                                                   Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




1. The resource base


Figure 2: Agro-ecologic zones (AEZ) of Ukraine




                                                    , Kyiv 2010.
Source: MAPFU “On state of soil fertility in Ukraine”

Ukraine is the second largest country in Europe                     Soils10
(603 700 km2) with three large agro-ecological
                                                                    Ukraine has some of the most fertile soils in the
zones and two mountain regions: a Forest zone
                                                                    world, including the famous Chernozems, deep
(Polissya) in the North (19 percent of total land);
                                                                    black soils rich in humus. Chernozems occupy
a Forest-Steppe zone (35 percent) to the South;
                                                                    about half of the country (about 68 percent of
a Steppe zone in the South and South-East
                                                                    the arable land), followed by Phaeozems and
(40 percent); and the Carpathian and Crimean
                                                                    Albeluvisols.
mountains, which occupy respectively the west
and the very southern part of the country.                          Physical, chemical and biological nominal data
                                                                    of Ukrainian soils and their classification were
The Steppe zone covers 19 million hectares                          studied in the late 1950s (completed in 1961).
of agricultural lands; the Forest-Steppe zone                       Since then no countrywide soil data update has
16.9 million hectares, and the Forest zone                          been done11.
5.6 million hectares.
                                                                    Nominal soil organic matter (SOM) content of
                                                                    chernozems ranges from 5.2 percent in wet


                                                                    10	 For further details see Annex 1.
                                                                    11	 Sviatoslav Baluk, Director, Institute for Soil Science and
                                                                        Agro-chemistry Research during roundtable discussions in
                                                                        Kyiv, 23 May, 2013. See also note n. 11.

                                                                                                                                     1
    Figure 3: Soils of Ukraine

                                          2% 2%
                                     4%

                            9%                                             Chornozems
                                                            68%
                                                                           Meadow Chornozems


                     11%                                                   Gray soils

                                                                           Sod-Podzolic, Podzoic and Gley

                      4%                                                   Dark brown and saline soils

                                                                           Brown soils

                                                                           Others


    Source: team elaboration from Balyuk S.A, 2013.

    Table 2: Ukraine: agropotential of chernozem soil for winter wheat

                                                                                                            Percentage of
     Zone               Soil                                      Yield agro potential
                                                                                                             arable land

                                                             Natural                  Optimal
                                                                                                                   %
                                                              (q/ha)                   (q/ha)

     Forest Steppe      Chernozem podzolic                   30 - 38                    40 - 48                    8.6

                        Chernozem Typical                    32 - 36                    38 - 45                   14.5

                        Typical chernozem and Meadow         30 - 36                    54 - 64                    1.0

     Steppe             Chernozem ordinary                   23 - 34                    31 - 40                   26.3

                        Chernozem Southern                    18 - 25                   22 - 31                    9.1

    Source: team elaboration from Balyuk, 2013.


    Forest-Steppe to 5.7 percent in Forest-Steppe,             This behaviour is partly dependent on the
    and 6.2 percent in Steppe, to 3.4 percent or less          Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC)12 of the soils.
    in South Steppe. Fertility follows a similar pattern,      Soil organic materials increase the CEC and so
    decreasing from Forest Steppe to southern                  organic matter build-up impacts positively on soil
    Steppe.                                                    fertility and productivity. The physical properties
                                                               of the Chernozems are also crucial for their
                                                               agronomic potential.




                                                               12	 CEC is the maximum quantity of total cations available for
                                                                   exchange with the soil solution that a determined soil is
                                                                   capable of holding. CEC correlates with the soil fertility and
                                                                   is definitely dependent on the mineral matrix but also on
                                                                   the amount and quality of soil organic matter.

2
                                                                      Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




2. Crop production                                  13




Figure 4: Destination of Ukraine cereals exports, 2012




                                                         20,5%
                               27,1%                                               Egypt              Portugal

                                                                                   Spain              Libya
                                         Total Export
                                                                                   Saudi Arabia       South Korea
                                              27
                           3,2%            mln MT                15,3%
                                                                                   Iran               Japan
                            3,3%
                                                                                   Israel             Italy
                              3,5%
                                 3,7%                    6,9%
                                    3,9%                                                              Others
                                           6,0% 6,5%




Source: State Customs Committee of Ukraine, Global Trade Atlas.

Table 3: Agricultural lands by ownership in 2012

                                                                         Operators                                  Total

                                                                           Rural
                                               Enterprises                                        Others
                                                                         Households

 Units                                            47 652                  5 100 000                                   

 Agricultural land, million ha                      20.7                    15.8                   5.0              41.5

 Arable land, million ha                            19.4                    11.6                   1.5              32.5

Source: MAFP, Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012.

During 2008-2012, Ukraine ranked sixth and                               The total crop area in Ukraine amounts to
third largest world wheat and coarse grains14                            27.8 million ha; over 55 percent of crop lands are
exporter, respectively. The country exported                             used for cereal production. Crop land use change
about 23 million tonnes of cereals. The total value                      since 2000 has been mainly in favour of industrial
of cereals exports reached almost USD 7 billion                          crops (oilseed); and within the cereal area, in
mostly to North Africa, the Middle East and                              favour of corn.
Europe, as shown in Figure 4.
                                                                         Ukraine is characterized by volatile wheat and
Sixty-nine percent of Ukrainian territory is                             coarse grains productivity. On average, every
agricultural land, totalling 41.5 million ha of which                    three years, wheat production changes by
32.5 million ha is arable land. Eighty eight percent                     20 percent and corn by 25 percent. This has a
(36.5 million ha) of total agricultural land is owned                    major impact on Ukraine’s trade balance.
by agricultural enterprises (about 48 000 units),
and by rural households (RHH)15.                                         Lower wheat yields volatility is a feature of
                                                                         provinces in the Forest-Steppe and Forest zones,
                                                                         and in Mykolaiv province. On the contrary, the
                                                                         Steppe zone is usually characterized by high
                                                                         volatility especially Kharkivska province. Corn
13	 For further details see Annex 3.                                     yields are also more volatile in the Steppe zone,
14	 Coarse grains refer to cereal grains other than wheat and rice.
                                                                         particularly in the Luhanska and Kharkivska
15	 Source: Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food (MAPFU),
    Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012.                            provinces.

                                                                                                                              3
     Figure 5: Ukraine: evolution of crop areas

                             0%                    20%                      40%                                         60%                               80%                      100%



               2000                                       50,2                                                   8,4             15,4                               26




               2012                                          55,4                                                                      28,4                              9       7,2



                                                 Cereals, total         Industrial crops                          Fodder crops                     Potato and veg.




                                                                                                                                                2011/05
                        18
                                                                                                                                                               leguminous and others
                        16
                                                                                                                                                               spring - rice
                        14
                                                                                                            Corn                                               spring - buckwheat
                                                                                                                                       + 112%
                        12                                                                                                                                     spring - millet
     million ha




                        10                                       Spring barley                                                                                 spring - maize for grain
                                                                                                                                        - 36%
                         8                                                                                                                                     spring - oats
                                                                                               Winter barley                           + 150%
                                                                                                                                                               spring - barley
                         6
                                                                                                                                                               spring - wheat
                         4
                                                          Winter wheat                                                                      + 5%               winter - barley
                         2
                                                                                                                                                               winter - rye
                         0                                                                                                                                     winter - wheat
                          1990        1995       2000        2005          2008      2009                          2010              2011

     Sources: MAFPU, Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012 and UkrStat.

            Figure 6: Production, exports and yield variability, 2000-2012
                                                   Wheat                                                                                    Coarse grains
                        30                                                                                  40
                                                                                                            35
                        25
                                                                                                            30
       million tonnes




                                                                                           million tonnes




                        20
                                                                                                            25
                        15                                                                                  20
                                                                                                            15
                        10
                                                                                                            10
                         5
                                                                                                             5
                         0                                                                                   0
                             2000200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012                                 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 20062007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
                               Export        Production       Domestic consumption                                      Export          Production                Domestic consumption

                 Source: FAO OECD Agricultural Outlook 2013-22.


                                          Wheat yield volatility                                                                     Corn yield volatility
                                  (Standard deviation/average)                                                           (Standard deviation/average)
                                                                                                            United States
    European Union
                                                                                                                       France
            France
                                                                                                                   Australia
         United States
               Turkey                                                                       European Union
              Russian                                                                                            Kazakhstan
           Federation
               Former                                                                                                  Canada
         Soviet Union                                                                                          Argentina
              Canada
                                                                                                                 Former
            Argentina                                                                                       Soviet Union
              Ukraine                                                                                            Ukraine
                        Kazakhstan                                                                               Russian
                                                                                                              Federation
                          Australia                                                                               Turkey
                                      0      5      10       15       20      25     30                                          0          5             10       15     20           25   30
                                                           percent                                                                                                  percent
          Source: Team calculations based on PSD USDA.

4
                                                                   Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




3. Soil erosion in Ukraine                                           16




At the time of the Soviet Union, agricultural                       Republic). In 2006, Dr. Bulygin estimated that
intensity and land tillage were very high in                        760 million tonnes per year were lost from arable
Ukraine, causing significant erosion. According                     land. This was based on a hydromechanical soil
to FAO (Bogovin, 2006), the annual soil losses                      erosion model using average weighted values
in the Soviet times amounted to as much as                          for runoff length, slope, soil erodibility, and crop
600 million tonnes, including 20-30 million tonnes                  management. The more conservative amount of
of humus. An estimated 40 percent of the                            500 million tonnes has been selected as a more
country’s territory is now eroded at different                      cautious measure.
levels of severity, and an additional 40 percent is
prone to further wind and water erosion.                            The amount of soil eroded corresponds
                                                                    to 23.9 million tonnes of humus,
A 1996 study by the State Committee of Land                         964 thousand tonnes of nitrogen,
Resources (SCLR) reported that 13.2 million ha                      676 thousand tonnes of phosphorus and
were exposed to water erosion, and 1.7 million ha                   9.7 million tonnes of potassium. At market
were exposed to wind erosion17, increasing                          price20, this amount of NPK nutrients corresponds
at a rate of about 60 000-80 000 ha per year.                       to over USD 5 billion of losses per year (USD 157
Erosion was estimated in 2013 to affect about                       per hectare).The yearly loss ranges from about
1 414.5 million hectares. This is also confirmed by                 3 to 30 tonnes of soil per hectare depending
the Soil Sciences and Agro-chemistry (research)                     on the region. This is estimated to amount to
Institute (SSAI O.N. Sokolovsky) . Erosion impact
                                         18
                                                                    a loss of about USD 5 billion per year (2013). A
has been exacerbated in the post-Soviet era by                      loss of 10 tonnes of soil corresponds to a loss
significantly reduced application of mineral and                    of 0.5 tonnes of Carbon (C) per ha: a significant
organic fertilizers, which has caused a sharp                       amount when compared with the existing
decline in soil humus content.                                      potential soil C sequestration levels. There is
                                                                    evidence to suggest that the intensity of erosion
MAPFU official statistics estimate that about
          19
                                                                    is accelerating (Bulygin and Nearing, 1999).
500 million tonnes of soil are lost annually from
32.5 million ha arable lands. This means that an                    Soil erosion represents a significant loss of the
average of 15 tonnes per year is eroded from                        country’s main agricultural productive asset:
arable land. This estimate is credible and in line                  its soils. Such erosion of productive capital is
with erosion in similar conditions. It is based on                  substantial. The value of eroded soil each year
two field surveys carried out in 1961 and 1985                      is around one-third of the agricultural GDP. This
in state land in Ukraine (at that time a Soviet                     means that for each dollar of agricultural value
                                                                    added generated, one-third is lost through
                                                                    erosion; or ten tonnes of soil are eroded for each
16	 See Annex 2 for more detail.
17	 World Bank, 2007  .Integrating Environment into Agriculture     tonne of grain produced.
    and Forestry Progress and Prospects in Eastern Europe and
    Central Asia. Volume II. Ukraine, Country Review. 22 pp.
    www.worldbank.org/eca/environmentintegration.
18	 Founded in 1956 and named after academician Oleksiy
    Nykanorovych Sokolovskyj. The Research Institute is
    in charge for providing rational exploitation of the land
    resources, protection and increase of soil fertility. It
    oversees national and state programmes; analyzing and
    proposing also normative bases on development of soil
    science, agro-chemistry and soil protection. The Soil Map of    20	 The price estimates used to calculate the market value of
    Ukraine was developed by this institute (1957-1961).                NPK nutrients are the following: 3300 UAH per 1 Tonne of
19	 Reported by Bulygin S., 2006. Ukraine. Pages 199-204.Soil           N, 5750 UAH per tonne of P and 3570 UAH per tonne of K.
    Erosion in Europe (Boarman J and Poesen J. Editors), John           These are conservative price estimates and do not value
    Wiley and Sons.                                                     the downstream damage.

                                                                                                                                5
    Figure 7: Average annual soil loss during the last 30 years from Ukrainian arable land




    Source: Bulygin, 2006.




6
                                                                  Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




4. Climate change uncertainties over Ukraine’s
breadbasket role                             21




Even though Ukraine is renowned as the                             the frequency of droughts and thus have a
breadbasket of Europe, food security does not                      negative impact on agriculture.
rank high in international comparisons.
The Economist Global Food Security Index                           Most future climate predictions are based
ranked Ukraine as 45th in a list of 105 ranked                     on GCM, which expect an overall increase in
countries. Two factors negatively affect Ukrainian                 precipitation in the region. However, there are
food security: (i) a high share of household                       conflicting estimates on the potential impact
expenditure is dedicated to food, and (ii) the                     of these changes on agriculture. For instance,
volatility of agricultural production is higher than               according to a recent Ukrainian study23 based
the average of other countries22.                                  on the Geophysics Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
                                                                   (GFDL) model, a 30 percent increase of
The volatility of agricultural production is caused                greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, winter wheat
by high dependency on natural precipitation since                  yields are expected to increase by 37 percent by
only 2 percent of cropland is irrigated. In turn,                  2030-2040 mainly due to increase in temperature.
natural precipitation is affected by significant                   However this study does not consider other
inter-annual and seasonal variability. It is expected              factors such as soil, land management, or crop
that climate change and increasing variability will                behaviours. A previous study by the International
further exacerbate the already high volatility of                  Institute for Applied Systems Analysis24 predicted
agricultural production and thus negatively affect                 that yields of rainfed high-input cereals in
food security. Indeed, high production variability                 southern Ukraine would decrease by 10 percent
in Ukraine may have implications for global trade                  by 2050 and by 17 percent by 2080. This second
and world price volatility.                                        study is based on the different conditions of agro-
                                                                   ecological zones within the country.
The second major climatic constraint is the
temperature: high temperatures increase                            The difference in the above estimates highlights
evapotranspiration (plants’ water demand) and                      the lack of robust climate analysis in terms of
heat waves (above 33°C) can damage crops                           seasonal variability, time-lines, baselines used,
and reduce production. Historical trends show                      and overall assessment of a range of climate
that during the past half century the average                      models outputs and associated uncertainties
temperature of the country has been increasing                     for the interpretation of predicted impacts.
significantly.                                                     Consequently it is important to understand the
                                                                   inherent uncertainties of each model in their
Increasing temperatures may have some positive                     ability to predict a changing climate.
impact in the colder and more humid regions
in the north of Ukraine, where extremely cold                      Projections of grain production and export
temperatures cause winterkill and consequent                       increases are based on assumptions of
productivity loss. However, in the south of the                    increasing trends in yields and in increasing
country, where water availability is a limiting                    arable land suitable for specific crops. However,
factor, increasing temperatures and increasing                     most grain productivity projections do not take
variability in rain events are expected to increase
                                                                   23	 Ibid, compared with a baseline of 1995-2009 average yields.
                                                                   24	 Fischer, G., F. Nachtergaele, S. Prieler, H.T. van Velthuizen,
21	 For further details see Annex 4.                                   L. Verelst, D. Wiberg, 2008, compared with the baseline
22	 56 percent of total household expenditures are dedicated           average yields of 1961-1990 based on experiments
    to food against an average of 39 percent, while standard           with four General Circulation Models (GCM), and the
    deviation of agricultural productivity is 0.17 versus 0.1          assessment of four basic SRES scenarios from IPCC Third
    (http://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com/Country/Details#Ukraine).        Assessment Report.

                                                                                                                                   7
    Figure 8: In southern Ukraine, soil moisture has been halving
                                 Wheat                                                     Coarse grains




                        Forest
                 Forest Steppe
                       Steppe
                     Mountain

                                                     Location: Bashtanka, in the Steppe
                         (soil moisture in mm of water in the first meter of soil on May 28 of every year under wheat)
          180
          160
          140
          120
          100
           80
           60
           40
           20
            0
                1961
                1962
                1963
                1964
                1965
                1966
                1967
                1968
                1969
                1970
                1971
                1972
                1973
                1974
                1975
                1976
                1977
                1978
                1979
                1980
                1981
                1982
                1983
                1984
                1985
                1986
                1987
                1988
                1989
                1990
                1991
                1992
                1993
                1994
                1995
                1996
                1997
                1998
                1999
                2000
                2001
                2002
                2003
                2004
                2005
                2006
                2007
                2008
                2009
                2010
                2011
                2012
                                                                                                       .
    Source: Adamenko 2012, presentation on “Agrometeorological monitoring and climate change in Ukraine”



    into account changes due to variability in the                     as expected by many models, this will create a
    frequency of extreme events, such as droughts                      serious obstacle to agricultural productivity.
    and frosts. The potential changes in variability
    and extreme events – frosts, heat waves,                           Additional modelling studies26 indicate that
    droughts, and heavy rains – are likely to have a                   although large parts of Ukraine might increase
    stronger impact on food production than shifts in                  their agricultural potential under warming
    temperature and precipitation.                                     scenarios, agriculture in the semi-arid southern
                                                                       zone – where most fertile Chernozem soils are
    Although several climatic models predict that                      concentrated – could suffer a dramatic increase in
    a warmer climate would be beneficial for                           frequency of droughts.
    agriculture in Ukraine25, geographic distribution of
    benefits is unlikely to be uniform. This can also be               Finally, any projection of agricultural expansion
    seen by historic trends of reduced soil moisture                   based on climate change scenarios should be
    in the southern part of the country (see Figure 8).                viewed with caution, if they do not take into
    If these historical trends continue in the future,                 account other regional socio-economic factors,
                                                                       such as land degradation, access to improved


    25	Pegov et al., 2000; Fischer et al., 2002; 2005; Parry et al.,
       2004).                                                          26	Alcamo et al. (2007) and Dronin and Kirilenko (2008).

8
                                                                          Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



crops, etc.27 Expansion of climatic zones suitable   Assessment of human vulnerability and
for agriculture does not necessarily imply that      adaptation to climate change needs to become
the local population currently employed in other     a key component of agricultural policies.
sectors would seek out new opportunities             Adaptation, such as implementation of large-
in agriculture, or will be prepared to change        scale soil-water conservation measures (i.e.
agricultural practices such as use of improved       no till), introduction of drought resistant crop
seed varieties. On the other hand, declining         varieties and development of irrigation are crucial
productivity due to increasing aridity in the        to increase climate resilience and food security.
southern area of Ukraine may result in the loss of
human capital as skilled farmers may be forced to
switch to other livelihoods.




27	 Lioubimtseva, 2010.

                                                                                                                                9
     5. Soil fertility and climate change resistance


     The productivity of a soil depends on its physical,      replenish underground water reserves, and
     chemical and biological properties and, in               in storing atmospheric carbon. The latter can
     particular, on its mineral composition, organic          contribute to a further decrease in the already
     matter content and biological activity. Appropriate      low or very low organic carbon content in many
     levels of SOM ensure soil fertility and minimize         lands in Europe and badly affects soil structure
     agricultural impact on the environment.                  and biodiversity.


     It is estimated that globally some                       The EEA states that despite erosion being a
     5-10 million hectares are being lost annually            natural phenomenon, several human activities,
     to severe degradation and declining yields (or           such as forest clearance and inappropriate
     increased input requirements to compensate).             farming practices, increase soil loss (EEA,
     This includes physical degradation by water              2005). Unsustainable land management
     and wind, crusting, sealing and waterlogging;            practices, which are degrading soils and are
     biological degradation due to organic matter             consequently reducing the fertility of the land
     depletion and loss of soil flora and fauna; and          include: continuous cropping with reductions in
     chemical degradation by acidification, nutrient          fallow and rotations, soil preparation methods
     depletion, pollution from excessive use of               based on mouldboard tillage, organic matter
     pesticides and fertilizers or human and industrial       removal, overstocking, overgrazing and burning
     waste.                                                   of rangelands, over-exploitation or clearance
                                                              of wooded and forest lands (Van Muysen and
     The Pan-European Soil Erosion Risk Assessment            Govers, 2002; Marques da Silva and Alexandre,
     estimates that almost a quarter of Europe’s              2004; Li et al., 2007). These practices are
     land is at some risk of erosion. Risk is defined         reducing the productive capacities of croplands,
     as “high” or “very high” for 10 million hectares         rangelands and forests worldwide while
     of Europe’s lands and “moderate” on a further            inducing farmers to apply more artificial inputs to
     27 million hectares (European Environment                maintain production (Lobb et al., 1995; Lobb and
     Agency [EEA], 2005). Eroded soils are apt to             Lindstrom, 1999; Reicosky et al., 2005).
     suffer from supplementary degradation such
     as reduced efficiency in filtering pollution, in         From an environmental perspective, degraded
     capturing water to sustain crop production or            soils are at greater risk from the damaging

     Figure 9: Soil organic matter and water holding capacity
                                        500
                                        450
                                        400
                                        350
                                        300
                            litres/ha




                                        250
                                        200
                                        150
                                        100
                                         50
                                         0
                                              1                2                   3
                                                           SOM, percent

     Source: Jones, 2006.


10
                                                                           Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



impacts of climate change due to loss of SOM          Second, soil protection through organic matter
and soil biodiversity, increased soil compaction      and the higher presence of large water-stable
and increased rates of soil erosion and landslides.   soil aggregates enhances resistance against
Organic matter works like glue keeping soil           water and wind erosion (Puget et al., 1995;
particles together improving their structure. Thus    Balabane et al., 2005). Third, water infiltration
organic matter increases the resistance of soil to    rate is a function of the initial water content and
mechanical disturbance, such as those produced        soil porosity. Porosity and its distribution down
by raindrops falling on the ground. That is why       the profile depend on soil texture and structure,
fertile soils with high organic matter content        aggregate stability, SOM content and therefore
are more resistant to heavy rains, less prone to      on the type, shape and size of soil structural
erosion, and have higher infiltration.                units; the presence of channels created by
                                                      roots, mesofauna and macrofauna also play a
Proper soil management can also influence             role. In low clay soils, organic matter is the main
rainwater infiltration and the capacity of the        stabilizer of soil aggregates and pores; neither silt
soil to reduce soil water evaporation and store       nor sand have cohesive (i.e. plastic) properties.
water in the soil profile. Soil protected by a        Therefore, soil management in general, and CA
superficial layer of organic matter, as in CA         in particular, can influence rainwater infiltration
systems, improves the capture and the use of          and increase the effectiveness of rainfall,
rainfall through increased water absorption and       enhancing productivity, reducing rates of erosion,
infiltration and decreased evaporation from the       dispersion of soil particles and reducing risks of
soil surface. This leads to reduced runoff and        waterlogging and salinity.
soil erosion and higher soil moisture throughout
the season compared with unprotected soils
(Kronen, 1994; Duiker and Lal, 2000; Post and
Kwon, 2000; Knowles and Singh, 2003; Baker,
2007; Bationo et al., 2007). This is due to
three separate processes. First, SOM plays a
major role in absorbing water at low moisture
potentials. A 1 percent increase of SOM in the
top 30 cm of soil can hold 144 000 litres of water,
which is available for crop needs (Figure 9). This
is why soils rich in organic matter increase crop
resilience to droughts.




                                                                                                                                11
     6. Approaches to address soil erosion


     Sustainable land management approaches to                         to measure profitability). The problem with no-
     reduce soil erosion can be classified as land use                 till alone is that weed and pest management
     regimes, agronomic and vegetative measures,                       becomes challenging over time. Therefore, in
     and structural measures, as seen in Table 4.                      order to be fully sustainable over time, it needs
                                                                       to be combined together with soil cover and crop
     However, no-till stands out in terms of profitability             rotation. The combination of these three elements
     per tonne of carbon dioxide sequestered, as                       is called conservation agriculture by FAO.
     shown in Figure 10 (note the logarithmic scale

     Table 4: Sustainable land management approaches

      Land use regimes                   Agronomic & vegetative measures              Structural measures
      •	 Watershed plans                 •	 Intercropping                             •	 Terraces and other physical measures
      •	 Community land use plans        •	 Natural regeneration                         (e.g. soil bunds, stone bunds, bench
                                                                                         terraces, etc.)
      •	 Grazing agreements,             •	 Agroforestry
         closures, etc.                                                               •	 Flood control and drainage measures
                                         •	 Afforestation and reforestation              (e.g. rock catchment’ water
      •	 Soil and water conservation     •	 No tillage                                   harvesting, cut-off drains, vegetative
         zones                                                                           waterways, stone-paved waterways,
                                         •	 Mulching and crop residue
      •	 Vegetation corridors                                                            flood water diversion, etc.)
                                         •	 Crop rotation
                                                                                      •	 Water harvesting, runoff management,
                                         •	 Fallowing                                    and small-scale irrigation (shallow
                                         •	 Composting/green manure                      wells / boreholes, micro ponds,
                                         •	 Integrated pest management                   underground cisterns, percolation pits,
                                                                                         ponds, spring development, roof water
                                         •	 Vegetative strip cover                       harvesting, river bed dams, stream
                                         •	 Contour planting                             diversion weir, farm dam, tie ridges,
                                         •	 Re-vegetation of rangelands                  inter-row water harvesting, half-moon
                                                                                         structures, etc.)
                                         •	 Integrated crop-livestock systems
                                                                                      •	 Gully control measures (e.g. stone
                                         •	 Woodlots                                     check dams, brushwood check dams,
                                         •	 Live fencing                                 gully cut/reshaping and filling, gully
                                         •	 Alternatives to woodfuel                     re-vegetation, etc)
                                         •	 Sand dune stabilization
     Source: World Bank 2012.

     Figure 10: Profitability and carbon sequestration of sustainable land management approaches




     Source: Carbon Sequestration in Agricultural Soils (World Bank report #67395-GLB).

12
                                                                              Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



The FAO definition28 of conservation agriculture          or black carbon, a little known but increasingly
(CA) is:                                                  important cause of climate change; and
                                                      •	 diversification of crop species grown in
    An approach to managing agro-ecosystems               sequences and/or associations crop rotation
    for improved and sustained productivity,              is achieved with crop rotation and/or
    increased profits and food security while             intercropping.
    preserving and enhancing the resource base
    and the environment. CA is characterized by                                                , which
                                                      CA is distinguished from “minimum tillage”
    three linked principles, namely:                  means reducing to some extent the traditional
                                                      mouldboard ploughing29, which includes turning
    •	 continuous minimum mechanical soil
                                                      the soil. Minimum-till and no-till are often jointly
        disturbance;
                                                                                                  .
                                                      referred to as “resource-saving technologies”
    •	 permanent organic soil cover; and
                                                      While minimum tillage does present important
    •	 diversification of crop species grown in       benefits, long-term international trials and studies
        sequences and/or associations.                have proved that the combination of the above
                                                      three practices is essential to maximize benefit.
This approach is practised on around                  For instance:
125 million ha globally (9 percent of global arable
land), and it is increasing at a rate of around
                                                      •	 no-till with crop residue coverage but no
6 million ha per year. Although this is more than
                                                          rotation presents the risk that weed and pest
twice the adoption rate of organic farming,
                                                          control will become unmanageable over time;
public knowledge about CA is much lower than
                                                      •	 ploughing an area previously under CA does
that about organic farming. CA includes a set
                                                          significantly reduce its soil organic matter
of farm practices that produce sustainable and
                                                          and therefore it reduces its soil water holding
synergic benefits when adopted simultaneously
                                                          capacity, which is the key element to soil
and continuously. With this approach, weeds
                                                          drought resistance; it also determines a
are controlled chemically rather than through
                                                          reversal of the benefits gained; and
cultivation (that is why the cost of herbicides
can initially increase). CA still requires other      •	 no-till without crop residues risks causing soil
agricultural practices such as fertilization and          compaction.
Integrated Pest Management in a way similar but
not identical to traditional ploughing. When the      Although the above three farm practices are
above farm practices are applied continuously,        the minimum requirements additional practices
they significantly improve soil fertility and         can be included to improve soil fertility, such as
produce more and more sustainable benefits            inclusion of multiannual crops (such as pastures)
than each individual practice alone. The three        or windbreaks.
principles can be further explained as follows:
                                                      The term “resource-saving technologies” is
                                                      used in the Former Soviet Union (FSU) to mean
•	 continuous minimum soil disturbance is
                                                      without distinction CA, no-till, and minimum till.
                              . This is the
    commonly known as “no-till”
                                                      See Annex 5 for more detail on this.
    practice of sowing without tillage, also called
    “direct seeding”(the practice of seeding
    directly into unprepared soil);
•	 permanent organic soil cover can be achieved
    using crop residues, mulching, or cover
    crops. It requires a total stop to burning crop
    residues, a farm practice which produces soot




28	 http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/1a.html.                                                        .
                                                      29	 British spelling “mouldboard plough”

                                                                                                                                   13
     7. CA feasibility in Ukraine


     Ukrainian scientists have concerns about the           process so that locally adapted practices are
     feasibility of CA/no-till technology in the country.   utilized to implement CA principles. When CA is
     The main concerns include the following:               a new concept and there is little local experience
                                                            to draw from, farmers will need to learn about CA
     •	 soil-related (soils too hard, sandy, stony, over
                                                            practices and adapt them to suit their conditions.
        moisturized, gleyish);                              Adoption of CA practices occurs gradually as
     •	 climate-related (cold moist spring delaying         farmers become more familiar with both the
        nitrification processes and causing nitrogen        theory and the practice of CA methods. This
        deficit);                                           can be done by slowly reducing mechanical soil
     •	 technical (excess of weeds, rodents, and            disturbance, going in the direction of minimum
        pests/diseases);                                    tillage, and/or by incrementally developing the
                                                            three practices of Conservation Agriculture,
     •	 organizational (need to invest in specialized
                                                            beginning with a small part of the farm.
        machinery and related technical
        assistance, financial constraints and
                                                            Without a specific and organized public sector
        overuse/management of herbicides and
                                                            support, this technological change may take a
        agrochemicals).
                                                            long time or it can be accelerated with enabling
                                                            support. That is why several European regions
     As discussed with some scientists, these
                                                            are moving in the direction of providing specific
     concerns can all be addressed through practical
                                                            subsidies for CA adoption. For the same reason
     learning on soil- and farm-specific cases.
                                                            the United States Department of Agriculture
     Moreover, it is being acknowledged that while the
                                                            (USDA) includes (with a rigorous protocol) the no-
     price of fuel has been increasing in the past few
                                                            till practice in the Farm Bill.
     years, the price of commonly used herbicides in
     CA/no till practices has been decreasing. This is
     increasing the benefits of CA adoption.                CA experiments in Ukraine
                                                            Trials30 carried out on yield comparisons
     International experience shows that initial            show controversial results when comparing
     hesitation toward this technology is normal. CA        traditional, minimum- and no-till technologies.
     adoption is a slow process, usually requiring          Admittedly, it is recognized that in these trials
     decades. This is due to several reasons:               the no-till technology is applied improperly. In
     (i) ploughing is the quintessence of crop              fact, depending on which crop is included in the
     cultivation. Abandoning such a basic tradition         rotation even the no-till field is ploughed on that
     is culturally challenging; (ii) some benefits          occasion. This single operation cancels all the
     – particularly those dealing with soil health          gains the technology was re-establishing on that
     improvement and environmental services –               given soil.
     materialize increasingly as time goes on, whereas
     others such as improvements in profit, savings on      In terms of soil humus content - which has been
     production inputs, reduction in erosion and other      computed while comparing the three technologies
     forms of soil degradation can be harnessed from        on soils which had a high SOM starting point
     the beginning; (iii) farm management and weed          (above 4 percent) – gains were marginal but
     control require a significant shift in approach to     evident at the first ten (0-10 cm) and first twenty
     how crop establishment and weed management
     operations are implemented. Farmers can do
                                                            30	 Presentation made by Professor S.A. Balyuk during round-
     much to innovate during the uptake and adoption            table discussions in Kyiv on 23 May, 2013.

14
                                                                                   Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 5: Ukraine: chlorophyll content in winter wheat leaves

        Traditional ploughing                            Mini-till                           No-till

                                              In standard units with N-tester

                   48.5                                    50.1                               52.8

Source: SSAcI O.N. Sokolovsky (Kharkiv, May, 2013).

(0-20 cm) centimetres of the soil. Otherwise at                All such trials would, however, need be repeated
10-20 cm and at 20-30 cm, very slight decreases                extensively and at different locations and
(0.02 percent and 0.14 percent) were recorded.                 conditions – in full respect of each technology’s
An interesting trial, which is being conducted by              correct protocol – and be accordingly
SSAI, on the chlorophyll content of crop leaves for            documented to have formal scientific recognition.
the three technologies shows that with no-till the
plants are able to photosynthesize better.




                                                                                                                                        15
     8. CA adoption in Ukraine                                              31




     Table 6: Ukraine: estimated adoption of resource-saving technologies, million ha, 1990-2009

                                                                                                                             Percent
      Technology                              1990                2000                  2005               2009
                                                                                                                             of total

      Traditional/ploughing                    29.5               19.5                   10.0               4.9                 18

      Minimum tillage                           2.0                  7.5                 17.0              21.9                 80

      No-till                                     0                  0.2                  0.5               0.7                  2

      Total                                    31.5               27.2                   27.5              27.5               100

     Source: Team elaborations and Agrosoyuz information, 2013.


     In the absence of official statistics, the evolution                  land resource management and an increased
     of land/seed bed preparation technologies in use                      frequency of drought events. On top of this,
     in Ukraine has been estimated with the advice of                      countries like the Russian Federation, Kazakhstan
     farmers32, practitioners and agriculture machinery                    and Ukraine which are important international
     suppliers, who all have their own networks and                        cereal producers and exporters, have also had to
     observatories.                                                        struggle to keep up their competiveness in global
                                                                           markets33. Depending on the agro-ecological
     This estimate lends itself to some immediate                          and economic situation of each country, these
     comments:                                                             challenges have had a different importance and
                                                                           level of priority in different countries. In Ukraine,
     •	 resource-saving technologies appear to have                        given the prevalence of its black Chernozem soils
         picked up steadily since independence with a                      (which, as discussed, have inherent higher SOM
         strong impetus during the last 15 years;                          content and more resilient chemical-physical
     •	 minimum-tillage is currently the most popular                      properties), scientists and farmers appear to have
         land preparation technology in use;                               prioritized two of the challenges: fighting against
                                                                           erosion and improving farm competitiveness by
     •	 traditional land preparation through ploughing
                                                                           reducing fuel consumption. Since 2007 MAPFU
         has greatly decreased with an apparent trend
                                                                           has promoted the use of resource-saving
         towards being definitely substituted;
                                                                           techniques and technologies34 as a strategic line
     •	 no-till was introduced in the late 1990s and
                                                                           of concern and action.
         has been increasing slowly ever since;
     •	 overall cultivated area is struggling to move                      Ukrainian farmers have given precedence to
         back to pre-independence levels.                                  the less demanding – in terms of adaptation
                                                                           requirements – minimum tillage technology as
     Such trends are similar to those in many other                        compared with the more complex CA/ no-till.
     FSU countries. Most of these countries in
     their progress towards a post-Soviet Union
                                                                           33	 As CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States) agriculture
     agricultural modernization have had to face                               underwent transition following the breakup of the Soviet
     challenging issues such as growing erosion,                               Union, the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Kazakhstan
                                                                               removed approximately 23 million hectares of arable land
     decreasing soil fertility, and soil moisture                              from production. This was the largest withdrawal of arable
                                                                               land from production worldwide in recent history. Of the
     impoverishment resulting from inadequate                                  23 million hectares of arable land excluded from production
                                                                               in the three countries, almost 90% had been used to
                                                                               produce grain, including about 4 million hectares in Ukraine.
                                                                               Some of the non-marginal excluded from production in
     31	 For further details see Annex 5.                                      Ukraine, can be returned to production http://www.fao.org/
     32	 Personal communication and presentation made by                       newsroom/common/ecg/1000808/en/faoebrd.pdf.
         representatives of the JSC AgroSoyuz in Dnipropetrovsk on         34	 Agriculture State Programme till 2015; September 19, 2007   ,
         March 13, 2013.                                                       N. 1158 (http://minagro.gov.ua/apk?nid=2976).

16
                                                                             Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



The main areas of concern (erosion and fuel             However, meetings that occurred during this
consumption) seem to have been - from the               study with the most concerned stakeholders
farmers’ point of view - addressed by minimum           – the farmers – confirm that there is growing
tillage technology or have become less evident          professional interest in CA/no-till. Ukrainian
to an extent which is considered quite adequate         farmers do not appear at all to be entrenched in
at current scientific/technical knowledge and           old methods and are eager to learn more about
investment/organizational capacity levels.              what benefits technology can provide for them.
Farmers in Ukraine however, do not have                 It is the same situation for researchers in soil and
sufficient evidence on both the incremental and         related sciences. They are ready and willing to
more sustainable benefits that can accrue by            invest more time and effort in understanding how
adopting CA on their farms; as well as on the           technology can best be adapted to the different
appropriate expedients and adaptations that             agro-ecological conditions and specific farming
need to be used in different soil/climate/cropping      needs of the country.
pattern/organizational situations.


The experience and evidence accumulated by the
large farms that have adopted the CA technology
are still insufficient for meaningful comparison;
data are not regular or have not always been
collected consistently. In other words they are
not convincing to the broader audience. In turn,
scientists have insufficient means, outdated
fundamental information (e.g. on the actual state
and behaviour of their soils), and have had little to
no exposure to international research networks
working in this area.




                                                                                                                                  17
     9. Potential benefits from CA adoption


     Table 7: Ukraine: soil erosion under different tillage, 2011/12

      Soil practice                                                      Soil erosion (kg/m2/year)

      Ploughing                                                                        6

      Mini-till                                                                       4.5

      No-till                                                                          3

     Source: In-field personal communication (SCAI of Donetsk). May, 2013.


     CA principles are universally applicable to all                    enhancing moisture retention and minimizing soil
     agricultural landscapes and land uses with locally                 compaction37.
     adapted practices. CA enhances biodiversity and
     natural biological processes above and below                       CA is also credited for limiting erosion damage
     the ground surface. Soil interventions such as                     from run-off38 and flooding. According to on-
     mechanical soil disturbance are reduced to an                      going field trials in Ukraine39, CA/no-till produces
     absolute minimum or avoided , and external
                                           35
                                                                        50 percent less soil loss per year compared with
     inputs such as agrochemicals and plant nutrients                   traditional land preparation technologies and
     of mineral or organic origin are applied optimally                 25 percent less (per year) when compared with
     and in ways and quantities that do not interfere                   minimum tillage.
     with, or disrupt, the biological processes.
                                                                        However, the real effects of CA can be seen
     CA facilitates good agronomy, such as                              better in the medium to longer term40 as a more
     timely operations, and improves overall land                       sustainable equilibrium is established, which will
     husbandry for rainfed and irrigated production.                    eventually show that erosion is further reduced at
     Complemented by other known good practices,                        least by 75 percent. There is ample evidence that
     including the use of good quality seeds, integrated                CA/no-till contributes to the gradual regeneration
     pest, nutrient, weed and water management, etc.                    of the inherent soil structure features and it
     CA is a base for the intensification of sustainable                improves its “anti”- erosion impact, which is
     agricultural production. It offers increased options               eventually further reduced to at least its inherent
     for integration of production sectors, such as crop-               technical minimum (20-25 percent).
     livestock integration and the integration of trees
     and pastures into agricultural landscapes.                         Crop yield variability can also be addressed
                                                                        positively by expanding CA adoption. Crops
                                                                        under continued CA/no-till technology are
     Specific advantages for Ukraine
                                                                        acknowledged to give higher or at least equal
     CA practices are known to produce several
     positive outcomes, including the reduction of soil
     erosion36;                                                         37	 Influence of Soil Tillage on Soil Compaction Barbora
                                                                            Badali´kova A.P .Dedousis and T. Bartzanas (eds.), Soil
                                                                            Engineering, Soil Biology 20, DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-
                                                                            03681-1_2, # Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
                                                                            http://www.springer.com/cda/content/document/cda_
                                                                            downloaddocument/9783642036804-c1.pdf?SGWID=0-0-
     35	 The maximum soil disturbance area that is accepted by the
                                                                            45-1001451-p173919206.
         CA protocol is 20-25 percent.
                                                                        38	 Stewart B. et al., 2008 “Comparison of runoff and soil erosion
     36	 Among available literature see e.g.: Javůrek et al., Impact
                                                                            from no-till and inversion tillage production systems” http://
         of different soil tillage technologies on soil erosion, 2008
                                                                            www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/person/6112/sr1083_08.pdf.
         (2): 218-223; Volker Prasuhn, On-farm effects of tillage
         and crops on soil erosion measured over 10 years in            39	 National Soils and Agro-chemistry Institute in Kharkiv.
         Switzerland, 2011; Wang et al., Dust storm erosion in China,       Personal communication, May 2013.
         2006; Sugahara et al., Erosion control on pineapple fields,    40	 Derpsch, R. et al., Critical Steps to No-Till Adoption, 2008,
         2000; Doyle, Reducing erosion in tobacco fields, 1983; etc.        WASWC. p479 - 495 http://www.rolf-derpsch.com/steps.pdf.

18
                                                                                                Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 11: Soil bulk density under different tillage




Source: Kravchenko et al. 2011: Chin. Geogra. Sci. 21(3) 257-266.


yields to that achieved with minimum tillage41.                       management system can optimize soil
The significance of such yields differences                           conditions. Once again, CA/no-till is an important
depends on the starting point level. In the                           land resource management technology that is
Ukrainian context the perception of the benefits                      also able to mitigate soil moisture decreases by
may be masked by high thresholds that prevail                         maximizing SOM, consequently enhancing its
in the country. However, it is proven in several                      physical structure and water holding capacity44.
instances that CA/no-till performs better under
drought conditions. An assumption can be                              From the cost of production savings stand-point,
legitimately made that the yield shortfalls (of                       and particularly in terms of fuel consumption there
20-25 percent) which occur in drought years                           is wide consensus that ploughing is by far the most
in Ukraine, could be mitigated by at least 25-                        fuel consuming technology. This is greatly reduced
35 percent through CA/no-till adoption, based on                      when moving to minimum tillage, and is further
what happens in other countries with comparable                       reduced with no-till. This is shown by research trials
agro-ecological conditions42. In any case, the                        and farm management experiences in Ukraine.
yields under CA in the medium-term tend to
stabilize and significantly reduce the volatility                     The potential advantages of adopting CA/
which is usually caused by climatic variation . On        43
                                                                      no-till technology in Ukraine in comparison
a large scale, the impact on Ukrainian economics                      with minimum tillage have been highlighted
and on food security is also considerable.                            throughout this assessment and can be
                                                                      summarized in Table 8.
With regard to bulk density, typically this property
is influenced by the land preparation technology
                                                                      43	 Relationships between winter wheat yields and soil carbon
that is in use (Kravchenko et al. 2011: Chin.                             under various tillage systems. O. Mikanová, T. Šimon, M.
                                                                          Javůrek, M. Vach Crop Research Institute, Prague-Ruzyně,
Geogra. Sci. 21(3) 257-266).                                              Czech Republic. Plant Soil Environ., 58, 2012 (12): 540-544
                                                                          www.agriculturejournals.cz/publicFiles/78760.pdf; Compari-
                                                                          son of no-tillage and conventional tillage in the development
This clearly shows how land management has a                              of sustainable farming systems in the semi-arid tropics.
                                                                          Thigalingam et al., Australian Journal of Experimental Agricul-
strong influence on the behaviour and dynamics                            ture, 1996, 36, 995-1002. http://www.bobmccown.com/wp-
of the different soil properties. An appropriate                          content/uploads/2011/10/112_Thiagalingam_McCown1996No-
                                                                          TillVsConventionalSAT1.pdf; Differential response of wheat to
                                                                          tillage management systems in a semiarid area of Morocco;
                                                                          Rachid Mrabet Field Crops Research 66 (2000) 165±174; Soil
                                                                          properties and crop yields after 11 years of no tillage farming
41	 The concept of soil quality : new perspective of nature               in wheat-maize cropping system in North China Plain; He
    farming and sustainable agriculture ; Papendick et al.                Jin et al. Soil & Tillage Research 113 (2011) 48-54; Effects
    1991 http://www.infrc.or.jp/english/KNF_Data_Base_Web/                of Residue Management and Cropping Systems on Wheat
    PDF%20KNF%20Conf%20Data/C4-5-129.pdf.                                 Yield Stability in a Semiarid Mediterranean Clay Soil. Mrabe.
42	 See also “Advancement and impact of conservation                      American Journal of Plant Sciences, 2011, 2, 202-216.
    agriculture/no-till technology adoption in Kazakhstan”: http://   44	 Impact of three and seven years of no-tillage on the soil
    www.eastagri.org/publications/pub_docs/Info%20note_                   water storage, in the plant root zone; Jema et al. Soil &
    Print.pdf; and, “No-till technology in Kazakhstan” by Turi            Tillage Research 126 (2013) 26-33; Soil fertility distributions
    Fileccia (2009), posted on FAO’s Conservation Agriculture             in long-term no-till, chisel/disk and mouldboard plough/disk
    website. (http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/doc/Importance_Zero_               systems; Sjoerd W. et al; Soil & Tillage Research 88 (2006)
    Tillage_Northern_Kazakhstan.pdf).                                     30-41.

                                                                                                                                                     19
                       Table 8: Comparison of no-till versus minimum till (potential)

Problem                                       Through minimum tillage                           Through CA/no-till
Erosion: estimated to cause 500-600 million Reduced by 25 percent (per     Reduced immediately by            Tonnes of eroded soil:
tonnes of annual soil loss; About 14-15 million ha)                        50 percent. With continued        0.75-7t/ha only
hectares are affected by wind/water erosion                                CA/no-till: by 75 percent, to a
(update 2013); increasing at a rate of about                               minimum (per ha)
60,000-80,000 hectares per year; and equal
to 3-30 tonnes/ha of soil per year, depending
on regions
Soil fertility/SOM: 24 million tonnes of      Same as per erosion          Same as per erosion               117 USD/ha of NPK
annual humus loss (including 964 thousand     = 25 percent less            = 50 percent; 75 percent less     Nutrients
tonnes of nitrogen, 676 thousand tonnes of
phosphorus 9.7 million tonnes of potassium)
from tilled land. This is equal to about
5 billion USD
Resilience to drought: at current climatic    Improved moisture retention Soil nominal moisture              See productivity gains
prevailing conditions and in those foreseen   capacity                    retention capacity fully
due to climate change evaporation rates                                   re-established mitigating
increase and soil humidity decreases;                                     productivity volatility
with dire events every 3-5 years or shorter
frequency
Production volatility: subject to             Insufficient to mitigate     Production volatility mitigated   77 USD/ha every 3 years or
20 to 25 percent yield reduction in average   significantly production     by 25-35 percent                  25 USD/ha/year
every 3 years                                 volatility
Cost of production:                           Reduced fuel use by          Reduced fuel use by               Production costs reduction
high fuel consumption with traditional        40 percent                   60 percent
technology (average 100 litres/ ha)           = average 60 litres /ha      = average 30 litres per ha
GHG mitigation, carbon sequestration                                       Sequestration rates at            In the short-term:
                                                                           baseline conditions for 2000-     CO2 Sequestration of
                                                                           2039                              170 kg/ha/year


                       The above indications (and references) show that
                       CA/no-till technology provides higher benefits
                       even when compared with minimum tillage.
                       This together with a number of other described
                       beneficial effects would justify a gradual but
                       more decisive move towards adoption of this
                       technology in Ukraine.




20
                                                       Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




10. Soil carbon sequestration


Table 9: Ukraine fuel consumption under different land preparation, 2011/12

 Soil practice                                                        Fuel consumption (litres/ha)

 Ploughing                                                                          90-120

 Mini-till                                                                          60-80

 No-till                                                                            25-40

Source: Farm managers; Researchers. 2013.


The adoption of CA has an impact in terms of the        case of one unpublished trial done at farm level46
GHG balance45. Emissions are reduced at field           and comparing three technologies (conventional,
level because of very low topsoil disturbance by        minimum tillage and no-till), bulk density and
tillage and thanks to the maintenance of a mulch        “equivalent” soil depth measurements are not
cover. This results in higher carbon retention          reported. Thus, the scientific confidence in the
capacity in the soil. The reduced mechanized            end results is not authoritative.
operations also imply a permanent decrease of
fossil fuel consumption.                                Only one scientific paper reports C stocks in a
                                                        typical Chernozem of Ukraine under different
However, in Ukraine, carbon sequestration               long-term tillage systems47. However its results
advantages that derive from the adoption of CA          cannot be applied to average farm conditions in
practices appear less evident. As the soil carbon       Ukraine: this experiment applied large amounts
content of the Chernozems is already inherently         of fertilizers and cattle manure (at a rate of
high, reaching several undertones of carbon per         12 tonnes per hectare). Such levels of application
hectare in the top meter, it is really difficult in     are unusual in Ukraine, and they surely had a
the short-term to appreciate a variation of a few       greater impact on SOM concentration than tillage
hundred kilos of carbon. The calculation of soil        practices. Thus, the tillage effect was masked in
C sequestration rates in Ukraine would require          this experiment.
detailed and high quality determination of soil
organic carbon (SOC) and of soil bulk density.          Based on the IPCC global proxies referred to
When calculating soil C sequestration rates,            specific climate categories, the corresponding
approaches being used and sampling methods              carbon sequestration rates proposed for no-till and
are also crucial. It is very important to take into     residues management category is 0.15 tonnes
account any previous change in soil bulk density,       CO2-eq/ha/yr- for the cool dry zone; and
and the equivalent depth of the soil sample taken.      0.51 tonnes CO2-eq /ha/yr for the cool moist zone.


Only a few scientific publications are available        Together with the above fuel savings, the total
concerning the evaluation of carbon sequestration       annual carbon sequestration can be estimated
performance of reduced-tillage technologies             at around 0.5 tonnes CO2/ha/yr-. These values
compared with conventional systems in Ukraine.          would generate significant impact only if applied
None discuss comparisons with true CA/no-till           to large areas. A more detailed assessment
technology. It also appears that results have been
biased by a combination of tillage effects with         46	 Done at Agrosoyuz JSC in 2011 and reported in a
the use of organic and inorganic fertilizers. In the        presentation during May 23rd Round Table discussions in
                                                            Kyiv, 2013.
                                                        47	 Kravchenko, Y., Rogovska, N., Petrenko, L., Zhang, X., Song,
                                                            C. and Chen, Y. 2012. “Quality and dynamics of soil organic
                                                            matter in a typical Chernozem of Ukraine under different
45	 For more details on this see Annex 6.                   long-term tillage systems”. In: Can. J. Soil Sci. 92: 429-438.

                                                                                                                       21
     of CA adoption should be compared with the                           All such aspects would justify the prioritization
     business as usual scenario of suboptimal land                        of Climate Smart Agriculture measures
     management practices meaning: continued                              and specifically, the expansion of CA/no-till
     erosion; sustained loss of SOC; and decreased                        investment in the Steppe area of Ukraine.
     organic fertilization.
                                                                          In the short-term (three to five years), if adequate
     CA/no-till is a long-term undertaking. Experience                    financial resources are made available and ad
     from countries48 and farms that have successfully                    hoc development interventions are supported, it
     moved to CA/no-till show that it is not just a                       is assumed that the CA/no-till area will grow to
     gradual improvement from minimum tillage, but                        three million hectares in the Steppe area. This
     a qualitative jump ahead in terms of production,                     criteria of prioritization implies that the agricultural
     economic and environmental benefits.                                 enterprises with an operational cropping area
                                                                          of 4 000 hectares and above, would act as first
                                                                          champions in CA technology adoption.
     Phasing CA adoption
     So far, this assessment acknowledges                                 In the medium-term (six to ten years), with
     the following key facts and a few specific                           continued state support, and the greater
     assumptions:                                                         evidence and awareness of the benefits for
                                                                          farmers, the entire Steppe area managed by
     (i)	 almost one-half (19 million hectares) of the
                                                                          agricultural enterprises would probably take up
         arable land is located in the Steppe AEZ of
                                                                          CA; starting with a further 3 million hectares
         Ukraine;
                                                                          (enterprises with 2 000 ha and above), and
     (ii)	 about 60 percent of the arable land in
                                                                          eventually including the total 9 million ha
         the country is managed by agricultural
                                                                          managed by enterprises.
         enterprises; over half of these are situated in
         the Steppe AEZ;
                                                                          In the longer term but it could happen sooner
     (iii)	the Steppe area produces 45 percent of                         – all farmland including the Forest Steppe area
         wheat, 15 percent of corn and 47 percent of                      operated by enterprises – i.e. 17 million hectares,
         sunflower output;                                                has the potential to adopt CA.
     (iv)	the Steppe area is the most affected by
         erosion, soil fertility loss, and negative climate
         change impacts;
     (v)	 the Steppe area has highest output volatility;
     (vi)	as of 2012, CA/no-till adoption is an
         undertaking exclusively of large organized
         farms (> 4 000 hectares); it is noted that
         a majority of such farmland (estimated at
         70 percent) is located in the Steppe area;
          there is a good level of “readiness to
     (vii)	
         convert” given the existing capacity of direct
         seeding machinery among large agricultural
         enterprises: over two thousand 6-12 metre
         wide seeders have been sold in Ukraine
         during the last five years, each capable of
         operating in average 2 000 hectares. It is
         assumed that 50 percent of these are in the
         Steppe AEZ.


     48	 Current status of adoption of no-till farming in the world and
         some of its main benefits; Rolf Derpsch, March, 2010 Int. J
         Agric. &.Biol Eng., Vol. 3 No.1.

22
                                                                       Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




11. Benefits and economics of CA


Figure 12: Total investment and net present value

  2 500                                                                  8 000
                                                       2 291
                                                                         7 000                                            6 685

  2 000                         1 883
                                                                         6 000                              5 523

                                                                         5 000        4 723
  1 500
             1 201
                                                                         4 000

  1 000
                                                                         3 000

                                                                         2 000
   500
                                                                         1 000

     0                                                                        0
          Conventional       Min.Tillage              No-Till                      Conventional          Min.Tillage     No-Till

                     Total investment, thousand USD                                                  NPV, thousand USD


Source: Team estimates.

Figure 13: Net income per hectare by technology

                          450
                                                                                                   387
                          400

                          350

                          300                                           282

                          250              219
                          200

                          150

                          100

                           50

                            0
                                        Conventional                 Min.tillage                  No-Till

                                                                Net income per ha, USD

Source: Team estimates.


The potential benefits of large-scale adoption of                        The performance of a 4 000 hectare agriculture
CA in Ukraine have been carefully quantified at                          enterprise in comparison with other technology
three levels: farm/enterprise, national, and global.                     use is clear, as can be seen in Figure 12 and
                                                                         Figure 13.

Farm/enterprise level
                                                                         With almost double investment compared with
The adoption of CA technology is expected                                conventional tillage, an enterprise that adopts
to lead to significant economic and financial                            CA/no-till can expect a net present value (NPV)
efficiency in grain and oil seeds production by:                         of over USD 6.6 million; and about USD 390 in
•	 increasing output stability;                                          terms of net income per ha/per year.
•	 decreasing inputs use and cost;                                       Based on the figures assumed in this analysis
•	 increasing productivity or efficiency; and                            (3 million hectares in the short to medium-
                                                                         term; 9 million hectares in the medium-term;
                                                                         and 17 million hectares in the longer term), the


                                                                                                                                   23
     Figure 14: Incremental net income by technology


                                                                                         2,31




                                                               1,23




                                       0,41




                                 3 million hectares      9 million hectares       17 million hectares


     Source: Team estimates.

     Figure 15: Annual fuel savings by technology

                                                                                     625




                                                           331




                                    110




                               3 million hectares     9 million hectares       17 million hectares


     Source: Team estimates.


     average accumulated benefit from the introduction                baseline scenario. In the case of conventional
     CA/no-till (intended as additional net income of                 tillage technology, the analysis generates a
     agricultural enterprises) would amount to:                       negative return (NPV) if prices decrease by more
                                                                      than 24 percent.
     •	 short-term: USD 0.41 billion;
     •	 medium-term: USD 1.23 billion;
                                                                      National level
     •	 long-term: USD 2.31 billion.
                                                                      The main benefits at the national level consist
     Importantly, the decreased annual fuel                           essentially in reduced cereal output volatility. The
     consumption cost which is considered a farm/                     estimated additional output of cereals (wheat and
     enterprise level benefit would be:                               corn) available during drought years (every three
                                                                      years) would be:
     •	 short-term: USD 110 million saved;
                                                                      •	 short-term: 0.3 million tonnes of wheat and
     •	 medium-term: USD 331 million saved;
                                                                         0.6 million tonnes of corn;
     •	 long-term, USD 625 million saved.
                                                                      •	 medium-term: 1 million tonnes of wheat and
     A sensitivity analysis was also performed. A CA/                    1.7 million tonnes ofcorn;
     no-till farm would probably remain profitable even               •	 long-term: 2 million tonnes of wheat and
     if grain sale prices fell by 34 percent from the                    3.3 million tonnes of corn.


24
                                                                                          Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 16: Incremental production by scenario
              Wheat, in million tonnes                                            Corn, in million tonnes

                                                                                                                  3,25

                                                 1,98




                                                                                                1,72
                            1,05



                                                                           0,57
       0,35




 3 million hectares   9 million hectares 17 million hectares         3 million hectares 9 million hectares 17 million hectares


Source: FAO OECD Agricultural Outlook 2013-22.


Figure 17: Incremental value by scenario
                                                                                          304




                                                               161




                                      54




                               3 million hectares       9 million hectares          17 million hectares

Source: Team estimates


This additional supply of cereals is expected to                Global level
generate off-farm benefits (mainly to traders
                                                                At a global level, the benefit is estimated in
and intermediaries). In drought years (once
                                                                terms of improved food security during the
every three years) these additional benefits are
                                                                drought years (every three years). Considering
estimated at:
                                                                a consumption of 130 kg of cereals/per capita/
•	 short-term: USD 54 million;                                  per year (FAO/WFP average calorie intake), the

•	 medium-term: USD 161 million;                                increased supply of cereals deriving from CA/no-
                                                                till area would be able to a feed further:
•	 long-term: USD 304 million.
                                                                •	 short-term: 5.4 million people;

More significant in value terms is the decreased                •	 medium-term: 16.1 million people;
soil fertility loss. This would reduce the equivalent           •	 long-term: 30.4 million people.
nutrient investment (which is otherwise required
to keep up crop productivity) by USD 117/ha
giving a total saving of:

•	 short-term: USD 0.35 billion;
•	 medium-term: USD 1.05 billion;
•	 long-term: USD 1.99 billion.


                                                                                                                                               25
     Figure 18: Nutrient savings by scenario

                                                                                               1,99




                                                                       1,05




                                              0,35




                                        3 million hectares      9 million hectares       17 million hectares


     Figure 19: Incremental food security by scenario

                                                                                               30,4




                                                                       16,1




                                              5,4




                                       3 million hectares      9 million hectares       17 million hectares


     Source: Team estimates.


     Benefits in terms of carbon sequestration and                            The market values of the above carbon emissions
     decreased emissions have been calculated                                 are difficult to estimate. Carbon markets are
     using EX-ACT . They were estimated as
                      49
                                                                              diverse, unstable and unreliable. The price of a
     three snapshots according to the three above                             tonne of CO2 can range from USD 0.5 per tonne
     scenarios:                                                               according to the NASDAQ Certified Emission
                                                                              Reduction to USD 4.44 according to EU CO2
     •	 adoption of CA in 3 million ha: 1.5 million                           Allowances. The economic value can range from
         tonnes of CO2e sequestered per year,                                 15 to 150 USD per tonne of CO2.
         equivalent to the emissions of 0.3 million cars
     •	 adoption of CA in 9 million ha: 4.4 million
         tonnes of CO2e sequestered per year,
         equivalent to the emissions of 0.9 million cars
     •	 adoption of CA in 17 million ha: 8.3 million
         tonnes of CO2e sequestered per year,
         equivalent to the emissions of 1.7 million cars




     49	 EX-ACT is a tool developed by FAO and aimed at providing
         ex-ante estimates of the impact of agriculture and forestry
         development projects on GHG emissions and carbon
         sequestration, indicating its effects on the C-balance, an
         indicator of the mitigation potential of the project.

26
                                                         Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




12. Next steps


The potential benefits from large scale adoption          Financial services
of CA are summarized in Table 1 and the risks
                                                          Access to affordable financing is a key constraint
caused by a changing climate should constitute
                                                          for Ukrainian agricultural enterprises. Any
a strong incentive to increase efforts to increase
                                                          approach to facilitate access to finance should
soil fertility and strengthen climate resilience.
                                                          favour those enterprises which invest in
A comprehensive plan should be designed and
                                                          environmentally friendly approaches such as CA.
implemented to achieve such important results.
The list below is a set of steps that would be
                                                          Agricultural insurances charge higher premiums
required.
                                                          to those agro-enterprises which apply CA
                                                          because this technology is less known. The
Verification of preliminary estimates                     Government should encourage dialogue between
The FAO preliminary assessment would benefit              research centres and insurance providers so that
from a more detailed follow-up investigation              the bias against this technology is eliminated;
to address areas such as: detailed on-farm                	
productivity, economic and environmental                  Risk management
analyses for technology comparison, assessment
                                                          It will be necessary to work with the research
of agricultural machinery capacity and market,
                                                          and farm community to improve the quality of
evaluation of erosion impact on river systems and
                                                          information on the estimated potential impact of
water bodies’ siltation.
                                                          climate change on agriculture, differentiating risks
                                                          and adaptation approaches by agro-ecological
Land markets                                              region.
Agricultural land markets in Ukraine suffer               	
several weaknesses. This complex issue is a               Food security
high priority of the Government which the World
                                                          In order to improve food security, it will be
Bank has been supporting for quite some time.
                                                          necessary to strengthen incentives for adopting
It is important to increase the efforts to improve
                                                          technologies to maintain soil fertility and reduce
confidence in long-term use of land so as to
                                                          the volatility of agricultural production, such as
create incentive for farmers to invest in long-term
                                                          CA with no-till.
soil fertility.

                                                          Implementing the above steps does require
Agricultural technology/advisory                          additional financing. In consideration of the
services                                                  global benefits that the proposed actions could
At the moment, agro-enterprises are excessively           generate, there are some sources of international
dependent on suppliers for technical assistance.          financing which Ukraine could apply for. For
To increase the attention paid to soil fertility it is    instance, there is available grant funding from the
essential to develop a programme of agricultural          GEF and from the Adaptation Fund for Ukraine:
technology or advisory services which could
address soil fertility concerns.




                                                                                                               27
     •	 The GEF will start a new funding period in           not need to have a detailed budget, detailed
        July 2014 (called GEF-6), where there are            result framework, or economic analysis,
        funds available for Ukraine to address issues        but should focus mostly on justification
        related to climate change (USD 17.4 million)         and rationale. After the project concept has
        and land degradation (USD 2.9 million). The          been accepted, the country can access a
        GEF does require co-financing, usually at least      USD 30 000 grant for preparation.
        four times that of the GEF grant amount;          (iv)	Preparation of the full proposal. This is
     •	 The Adaptation Fund has a grant of up to             quite demanding and often requires much
        USD 10 million available for Ukraine.                correspondence with the Secretariat.


     The Adaptation Fund can finance adaptation           The Adaptation Fund has already funded many
     investments on a grant basis up to USD 10 million    proposals to help the agriculture and food sector
     per country. The preparation process has some        to adapt to climate change. A large number
     similarities to the GEF project cycle, a known       of Climate Smart Agriculture or food security
     process in Ukraine. The Adaptation Fund has two      proposals similar to CA have been financed. This
     windows:                                             should thus represent an interesting funding
                                                          option, which may complement GEF funding.
     (i)	 the Multilateral Implementation Entities,
        where international intermediaries such as
        the United Nations Development Programme,
        World Bank, the United Nations Environment
        Programme and others can participate in a
        tri-partite contract; and
     (ii)	 the Regional or National Implementation
        Entities. This requires a bilateral contract
        between the Grantee and Grantor, without a
        multilateral agency as intermediary.


     A period of at least one year is needed to prepare
     and receive approval for such a proposal. The
     following steps are necessary:


     (i)	 Nomination of the Adaptation Fund Focal
        Point at National Level, often the head of
        the United Nations Convention to Combat
        Desertification, or similar.
     (ii)	 Accreditation of the National Implementing
        Entry. This is a complex step which requires
        accrediting several areas including financial
        management, procurement, project
        supervision, anti-corruption, and transparency.
        Countries where a local agency has been
        accredited: India, Jordan, Uruguay, Argentina,
        Jamaica, Belize, Senegal, South Africa,
        Rwanda, Benin. Macedonia should have an
        advantage here since the Paying Agency
        has already significant experience under the
        European Union Accreditation Process.
     (iii)	Preparation of a project concept of about
        20 to 30 pages. The project concept does

28
                                                                                 Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




                    Annex 1 - Ukrainian soils


                    Dominant soil types                                            in the flat valleys of the Dnepr and its tributaries.
                                                                                   Chernozems are associated with Phaeozems,
                    Due to the large size of the country (circa
                                                                                   and to a lesser extent with Cambisols, on the
                    60 million hectares) and the variety of natural
                                                                                   Podolskaja and Predneprovskaja uplands of the
                    soil-forming factors (climate, geology, native
                                                                                   central part. The southern region is a huge area
                    vegetation, relief etc), Ukraine has a large
                                                                                   of homogeneous Chernozems bordered on the
                    diversity of soil types. According to the European
                                                                                   south by the Krym peninsula. The depression
                    Soil Atlas (Figure 20), 15 Reference Groups (RGs),
                                                                                   between the peninsula and the Chernozems
                    which account for nearly one-half of the RGs of
                                                                                   presents a mixture of saline soils. Table 10
                    the World Reference Base (WRB), are found in
                                                                                   provides a tentative equivalent of the FAO WRD
                    the country.
                                                                                   base in other soil classifications used in most
                                                                                   documents concerning Ukraine.
                    The north-eastern region is covered by
                    Albeluvisols, Phaeozems and Histosols, which
                                                                                   In terms of absolute coverage Chernozems
                    are common for mixed coniferous-deciduous and
                                                                                   occupy about half of the country, followed by
                    deciduous forests of the cold temperate regions
                                                                                   Phaeozems and Albeluvisols, each corresponding
                    of the Russian plain. The north-western part of
                                                                                   to about 14 percent of the country. Chernozems
                    Ukraine is dominated by Histosols. Histosols and
                                                                                   and similar (Phaeozems and Kastanozems), are
                    Gleysols occupy the swampy depression shared
                                                                                   classified as Mollisols in the USDA Soil Taxonomy.
                    with Belarus called Polissya also known as the
                                                                                   Chernozems are considered to be amongst the
                    Forest AEZ. The eastern and central parts of the
                                                                                   most productive soil types in the world. They are
                    country are covered mainly by Chernozems.
                                                                                   characteristic of the long-grass steppe regions,
                    Chernozems combined with Fluvisols are found


Table 10: Tentative correspondence of the main soil types in Ukraine

Reference group               USDA soil             Ukrainian
                                                                                                                               Observations
of the WRB                    taxonomy                names
Albeluvisols                      Alfisols   Peat-boggy soils,       Agricultural suitability is limited because of their acidity, low nutrient
                         (aqualfs, cryalfs      soddy gleyed                                        levels, and tillage and drainage problems.
                              and udalfs                 soils
                              suborders)
Cambisols                     Inceptisols        Soddy brown                Cambisols generally make good agricultural land and are used
                                                         soils                                                                intensively.
Chernozems                      Mollisols       Чорноземи or           They have deep, high organic matter, nutrient-enriched surface soil
                                                   Black soils       (A horizon), typically between 60-80 cm in depth. This fertile surface
                                                                  horizon results from the long-term addition of organic materials derived
                                                                          from plant roots, and typically have soft, granular, soil structure.
Fluvisols                        Entisols    Meadow soils on           They correspond to Alluvial plains, river fans, valleys and marshes;
                           (Fluvents and     alluvial deposits,          many Fluvisols under natural conditions are flooded periodically.
                            Fluvaquents)     meadow-swamp
Histosols                      Histosols                  Peat      Soil consisting primarily of organic materials They have very low bulk
                                                                         density and are poorly drained because the organic matter holds
                                                                   water very well. For cultivation, most of them need to be drained and,
                                                                                                         normally, also limed and fertilized.
Gleysols                 Different orders      Light grey and      Soil often saturated with groundwater for long periods. Thus, the main
                         with an “aquic”      grey Podzolized     obstacle to their utilization is the necessity to install a drainage system
                                condition      soils, Meadow                                                to lower the groundwater table.
                                                         soils
Phaeozems and                  Mollisols             Meadow-   Phaeozems and Kastanozems are much like Chernozems but they are
Kastanozems                  (Udolls and         chernozemic leached more intensively. Phaeozems are porous, fertile soils and make
                                Albolls)        soils, chesnut                 excellent farmland. Most are slightly acid or neutral.
                                              soils, Solonetzs


                                                                                                                                             29
     Figure 20: Distribution of soil types in Ukraine




     Source: Adapted from Plate 18 of the Soil Atlas of Europe.

     Figure 21: Distribution of Chernozems in Europe and typical Chernozem profile




     Source: Soil Atlas of Europe.


     especially in Eastern Europe, Ukraine and the                The first four soil types, corresponding to the
     Russian Federation.                                          Chernozems, Kastanozems and Phaeozems of
                                                                  the WRB classification (see above) represent
     The distribution of the soils in Ukraine shows               around two thirds of the soil coverage. These soils
     common patterns with the country’s AEZ                       contain a high percentage of arable soils, close to
     (Figure 2). The Forest AEZ corresponds to                    90 percent for the different Chernozems types.
     19 percent of the territory. The Forest-Steppe
     zone occupies 34 percent. The Steppe zone                    Arable soils cover 78.5 percent (about 31 million ha)
     situated in southern Ukraine occupies about                  of Ukrainian soils and are mostly Chernozem soils.
     40 percent of the territory. See also Table 11 first
     column) that indicates the coverage of agricultural
                                                                  Main properties of the soils
     lands per AEZ. Chernozems are typical of the
     Steppe AEZ (together with Kastanozems in the                 This section will focus on the most dominant
     southern part), and of the Forest-Steppe AEZ                 soil type by area, that also correspond to largest
     together with Phaeozems.                                     extent of arable lands, that corresponds to the

30
                                                                                    Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 11: Ukraine: soil distribution

 Soils                                                                   Agricultural lands              Arable
 (based on Ukrainian classification)                                      (thousands ha)                  (%)

 Chernozem podzolic                                                             3 418.7                    91.6

 Chernozem typical                                                              5 779.6                    91.8

 Chernozem ordinary                                                            10 488.6                    88.3

 Chernozem southern                                                             3 639.9                    88.8

 Meadow chernozem and chernozem-meadow                                          2 038.9                    60.0

 Light-grey forest, forest grey, dark grey podzolic                             4 333.4                    80.5

 Sod-podzolic, podzolic, grey                                                   3 850.2                    74.1

 Dark brown, chestnut saline, saline meadow-chestnut, chestnut salt             1 382.9                    80.0

 Brown (podzolic, podzolic, meadow brownsoil-podzolic gley)                      1 110.0                   43.9

 Brown                                                                              48.5                   26.2

 Meadow and marsh and swamp                                                        975.3                     7.9

 Alluvial meadow and meadow-swamp                                                   781.9                  18.8

 Peat from lowland                                                                 559.4                   14.9

 Sod-sandy and sandy-coherently and sand                                           505.5                   24.2

Source: Balyuk, 2013.

Figure 22: Ukraine: share of the arable soils

                                     2% 2%
                                4%

                        9%                                            Chornozems
                                                       68%
                                                                      Meadow Chornozems


                11%                                                   Gray soils

                                                                      Sod-Podzolic, Podzoic and Gley

                   4%                                                 Dark brown and saline soils

                                                                      Brown soils

                                                                      Others


Source: Based on Table 11.


Chernozems, Phaeozems and Kastanozems                     According to Krupskiy and Polupan50 (1979) the
(all being grouped under Mollisols in USDA Soil           nominal SOM content of Chernozems increases
Taxonomy).                                                from 5.2 percent in the Wet Forest-Steppe to
                                                          5.7 percent in the Forest-Steppe and 6.2 percent
In terms of texture, these soils vary from light          in the Steppe, but decreases to 3.4 percent in
loam to medium clay. Coarse silt and clay are             South Steppe. Fertility of the Chernozem soils
thus dominant soil particles, but distributions           varies according to their location, following the
might differ. Typically texture becomes heavier           same pattern, decreasing from Forest-Steppe to
from the north to the south: The percentage of            Southern Steppe (Table 12).
particles (< 0.01 mm) varies from 25 to65 percent
from the Wet Forest-Steppe to the South Steppe
(Kravchenko et al., 2011).
                                                          50	 Krupskiy N K, Polupan N I, 1979. Soil Atlas of USSR. USSR,
                                                              pages 48-101 (cited in Kravchenko et al. 2011: Chin. Geogra.
                                                              Sci. 21(3) 257-266).

                                                                                                                                         31
     Table 12: Agropotential of Chernozem soil for winter wheat

                                                                               Agropotential
      Zone                   Soil                                                                         Arable (%)
                                                                      Natural             Optimal
                                                                       q/ha                q/ha

                             Chernozem podzolic                        30 - 38             40 - 48               8.6

      Forest-Steppe          Chernozem Typical                         32 - 36            38 - 45.2             14.5

                             Typical Chernozem and Meadow              30 - 36             54 - 64               1.0

                             Chernozem ordinary                       23.2 - 34           31.6 - 40             26.3
      Steppe
                             Chernozem Southern                       18 - 25.2           22 - 31.2              9.1

     Source: Balyuk, 2013.

     Figure 23: Cation exchange capacity (CEC) in Ukrainian Chernozems 51




     Source: Fridland et al., 1981.


     This behaviour is partly dependent on the CEC                   management of the soil than its location in the
     of the soils. CEC is the maximum quantity of                    different AEZ (Figure 25).
     total cations that a particular soil is capable of
     holding, at a given pH value, and which available               It is important to stress that soil management
     for exchange with the soil solution. Thus CEC                   will have a strong influence on the behaviour
     correlates with soil fertility. CEC is dependent                and dynamics of the different soil properties.
     on the mineral matrix but also the amount and                   Management can imply either antagonist or
     quality of SOM. Soil organic materials raise the                synergic patterns among the different soil
     CEC by increasing the available negative charges.               properties. This means it is necessary to fine
     Consequently, organic matter build-up in soil                   tune soil management in order to optimize soil
     usually improves soil fertility.                                conditions for sustainable productivity.


     Physical properties of the Chernozem soils are                  Historically, soil properties have also been
     also important for their agricultural use. Soil                 impacted by the different management
     bulk density is an indirect measure of soil pore                operations used in the past (Table 13).
     space which depends on soil organic matter
     content and texture. It has been reported that the              The major changes observed were the decline in
     favourable range for plant growth is 0.9-1.3 g/cm           3
                                                                     SOM (Figure 25) and soil thickness, while water
     in Ukrainian Chernozems (Fridland et al., 1981).                and wind erosion as well as soil compaction are
     But typically this property will rely more on the               also becoming serious (see degradation section
                                                                     below).


                                                                     Kravchenko et al. (2011) also reported a decrease
     51	 WFSM: Wet Forest-Steppe Mollisols, FSM: Forest-Steppe
         Mollisols, SM: Steppe Mollisols, SSM: South Steppe          in SOM of 22 percent of the original levels in the
         Mollisols.

32
                                                                                        Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 13: Evolution of various inputs to agricultural soils in Ukraine, 1986-2010

                                                                                Periods of time
 Management operation
                                                         1986-1990         1996-2000       2001-2005       2006-2010

 Application of chemical fertilizers (kg/ha)                  148              16              24              40

 Application of organic matter (millions tonnes)              278              52              19              21

 Liming of acid soils (thousands ha)                        1 548              53              32              36

Source: Balyuk, 2013.


Figure 24: Bulk density in Ukrainian Chernozem by tillage systems




Source: Kravchenko et al. 2011: Chin. Geogra. Sci. 21(3) 257-266.

Figure 25: Evolution of soil organic carbon content in Ukrainian soils for the various AEZ




Source: Data reported by Balayev2013..

Forest Steppe zone, 19.5 percent in the Steppe                      Soil degradation
zone and 19 percent in the Forest Zone in Ukraine.
                                                                    Like most cultivated soils around the world,
                                                                    Ukrainian soils suffered and are still exposed to
There are strong correlations (even if these
                                                                    different forms of soil degradation. The dominant
correlations change according to the soil and
                                                                    forms of degradation are summarized in Table 14.
other conditions) between the SOM content and
other properties, including fertility. Therefore,
                                                                    The geographical distribution of the different
practices that favour the conservation of soil
                                                                    forms of degradation will depend on different
resources are urgently needed to guarantee
                                                                    factors such as the climate and the soil type, thus
sustainable production.
                                                                    there are zones of degradation as reported for
                                                                    water erosion (Table 15 and Figure 26).



                                                                                                                                             33
                         Table 14: Type of soil degradation affecting more than 1 percent of total area

                                                                                                      Share of the degradation level
                                                                                                             (% of total area)
Types of soil degradation
                                                                                       low              medium           strong            total

Loss of humus and nutrient matter                                                      12                  30              1                43

Soil compaction                                                                        10                  28              1                39

Sealing and soil crust formation                                                       12                  25              1                38

Water erosion                                                                           3                  13              1                17

Acidification                                                                           5                  9               0                14

Water excess                                                                            6                  6               2                14

Contamination by radio nuclides                                                         5                  6              0.1              11.1

Wind erosion affecting the top soil                                                     1                  9               1                11

Pollution by pesticides and other organic contaminants                                  2                  7              0.3              9.3

Contamination with heavy metals                                                        0.5                 7              0.5               8

Salinization, alkalization                                                              1                  3              0.1              4.1

Gully erosion (ravines formation)                                                       0                  1               2                3

Side effects of water erosion (siltation of reservoirs)                                 1                  1               1                3

                         Source: Morozov, 2007.

                         Table 15: Soil cover degradation in agricultural land by AEZ

                                  Area                                Eroded land
                                                                                                                                       Other
                                                                                                                Acid   Salted
Zone                                                                                                                              (water saturation,
                                                                                                                land    land
                      thousand ha         %       by wind by water both by wind and water                                          marshes, stony)

Forest                       5 616.6     13.5         4.2          0.9                       -                   5.4    0.5              3.3

Forest-Steppe            16 854.4        40.6          7.6        11.6                  0.1                     17.8    2.9              4.0

Steppe                   18 993.5        45.8        34.9        19.5                   4.9                      2.6    8.1              2.8

Total                    41 464.5        100         46.7        32.0                   5.0                     25.8    11.5            10.2

                         Source: Balayev, 2013.


                         According to a 2007 Country Review from                                 named after O.N. Sokolovskyj, the predominant
                         the World Bank52 “the impact of the Ukrainian                           reasons causing soil degradation are:
                         agricultural production system on the
                         environment is estimated to cause 35-40 percent                         •	 increasing economic pressure on soils for
                         of the total environmental degradation […]                                 productivity;
                         The main environmental problems caused
                                                                                                 •	 lower level of conservation areas (nature
                         by agriculture in Ukraine include soil erosion
                                                                                                    reserves and other protected areas for
                         and degradation, loss of biodiversity, water
                                                                                                    recreational, health and historical-cultural
                         contamination (both surface and groundwater),
                                                                                                    purposes);
                         mismanaged agricultural waste, soil
                                                                                                 •	 absence of strong adequate state, regional
                         contamination, and inadequate storage of
                                                                                                    and local programmes; and
                                            ”
                         obsolete pesticides.
                                                                                                 •	 insufficient level of the legislative protection
                         According to Dr Balyuk, Head of NSC Institute                              of soils.
                         for Soil Sciences and Agrochemistry Research,


                         52	 “Integrating Environment into Agriculture and Forestry:
                             Progress and Prospects in Eastern Europe and Central
                             Asia”. Volume II - Ukraine. www.worldbank.org/eca/
                             environmentintegration.

34
                                                                       Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience


Figure 26: Map of soil degradation in Ukraine




Source: Balayev, 2013.



Climate change impact                              Their results suggested that soil organic carbon
                                                   will be lost under all climate scenarios. However,
Smith and his colleagues (Smith et al., 2007)
                                                   they also showed that optimal management
estimated the soil organic carbon status under
                                                   will be able to reduce this loss of SOC by up to
different climate change scenarios from the IPCC
                                                   44 percent compared with usual management
and the climate model HadCM3 from the Hadley
                                                   practices.
Center.




                                                                                                                            35
     Annex 2 - Erosion of Ukrainian soils


     Figure 27: Ukraine: soil erosion is visible from satellites




     Source: Google Earth © (Obtained 17 June 2013).


     Soil erosion is the most important form of soil               at different levels of severity (Figure 28), and an
     degradation in Ukraine. Erosion can be caused by              additional 40 percent is prone to wind and water
     wind or water. Both forms occur in Ukraine, and               erosion. A 1996 study by the State Committee
     sometimes the combination of both. Erosion has                of Land Resources reported that 13.2 million ha
     associated negative impacts at field and farm level,          were exposed to water erosion, and 1.7 million ha
     such as decrease of soil fertility and decrease of            were exposed to wind erosion54. It was estimated
     crop yields, but also at the landscape scale:                 that these figures would increase by about
                                                                   60 000-80 000 ha per year. At this rate erosion
     •	 decrease in water quality from nutrient                    would affect about 14 to 14.5 million ha in 2013.
         leaching;                                                 Erosion is exacerbated by the recent significant
     •	 siltation of rivers and reservoirs; and                    decrease in the application of mineral and organic
                                                                   fertilizers, which has caused a sharp decline in
     •	 loss of rural income.
                                                                   soil humus content, as reported in Annex 2.

     In the past, Ukraine was considered the granary
                                                                   The map above represents the percentage
     of the former Soviet Union. However, high
                                                                   of arable land affected by erosion, but not
     agricultural production, mostly in an intensive
                                                                   its severity level. Some authors proposed
     manner, caused serious erosion. According to
                                                                   an evaluation of the erosion level in terms of
     FAO53, annual soil losses during that period were
                                                                   intensity. For instance the paper by Belolipskii
     as much as 600 million tonnes, including 20-
     30 million tonnes of humus, and cost the country
     more than USD 1.6 billion annually. An estimated
     40 percent of the country territory is now eroded

                                                                   54	 World Bank. 2007  . Integrating Environment into Agriculture
     53	 Bogovin A.V. 2006. Country Pasture/Forage Resource            and Forestry Progress and Prospects in Eastern Europe and
                          ” FAO. http://www.fao.org/ag/agp/agpc/
         Profiles: Ukraine.                                            Central Asia. Volume II. Ukraine, Country Review. 22 pp.
         doc/counprof/ukraine/ukraine.htm.                             www.worldbank.org/eca/environmentintegration.

36
                                                                                       Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 28: Ukraine: erosion map




Source: Bulygin, 2006.

Figure 29: Ukraine: arable land annual soil loss during the last 30 years




Source: Bulygin, 2006.


and Bulygin55 divides the Ukrainian steppe                       to 23.9 million tonnes of humus, 964 thousand
into zones according to the potential runoff                     tonnes of nitrogen, 676 thousand tonnes of
manifestation degree, i.e. the potential severity                phosphorus and 9.7 million tonnes of potassium.
level (see Figure 29).                                           But Bulygin (2006) also recognized that the
                                                                 method used to derive the map in Figure 29,
Bulygin (2006) reported that according to                        might not be appropriate for the Carpathian and
data from the Ministry of Agriculture, about                     Crimean mountains. The yearly soil loss averages
500 million tonnes of soil on average are lost
                                                                 8-30 tonnes per hectare depending on the
from Ukrainian arable land yearly, corresponding
                                                                 region. The same publication also reported that
                                                                 “According to the data obtained from the Institute

55	 Belolipskii V.A., Bulygin S.Y. 2009. An Ecological and
                                                                 of Soil Conservation (Lugansk), the shortfall of
    Hydrological Analysis of Soil- and Water-Protective          grain production resulting from soil degradation is
    Agrolandscapes in Ukraine. Eurasian Soil Science, Vol. 42,
    No. 6, pp. 682-692. DOI: 10.1134/S1064229309060143.                            .
                                                                 8.6 million tonnes”

                                                                                                                                            37
                        Table 16: Soil properties according to erosion levels and depths
                      pH                                                         Clay             Clay                            Nitr.                      C:N
Erosion severity              Carbonate          Humus     Sand       Silt                                       N     Min N                      Urease
                     (H2O)                                                     (USDA)            (FSU)                            Ener.                      ratio
E0 (none)              7.9           7.7         2.38        7.2      51.4          41.4         56.4       0.17        20.7      13.7             126       7.67

E1 (mild)            8.51        10.0             1.73      11.5      66.8          21.8         34.7       0.13        16.1         9.5           135       6.78

E2 (moderate)        8.66        13.8             1.03      5.6       66.1          28.4         47.9           0.11    10.3         6.2            96       4.72

Mean                 8.36        10.5             1.71      8.1       61.4          30.5         46.3       0.14        15.7         9.8           119       6.39

LSD* (Erosion)       0.29            2.7         0.33       4.3        5.8           3.3          2.3       0.02         3.6         2.7            33       1.14

                        Mean soil properties for different erosion severities and different depths.
                        *LSD = Least significant Difference, it is the minimum difference to have a statistically significant difference between two values.

                        Quantities are in % mg/kg or mg NO3/kg.


                        Table 17: Yields according to various treatments

Treatment                                                                                         Yield (tonnes/ha) two year average

                                                                                      Barley                                         Wheat

Soil without erosion no fertilizer                                                     2.75                                            4.43

Soil with moderate erosion no fertilizer                                               2.06                                            3.38

Soil with moderate erosion plus NPK-fertilizer                                         2.73                                            4.31

                        Source: Kharytonov et al., 2004.


                        Table 18: Characteristics of annual dust storms by AEZ

Zone                          Number of days             Duration hours                                         Wind velocity (m/s)

                                                                              2-4          5-7      8-10    11-13      14-16   17-19    20-22 23-25 26-28

Forest                                     1.1                 2.7            13           24        25          14     11       8            5          -       -

Forest-Steppe                              1.1                 2.6            15           26        22          15      9       9            4          -       -

North and Central Steppe                   2.9                 8.5              8          15        21          12     17      14         10            2      1

South Steppe                               5.3                17.5              6          14        20          14     17      17            9          2      1

                        Source: Dolgilevich, 1997.

                        Considering a soil bulk density of 1 tonne per m3,                        30-50 percent lower in a moderately eroded plot
                        a loss of 10 tonnes of soil per ha corresponds                            compared with a control plot without erosion.
                        to a loss of 1 mm of the top soil layer, which
                        mostly contains C-rich soil organic matter.                               The authors also showed that even adding a
                        Taking a 5 percent content of soil carbon, a                              complete and efficient fertilizer (NPK 60 kg per
                        loss of 10 tonnes of soil corresponds to a loss                           ha in the form of nitrophoska [N17-P17-K17] a
                        of 0.5 tonnes of C per ha, an important figure                            synthetic polymer-based fertilizer) the yield is
                        compared with the existing potential soil C                               still slightly below the non-eroded soil without
                        sequestration levels (See Annex 7).                                       fertilizer.


                        A study from Kharytonov et al.56 in the
                        Dnepropetrovsk district showed that eroded soils
                        have significantly lower humus and clay contents,
                        and higher pH and carbonates values (Table 16).
                        They also reported that soil macro and micro-
                        nutrients (Manganese, Zinc, and Copper) were


                        56	 Kharytonov M., Bagorka M., Gibson P     .T. 2004. Erosion
                            effects in the central steppe Chernozem soils of Ukraine. I.
                            Soil properties. Agricultura, 3, 12-18.

38
                                                                                      Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 19: Effects of tillage levels on soil losses
(Kilograms/m2/year; Average 2011-2012)

 Ploughing                                                                                    6

 Mini-till                                                                                   4.5

 No-till                                                                                      3

Source: In-field personal communication (SCAI of Donetsk). May, 2013.


Wind erosion                                                      Addressing erosion
Dolgilevich57 studied the extent and severity of                  Land resource management is the best cost-
wind erosion in Ukraine using information about                   effective way to address erosion. Conservation
dust storms over a forty year period including                    agriculture practices are often cited by
the number, duration and the wind velocity                        farmers and soil scientists as having several
of storms at all meteorological stations of the                   positive outcomes for reducing risks from
Ukraine. Its analysis showed that wind erosion                    drought. These include: reducing soil erosion;
takes place in all AEZ. The climatic parameters of                enhancing moisture retention; and depending
wind erosion were determined as follows: The                      on the soil texture, minimizing soil compaction.
mean number of days with dust storms reaches                      Conservation agriculture is also credited with
3-5 days in the Steppe zone and 1 day per year                    limiting damage from runoff and erosion during
in the Forest zone. The duration of dust storms                   flooding. Some producers are also enhancing the
is 8-17 and 3 hours per year. Wind velocity                       establishment of shelterbelts mostly to address
during dust storms reaches 21 and 15 m.s             -1
                                                                  wind erosion. Shelterbelts also provide protection
respectively (Table 18). The author also reported                 from heat and wind for livestock. Another way to
that Chernozems are most susceptible to wind                      address wind erosion is to maintain the soil as
erosion and are severely degraded.                                moist as possible. One solution in a country with
                                                                  important snow precipitation is to cut stubble at
                                                                  different heights to trap snow on field surfaces
                                                                  and so enhance spring moisture levels in the
                                                                  soil. The stubble also helps maintain the snow in
                                                                  place during the windy periods.




57	 Dolgilevich M.J. 1997. Extent and Severity of Wind Erosion
    in the Ukraine. Proceeding of the workshop “Wind Erosion:
    An International Symposium/Workshop”   . http://www.weru.
    ksu.edu/symposium/proceedings/dolgilev.pdf.

                                                                                                                                           39
     Annex 3 - Land, cropping structure, and yields


     Figure 30: Agricultural land structure in Ukraine, million ha
                            By use                                                        By ownership 59
                       0.9 0.3
                       2% 1%

                                                                                                 1.0
                      2.4                                                                5.0                                  State
                                                      Arable lands                               2%
                      6%                                                                 12%                                  enterprises

              5.5                                     Pastures
                                                                                                                              Private
              13%                                     Hayland                                                                 enterprises
                        Total area:                   Perennial                                                               Individuls
                           41.5                       planting
                                                                               15.8                             19.7
                        million ha                                                                                            Other
                                                      Fallow                   38%                              48%
                                                                                                                              landusers
                                                      abandon land
                                      32.5
                                      78%




     Source: MAFP                                           .
                 , “Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012”


     Table 20: Agricultural lands by ownership in 2012

                                                                  Type of ownership
                                                                                                                                Total
                                               Enterprises            Rural households              Others

      Units                                       47 652                 5 100 000                      -                          -

      Agricultural land, million ha                20.7                     15.8                       5.0                       41.5

      Arable land, million ha                      19.4                     11.6                       1.5                      32.5

     Source: MAFP, Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012.


     Role of agriculture in the national                                  land (41.5 million ha). Over 78 percent of this
     economy                                                              (32.5 million ha) is arable land (see Figure 30).

     With an agricultural GDP of 111.7 billion UAH58
                                                                          As shown by Table 20, 36.5 million ha (88 percent
     in 2012, agriculture contributed 7.93 percent to
                                                                          of total agricultural land) are owned by
     the Ukrainian GDP. Sixty seven percent of this
                                                                          enterprises (state and private, agricultural and
     was from crop production: the main agricultural
                                                                          farm enterprises) and rural households. By the
     sub-sector. Livestock production contributed the
                                                                          end of 2012, about 48 000 enterprises owned
     remaining 33 percent.
                                                                          50 percent of all agricultural land and 60 percent
                                                                          of all Ukrainian arable land.
     Land distribution by use, enterprise,
     region and agroclimatic zone
     According to the most recent data provided
     by MAPFU, at the end of 2012, 69 percent of
                                                                          59	 According to the Ukrainian State Statistics Service: An
     the entire Ukrainian territory was agricultural                          agricultural enterprise (state or private) is defined as
                                                                              in-dependent business entities which has legal person’s
                                                                              right and carries out productive activity on Agriculture. The
                                                                              structure of private agricultural enterprises includes private
                                                                              farms also. Private farm is a form of private business of
                                                                              citizens with legal person’s right, who has expressed the
                                                                              wish to produce commodity production, to process and sell
                                                                              it with purpose to gain a profit. Citizens carry out their activity
     58	 UAH (Ukrainian Hiryvnia); equal to about USD 13.7 billion.           on land lots, which were placed at their disposal for farming.

40
                                                                                                    Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 31: Crop land structure

                0%              20%                      40%                      60%                       80%                  100%



  2000                                50,2                                  8,4          15,4                       26




  2012                                   55,4                                                28,4                        9     7,2



                              Cereals, total         Industrial crops         Fodder crops            Potato and veg.


Source: MAFP, Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012.


Figure 32: Historical trends of grains, 1990-2011




                                                                                                  2011/05
              18
                                                                                                             leguminous and others
              16
                                                                                                             spring - rice
              14
                                                                          Corn                               spring - buckwheat
                                                                                             + 112%
              12                                                                                             spring - millet
 million ha




              10                               Spring barley                                                 spring - maize for grain
                                                                                                - 36%
               8                                                                                              spring - oats
                                                                        Winter barley        + 150%
                                                                                                             spring - barley
               6
                                                                                                             spring - wheat
               4
                                      Winter wheat                                               + 5%        winter - barley
               2
                                                                                                             winter - rye
               0                                                                                             winter - wheat
                1990   1995    2000          2005       2008      2009        2010       2011


Source: UkrStat.


The regional distribution of all the land owned                          areas under spring barley decreased significantly
by enterprises and rural households in 2011 is                           while farmers increased the areas under winter
provided below. The five regions with the largest                        barley and corn by 150 percent and 112 percent
areas of arable land are Dnipropetrovsk, Odessa,                         respectively.
Zaporizhia, Kharkiv and Kirovograd provinces. All
five regions are situated in the Steppe AEZ. The                         Despite the stable crop area, grain output in
Steppe zone covers 19 million ha of Ukrainian                            Ukraine has been unstable due to high yield
agricultural land, the Forest-Steppe zone                                variability. In the recent years, grain production
16.9 million ha and the Forest zone 5.6 million ha.                      ranged from slightly less than 40 million tonnes
                                                                         in 2010 to over 55 million tonnes in 2011. In 2012,
                                                                         Ukraine reported a harvest of 46.2 million tonnes
Crop production
                                                                         of grain crops. In the last five years (2008-12),
According to MAPFU, in 2012 the total crop                               average production in the Steppe region has been
area in Ukraine was 27.8 million ha. As shown                            10 million tonnes of wheat and 3 million tonnes
by Figure 31, over 55 percent was dedicated to                           of corn; and 8 million tonnes of wheat and
cereal60 production.                                                     9.5 million tonnes in the Forest-Steppe region.

The total area under cereals has remained stable                         After the stagnation in the early 1990s, the
since 2007 at around 15 million ha. From 2005 to                         expansion of the oilseeds area (see Figure 35)
2011, the crop structure changed significantly. If                       has been particularly impressive, especially the
the acreage of winter wheat remained stable, the                         sunflower seed area. Farmers decreased the area
                                                                         under sugar beets because of the loss of sugar
                                                                         export markets.
60	 Wheat, barley, oats, corn, rye, minor cereals and pulses.

                                                                                                                                                         41
     Figure 33: Production of main grain crops, 1990-2011

                        60


                        50


                        40
      million tonnes



                        30


                        20


                        10


                            0
                                      1990         1995          2000            2005          2008          2009          2010      2011

                                                            Other grain and leguminous crops           Wheat        Corn


     Source: UkrStat.

     Figure 34: Production of industrial crops

                        8
                                                                                                                                  flax fibre
                        7                                                                                                +320%
                                                                                                        Rape                      rape
                        6                                                                                                +159%
                                                                                                         Soya                     soya

                        5                                                                                                         sunflower
      million ha




                        4                                                                                                         sugar beet (factory)
                                                                                                                         +27%
                        3
                                                                                          Sunflower
                        2
                                                                                                                                   20
                        1                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                         /0
                                    Sugar beet                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                         -18%
                        0
                                1            2          3             4           5        6             7           8

     Source: UkrStat.

     Figure 35: Production of main oilseed crops, 1990-2011

                       14

                       12

                       10
      million tonnes




                        8

                        6

                        4

                        2

                        0
                                    1990         1995          2000            2005       2008           2009            2010     2011

                                                                          Sunflower     Soya          Rapeseed


     Source: UkrStat.




42
                                                                                           Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 36: Profitability levels of main crops in Ukraine in 2012

                                                                                                                  46%




                                                                                        23%
                                                                22%
                                     20%

            12%




           Wheat                     Corn                Average crop                   Soya                  Sunflower
                                                          production

                    Grain crops                                  -                             Industrial crops

                                                Profitability level of main crops

Source: UkrStat.


According to MAPFU61, agronomic                                      Forest-Steppe zones; corn dominates the Forest-
sustainability of oilseed production in Ukraine                      Steppe zone while barley is mainly sown in the
requires sunflower area to decrease to                               Forest and northern Forest-Steppe zones.
3-3.5 million ha and be in line with crop rotation
recommendations provided by Resolution N                             Yields
164 of 11 February 2010 (see below); areas                           Potential and actual yields of crops are very
under soya and rape seed can be considered as                        different by region (corn in particular). The most
alternative sequences.                                               productive provinces are concentrated in the
                                                                     central part of Ukraine – the Forest-Steppe
Compared with 2005, the output of main                               zone. Wheat yields are rather similar across the
industrial crops more than doubled in 2011. In                       country with Vinnytsia, Cherkasy, Khmenytskyi
2012 Ukraine produced 8.4 million tonnes of
                                                                     and Poltava provinces performing slightly better
sunflower seed. In the last five years (2008-12),
                                                                     than others. Corn yields are lower in the eastern
the average sunflower seed production in the
                                                                     Steppe zone (Zaporizhia, Donetsk and Luhanska
Steppe region was 5 million tonnes, while that of
                                                                     provinces) and are particularly high in the central
the Forest-Steppe region was 2 million tonnes.
                                                                     Forest-Steppe zone. Sunflower performs well in
                                                                     the central east Forest-Steppe zone.
This result was a result of increasing cropped area
and higher yields. In all cases, farmers’ perception
                                                                     Yield volatility
of the market appears to have led to their choice
                                                                     Significant regional differences also exist in the
of a continued expansion of sunflower output.
                                                                     volatility of crop yields. As visible from Table 21,
This behaviour can be explained by the fact
                                                                     lower than average wheat yield volatility was
that industrial crops (sunflower in particular) are
characterized by higher levels of profitability (see                 observed in Forest-Steppe and Forest zones

official statistics in Figure 36).                                   and in Mikolaiv province. The Steppe zone is
                                                                     usually characterized by high volatility, particularly
Crop production: regional distribution                               Kharkivska province. Corn yields were also more

Crop production varies from region to region                         volatile in another Steppe zone Luhanska province.
reflecting economic and agroclimatic conditions                      Sunflower yields were highly volatile in western
of the area. For instance, milling quality wheat                     regions of Ukraine but were more stable in central
is mainly produced in the Steppe and southern                        and south-eastern regions of the country.


                                                                     High regional yield volatility has not been mitigated
61	 Ukrainian MAFP, Panorama of Ukraine Agrarian Sector 2012.        at national level. In the period from 2000 to

                                                                                                                                                43
                     Table 21: Ukraine: volatility of yield of wheat and corn by region, tonnes per ha, 2008-2011

                                                               Wheat                                       Corn
Agro-climatic zone   Province
                                           Min         Max            Av    StDev/Av    Min         Max           Av     StDev/Av

                     Luhanska               2.4         3.8           2.8     25%        1.7        3.9           2.5      40%

                     Crimea                 2.1         3.3           2.6     21%        7.7        8.8           8.1          6%

                     Hersonska              2.4         3.5           2.9     19%        5.2         6            5.5          6%

                     Dnipropetrovska        2.9         3.8           3.2     14%         3         4.5           3.5      19%

Steppe               Zaporizka              2.6         3.5            3      13%        2.6        3.1           2.9          8%

                     Kirovogradska           3          3.9           3.4     12%        4.7        6.6           5.3      16%

                     Donetsk                2.9         3.6           3.2     11%        2.1        3.8           2.9      23%

                     Odesska                2.6         3.3            3      11%        2.7        4.1           3.5      19%

                     Mikolaïvska            2.9         3.1            3       4%        2.9        4.7           3.9      20%

                     Harkivska              2.1         4.6           3.4     31%        2.6        5.7           3.9      33%

                     Kyivska                2.5          4            3.2     23%        5.3         8            6.3      20%

                     Sumy                   2.2         3.9           3.1     23%        3.5        6.4           5        24%

                     Poltavska              2.6         4.3           3.5     20%        4.4         7.9          6        24%

Forest-Steppe        Ternopilska            2.5         3.8           3.3     17%        5.3        6.3           5.6          9%

                     Hmelnickiy             2.9         4.1           3.5     15%        5.3        6.3           5.9          7%

                     Vinnitska              3.3         4.5            4      13%        5.5         7.5          6.3      14%

                     Lvivska                2.5         3.5           3.1     13%        5.2        6.4           5.8      10%

                     Cherkaska              3.5         4.7           4.2     13%        5.3        9.1           6.8      25%

                     Chernigivska           2.2         3.3           2.9     20%         4         6.5           5        21%

                     Zhytomyrska            2.5         3.4           3.1     13%        5.1         7.2          6.4      15%
Forest
                     Rivnenska              2.9         3.7           3.2     10%        4.7        5.7           5            9%

                     Volinskiy              2.6         3.2           2.9     10%         6          7.1          6.3          8%

                     Chernivetska           2.7         3.8           3.3     15%        4.8        5.8           5.2          9%

Mountains            Zakarpatska            2.1         3.1           2.8     16%        4.5        4.8           4.7          2%

                     Ivano-Frankivska       2.5         3.7           3.1     16%        4.6        5.8           5        11%

                     Source: Own calculations based on 2011 UkrStat data.


                     2012, corn yields in Ukraine fluctuated from 3 to          of corn and 17 million tonnes of wheat per year.
                     6.4 tonnes/Ha with an average yield of 4.2 tonnes/         In the same period, the minimum and maximum
                     ha and wheat yields from 1.5 to 3.7 tonnes/ha with         annual production levels of corn varied from
                     an average yield of 2.8 tonnes/ha.                         28 percent below average to 54 percent above
                                                                                it and wheat production varied from 48 percent
                     In order to quantitatively assess the volatility of        below average to 30 percent above it.
                     yields we calculated their Standard Deviation. The
                     charts below show the volatility of yields: Ukraine        Crop calendar and cropping patterns
                     is among the top three countries for high yield            Winter wheat, corn, sunflower and spring barley
                     volatility.                                                (main crops in Ukraine) are planted and harvested
                                                                                according to the calendar below.
                     The persisting high volatility in yields of the main
                     cereal crops in Ukraine negatively impacts national        Winter wheat production is mostly concentrated
                     output levels. During the period from 2000 to 2012         in the central and south-central Ukraine, with the
                     Ukraine produced on average 9.7 million tonnes             hard red winter wheat type the most cultivated.

44
                                                                                                  Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



 Figure 37: World: volatility of wheat and corn yields
 (Deviation from average 1987-2012)
                           Wheat yield                                                          Corn yield
                      Wheat yield (average=1, 1987/2013)                                  Corn yield (average=1, 1987/2013)
 1,8                                                               1,8
 1,6                                                               1,6
 1,4                                                               1,4
 1,2                                                               1,2
  1                                                                 1
 0,8                                                               0,8
 0,6                                                               0,6
 0,4                                                               0,4
 0,2                                                               0,2
  0                                                                 0
      01

            02

                   03 03

                   04 4

                   05 5

                   06 6

                   07 7

                   08 8

                   09 9

                   10 0

                   11 1

                   12 2
                           3




                                                                        01

                                                                              02
                                                                                   03

                                                                                            04 04

                                                                                            05 5
                                                                                            06 6
                                                                                            07 7

                                                                                            08 8
                                                                                            09 9

                                                                                            10 0
                                                                                            11 1

                                                                                            12 2
                                                                                                    3
                 20 200

                 20 200

                 20 200

                 20 200

                 20 00

                 20 200

                 20 201

                 20 201

                 20 201
                        01




                                                                                          20 200
                                                                                          20 200
                                                                                          20 00

                                                                                          20 200
                                                                                          20 200

                                                                                          20 201
                                                                                          20 201

                                                                                          20 201
                                                                                                 01
    0

           0

                  0




                                                                      0

                                                                             0
                                                                                    0

                                                                                           0
 /2

        /2

               /2




                     /2




                     /2




                                                                   /2

                                                                          /2
                                                                                 /2

                                                                                        /2




                                                                                              /2




                                                                                              /2
                     /

                     /

                     /

                     /



                     /

                     /

                     /

                     /
00

       01

            02




                                                                                              /

                                                                                              /


                                                                                              /

                                                                                              /
                                                                                              /

                                                                                              /
                                                                                              /
                                                                   00

                                                                         01
                                                                              02

                                                                                    03
20

     20

           20

                 20




                                                               20

                                                                     20
                                                                             20

                                                                                   20
                                                                                         20
        Argentina               Australia          Canada                Argentina                   Australia          Canada
        European Union          Former             Kazakhstan            European Union              Former             Kazakhstan
        Russian                 Soviet Union       United States         Russian                     Soviet Union       United States
        Federation              Ukraine                                  Federation                  Ukraine
        France*                 Turkey                                   France*                     Turkey


  Source: Own calculations based on PSD USDA..


 Figure 38: Ukraine: calendar of main crops




  Source: USDA.


 Sunflower, the principal Ukraine oilseed crop,                    specialists see crop rotation as the best way - or
 has become one of the most profitable crops                       the only way - to control disease in sunflower
 due to a combination of high price, a relatively                  fields); (ii) depletion of soil fertility, for the deep
 low production cost. Unfortunately, this results                  rooting system that extracts higher amounts
 in frequent violations of crop rotation schemes                   of nutrients from the soil than other crops in

 recommended by agricultural officials.                            the rotation; (iii) depletion of soil moisture; the
                                                                   deeper sunflower taproot utilizes water that can
 The official recommended frequency of sunflower                   otherwise constitute a reserve, considering the

 in crop rotation is once every seven years                        frequent occurrence of droughts. According to
                                                                   recommendations62 sunflower should occupy the
 because of phytosanitary conditions and the
                                                                   last place in the rotation prior to the fallow year, in
 nutrient balance of soils. The one in seven years
                                                                   order to restock soil moisture.
 frequency is recommended for the prevention
 of: (i) soil-borne fungal diseases (with most farms
 facing financial constraints that limit their access              62	 Resolution of February 11, 2010 N 164 On approval of
                                                                       optimal ratio of crops in crop rotations in different natural
 to fungicides and disease-resistant hybrids,                          and agricultural zones.

                                                                                                                                                       45
                       Table 22: Crop rotation recommendations

                                                                          Structure of sown areas (in percentage)

     Natural and agricultural region                                                           Potatoes,
                                                            Industrial crops                                              Forage crops              Fallow
          grains and legumes                                                               vegetables, melons

                                                                          Incl.:                                                       Incl.:
                                             All     All                                              All                 All
                                                                  rape       sunflower                                               grasses

Polissya (Forest)                       35-80       3-25          0,5-4             0.5              8-25               20-60          5-20

Forest-Steppe                           25-95       5-30           3-5              5-9              3-5                10-75         10-50

Northern Steppe                         45-80       10-30          10               10            Up to 20              10-60         10-16             5-14

Southern Steppe including irrigated     40-82       5-35          5-10             12-15          Up to 20            Up to 60       Up to 25       18-20

Pre-Carpathians                         25-60       5-10           5-7                               8-20               25-60         10-40
Allowable frequencies of growing crops in a same field are:
•	 winter rye and barley, spring barley, oats, buckwheat - not less than one year;
•	 winter wheat, potatoes, millet - not less than two years;
•	 corn in the rotation or temporarily withdrawn from the rotation field - two/three years;
•	 perennial legume grasses, legumes (except lupine), sugar and fodder beets, winter rape and spring - not less than three years;
•	 flax - not less than five years;
•	 lupine, cabbage - not less than six years;
•	 sunflower - not less than seven years;
•	 medicinal plants (depending on the biological properties) - one to ten years.
                       Source: Resolution of February 11, 2010 N 164 on approval of optimal ratio of crops in crop rotations in different natural and
                       agricultural zones.


                       Barley production mostly consist of spring-                           •	 winter wheat > 2. corn (or barley) > 3.
                       sown barley (approximately 90 percent of total                             sunflower (or winter wheat) > 4. soybean (or
                       barley production), The area sown with spring                              mustard, or sorghum);
                       barley typically fluctuates in response to the                        •	 pulses (e.g. chick pea) > 2. winter wheat > 3.
                       level of winter wheat that is sown in the autumn                           sunflower > 4. sorghum (commercial crops
                       and the amount of wheat winterkill; spring                                 rotation);
                       reseeding of damaged or destroyed winter crop
                                                                                             •	 alfalfa > 2. alfalfa > 3. alfalfa > 4.Corn silage
                       fields is common. Malting barley production
                                                                                                  > 5. winter wheat or pulses/grass in dry year
                       has significantly increased as a result of higher
                                                                                                  (fodder crops rotation).
                       demand from the brewing industry and the import
                       demand of high-quality planting seed from the
                                                                                             Despite official recommendations provided by
                       Czech Republic, Slovakia, Germany, and France.
                                                                                             the “Resolution of February 11, 2010 N 164 On
                                                                                             approval of optimal ratio of crops in crop rotations
                       The sown area of maize has progressively
                                                                                             in different natural and agricultural zones” (see
                       increased, becoming the third most important
                                                                                             Table 22), establishing a clear frequency of crops
                       grain crop. It is mainly planted in eastern and
                                                                                             useful to preserve soil fertility and to better
                       southern Ukraine, excluding some extreme
                                                                                             manage soil-borne diseases, the frequency of
                       southern provinces with insufficient rainfall to
                                                                                             crops such as sunflower or a few grain crops in
                       support its cultivation.
                                                                                             the same field has increased.

                       After the liberalization of Ukrainian agriculture,
                       farmers cropping patterns have changed and are
                       now more market-oriented, influenced by the
                       profitability levels characteristic of single crops.


                       Based on information collected during our field
                       visit, among the most common crop rotation
                       schemes in the Steppe zone are the following:

46
                                                                  Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




Annex 4 - Climate change in Ukraine


Main climatic features of Ukraine                                  Figure 39 depicts the agrometeorological zones
                                                                   in Ukraine.
Ukraine is situated on the southwest of the
Eastern European plain. Almost all of Ukraine is
within the temperate zone with a moderately                        Climate change trends
continental climate. The southern coastal region                   The above indications on productive moisture
of Crimea has sub-tropical features. The climate                   are very relevant when looked at from a climate
is generally favourable for most of the important                  change perspective. According to a study of
crops and in some areas of the country two                         climate change impact on the forest ecosystem65,
harvests are possible.                                             a temperature increase is forecasted for all
                                                                   seasons of the year on the premise of doubled
Total annual solar radiation varies from 96 to 125                 CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. Thus,
kcal/cm2. The average annual air temperature                       according to scenarios developed on the basis
increases from 5-6ºC in the northeast up to 9-11ºC                 of the Canadian Climate Centre Model (CCCM)
in the southwest. Absolute values of temperature:                  and the Goddard Institute for Space Studies
minimum -34 to -37ºC of frost, maximum +36 to                      (GISS) model simulations, the air temperature
+38ºC above zero.63 On average, 300-700 mm                         will increase most significantly in winter, and
of precipitation falls annually on flat areas. The                 according to the GFDL model and United
distribution of rainfall in Ukraine shows a decrease               Kingdom Meteorological Office model, it will
from north and north-west to south and south-east.                 increase in the spring. According to the last two
                                                                   scenarios, the warming in Ukraine will increase
The three rain zones are64:
                                                                   from south to north and will be the greatest
•	 zone of sufficient rainfall, where precipitation                in the north, in the region of the Forest AEZ
    is most important. This zone is the Ukrainian                  during the winter and spring seasons. Under
    Carpathian Mountains, as well as the West                      all the scenarios, the amount of precipitation
    and Southwest of Ukraine. In the Ukrainian                     will increase, and during certain seasons
    Carpathians rainfall exceeds 1 000 mm per                      this increase could exceed the current level
    year, but in parts of the mountains it reaches                 by 20 percent. However, all studies predict
    1 500 mm;                                                      increased precipitation in all areas of the country.
                                                                   In addition, these are not necessarily tied in a
•	 zone of unstable rainfall. This is the south-
                                                                   positively correlated manner with the crop cycles.
    eastern and the central part of Ukraine with
                                                                   Other studies66 have noted that a temperature
    annual rainfall between 500-600 mm. In this
                                                                   increase of only 1°C would result in a 160 km
    zone dry years are likely, particularly in the
                                                                   shift in the latitudinal borders of the natural
    centre; and
•	 zone of the insufficient rainfall with high
    probability of dry years and occurrences                       65	 Igor Fedorovich Buksha. 2010: Study of climate change
                                                                       impact on forest ecosystems, and the development of
    of droughts. This includes the eastern and                         adaptation strategies in forestry, in: Forests and Climate
    southern part of the country. Here precipitation                   Change in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. Working Paper n.
                                                                       8, FAO. 2010. The climate change forecast for the conditions
    is less than 400 - 500 mm per year, but near                       of Ukraine was made using four models: CCCM (sensitivity
                                                                       to doubled atmospheric CO2 concentration = 3.5°C), GFDL
    the sea coast even less than 400 mm.                               (sensitivity to doubled atmospheric CO2 concentration
                                                                       = 4.0°C), GISS (sensitivity to doubled atmospheric
                                                                       CO2concentration = 4.2°C), and UKMO (sensitivity to
63	 Data from the Ukrainian Agrometereological Centre (www.            doubled atmospheric CO2 concentration = 3.5°C).
    meteo.gov.ua).                                                 66	 Didukh, Y. 2009. Ecological Aspects of Global Climate
64	 Ukrainian Committee - International Commission on                  Change: Reasons, Consequences, Actions. pp. 34-44, in:
    Irrigation and Drainage; “Irrigation management transfer in        Report of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine,
    European countries of transition”  , March 2005.                   2009, no. 2.

                                                                                                                                47
     Figure 39: Agrometeorological map of Ukraine




     Source: Adapted from Ukrainian Hydrometerological Centre.



     Figure 40: Deviation from norm: average annual air temperature by AEZ (0C), 1989-2012
       2,5


        2


       1,5


        1


       0,5


        0
             1989

                    1990

                           1991

                                  1992

                                          1993

                                                 1994

                                                        1995

                                                               1996

                                                                      1997

                                                                              1998

                                                                                     1999

                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                    2001

                                                                                                           2002

                                                                                                                  2003

                                                                                                                         2004

                                                                                                                                 2005

                                                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                                                2007

                                                                                                                                                       2008

                                                                                                                                                              2009

                                                                                                                                                                     2010

                                                                                                                                                                            2011

                                                                                                                                                                                   2012
      -0,5


        -1
                                         Norm = Steppe - 9.5                 Forest Steppe - 7.8 Polissya - 7.6
      -1,5

                                                        Steppe                         Forest Steppe                            Forest

     Source: Adamenko 2011.


     zones; and that the temperature increase caused                                               1989 average annual temperature in most years
     by warming would result in increased moisture                                                 exceeded the norm in the Polissya/Forest and
     evaporation from the soil surface. In the Forest-                                             Forest-Steppe zones. These AEZ “get warmer”
     Steppe and Steppe zones, climate change is                                                    significantly faster than the Steppe zone. The
     expected to intensify the decomposition of                                                    average country level and the mean temperature
     humus and this will result in less humus content                                              deviation from the norm for various AEZ can be
     in soils and in decreased soil fertility.                                                     seen in Figure 1 and Figure 40.


     According to T.I. Adamenko, Head of                                                           The effect of higher temperatures on the
     Agrometeorology Department, Ukrainian                                                         reduced productive moisture appears to be more
     Hydrometeorological Centre (UHMC), since                                                      significant in the soils of the dry Steppe zone,

48
                                                                                                                                        Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 41: Soil moisture in AEZs, 1961-2011

                                            Supply of Productive Moisture (mm) in a Meter Soil Layer as of May 28
                                                       under Winter Wheat by Continuous Observation
                                                                (Bashtanka, Southern Steppe)

 200
 180
 160
 140
 120
 100
   80
   60
   40
   20
    0
        1961

               1963

                      1965

                             1967

                                     1969

                                            1971

                                                   1973

                                                          1975

                                                                 1977

                                                                        1979

                                                                               1981

                                                                                      1983

                                                                                             1985

                                                                                                    1987

                                                                                                           1989

                                                                                                                  1991

                                                                                                                         1993

                                                                                                                                1995

                                                                                                                                       1997

                                                                                                                                              1999

                                                                                                                                                     2001

                                                                                                                                                            2003

                                                                                                                                                                   2005

                                                                                                                                                                          2007

                                                                                                                                                                                 2009

                                                                                                                                                                                        2011
Source: Adamenko 2011.


which would probably be more detrimental on                                                         temperature reduction; (v) the droughts of
crop performances in this AEZ in the future.                                                        severe-to-exceptional and exceptional severity
                                                                                                    during the growing season normally affect 25-
Scientific papers unanimously stress a                                                              60 percent (up to 80 percent of the major crop
considerable increase in drought areas, their                                                       area) and 5-10 percent (up to 20 percent) of the
frequency, intensity, duration and impact.                                                          entire country and the latest is leading to up to
Such tendencies are generally agreed to have                                                        40 percent of losses in Ukrainian grain production
taken place in the past 30 years (1980-2010)                                                        every three to five years.
of intensive global warming and especially
the last 11 years (2001-2011)67. Adamenko68
                                                                                                    Crop yield dynamics
has also looked at drought monitoring through
satellite-based drought detection techniques69.                                                     The study71 referred to above, analyzed yield
Regional analysis indicate: (i) the drought area                                                    dynamics of the main cereal crops in major
in Ukraine has not experienced any trend after                                                      provinces of all regions of Ukraine during 14 years
2000, although the last 50 years country average                                                    from 1996 to 200972. Both winter (Wheat; Barley;
annual temperature increased by 1.45°C (twice                                                       Rye) and spring crops (Wheat; Barley; Oats) were
the global increase ); (ii) winter temperature
                                70                                                                  examined. As a general trend, cereals show a
increase in Ukraine is higher than the summer                                                       positive yield trend in all AEZ. This increase can
one; (iii) total annual precipitation increased by                                                  be attributed to a number of factors, including
40 mm despite drought intensification due to a                                                      improved rates of mineral fertilizer application,
warmer climate; (iv) strong increase in winter                                                      better crop protection and plant genetics.
temperature is leading to a 10 percent reduction                                                    However, it is clear that yields of all crops and in
of the winterkill area; however, reduced snow                                                       all regions vary greatly due to weather conditions.
depth contributes to an increased vulnerability                                                     As can be seen in Figure 42, yield fluctuations
of winter crops during the period of sharp air                                                      in the Dnipropetrovsk area of the Steppe region
                                                                                                    are strongly marked, and during the years
                                                                                                    characterized by drought conditions (2003/2007)
67	 T.I. Adamenko, et al: Global and Regional Drought Dynamics
    in the Climate Warming Era, in International Journal of                                         there is a drastic reduction of yields.
    Remote Sensing, 2011.
68	 Op. cit. in note n. 6.
69	 Using data obtained from the Advanced Very High
    Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) on NOAA polar orbiting
    satellites. In addition, Vegetation health method is used to
    estimate the entire spectrum of vegetation condition or                                         71	 See note n. 6.
    health from AVHRR-based Vegetation Health (VH) indices.                                         72	 Trend lines were calculated using harmonic weights, yield
70	 The latest available (4th) IPCC report stated that the average                                      deviations from trend lines, trend productivity dynamics
    Earth surface temperature in the past 100 years increased                                           and assessment of climate variability of yields across
    0.74° (Solomon et al, 2007).                                                                        territories of Ukraine.

                                                                                                                                                                                               49
     Figure 42: Crop yield dynamics (Dnipropetrovsk, Steppe), 1996-2009
                                              Winter wheat




                                              Winter barley




                                               Winter rye




                                              Spring wheat




                                               Spring barley




                                                Spring oats




     Source: Adamenko 2011.


50
                                                                                               Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




Table 23: Ukraine: yield coefficients of climate variability, 1996-2009

 Soil climatic zone, Province           Winter wheat           Winter rye        Winter barley       Spring wheat     Spring barley         Oats

                                                                            Polissya

 Volinskiy                                    0.12                 0.14                0.23              0.12              0.12             0.15

 Rivnenska                                    0.14                 0.14                0.19              0.13              0.16             0.20

 Zhytomyrska                                  0.17                 0.13                0.31              0.24              0.15             0.15

 Chernigivska                                 0.19                 0.14                0.14              0.13              0.16             0.14

                                                                          Forest-Steppe

 Lvivska                                      0.10                 0.12                0.13              0.09              0.13             0.10

 Ternopilska                                  0.18                 0.19                0.26              0.15              0.14             0.15

 Hmelnickiy                                   0.21                 0.17                0.18              0.16              0.16             0.14

 Vinnitska                                    0.22                 0.17                0.20              0.21              0.17             0.15

 Kyivska                                      0.21                 0.13                0.20              0.11              0.17             0.14

 Sumy                                         0.25                 0.17                0.35              0.17              0.18             0.19

 Cherkaska                                    0.26                 0.19                0.24              0.19              0.21             0.15

 Poltavska                                    0.31                 0.17                0.29              0.21              0.21             0.16

 Harkivska                                    0.30                0.22                 0.35              0.21              0.27             0.21

                                                                             Steppe

 Kirovogradska                                0.32                0.24                 0.30              0.36              0.31             0.26

 Dnipropetrovska                              0.34                0.26                 0.31              0.28              0.30             0.31

 Donetsk                                      0.28                0.21                 0.30              0.30              0.27             0.22

Luhanska                                      0.32                0.26                 0.30              0.36              0.28             0.25

Odesska                                       0.32                0.25                 0.30              0.30              0.31             0.28

Mikolaïvska                                   0.33                0.27                 0.36              0.36              0.32             0.31

Zaporizka                                     0.27                0.22                 0.31              0.33              0.36             0.27

Hersonska                                     0.29                0.25                 0.32              0.40              0.33             0.31

Crimea                                        0.12                0.17                 0.15              0.26              0.24             0.21

                                                              Zakarpattya and Prykarpattya

Zakarpatska                                   0.34                0.13                 0.14              0.16              0.18             0.12

Ivano-Frankivska                              0.15                 0.11                0.12              0.12              0.11             0.08

Chernivetska                                  0.22                0.20                 0.22              0.22              0.14             0.10

Across Ukraine                                0.22                0.14                 0.13              0.13              0.20             0.13

Note: 0.00-0.20 climate stable yields; 0.21-0.30 moderately stable yields; >0.30 unstable yields

Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                 ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.




                                                                                                                                                    51
     Figure 43: Ukraine: forecast of dates of spring season higher temperatures by zones
     (>5 0C) anticipation, 2030-2040




     Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                      ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
     Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.

     Figure 44: Ukraine: forecast of autumn season higher temperatures by zone and date
     (>5 0C) delay, 2030-2040




     Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                      ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
     Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.




     As shown in the Table 23, crops in the Steppe
     region are those most subjected to climate
     variations. Weather variations can be described
     by the weather coefficient of yield variability Cp,
     which is calculated as follows73:




     73	 Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P ., et al.
         “Assessment of climate change impact on economic
                           , Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.
         sectors of Ukraine”

52
                                                                                           Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 45: Ukraine: forecast of temperatures (>10 0C) duration by zone, 2030-2040




Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                 ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011..

Figure 46: Ukraine: forecast of precipitation with temperatures (>5 0C) by zone, mm, 2030-2040




Figure 47: Ukraine: forecast of precipitation with temperatures (>10 0C) by zone, mm, 2030-2040




Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                 ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.

                                                                                                                                                53
     Figure 48: Ukraine: evaporation scenarios by zone, mm, 2030-2040




     Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                      ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
     Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.


     Forecasts 2030-2040                                               With respect to precipitation, for the period with
                                                                       the temperatures above 5 and 10 °C, it will be
     Regarding climate change scenarios in
                                                                       higher than that of 1991 to 2005. Comparison of
     2030-2040, Adamenko et al74, 75confirm the
                                                                       this previous period with deviations by 2030-2040
     findings of Bukhsa76 (except that the latter
                                                                       has shown that for all seasons the amount will
     reports a precipitation decrease of 180 mm in
                                                                       increase, except in autumn.
     some localities in the south of the country).
     The Adamenko study also discusses about
                                                                       Total evaporation will increase. The lowest
     anticipation by 30-33 days of spring air
                                                                       increase will be in western Polissya – by 10 mm
     temperatures above 50° Cin Forest, Forest-
                                                                       (but in between the two previous observation
     Steppe and northern Steppe AEZs; and by 39-41
                                                                       periods [1961-1990 and 1990-2005] it had already
     days in the southern Steppe.
                                                                       increased by 22 mm). The highest evaporation
                                                                       will occur in eastern Polissya - up to 100 mm,
     Autumn temperature transition in the years 2030-
                                                                       in Western Forest-Steppe and in Southern
     2040 will come later and will be delayed until the
                                                                       Steppe up to 80-90 mm. In Ukraine evaporation
     13th-15th of December in the South, and until the
                                                                       will range from 615 mm in eastern Polissya to
     20th-25th of November in Forest/Polissya region
                                                                       470 mm in Southern Steppe.
     (a 23 day delay in Polissya and a 30 day delay in
     southern Steppe).
                                                                       Crop scenarios
     The changes in duration of the period with the
                                                                       The forecast for the 2030-2040 crop climate
     temperatures above 10 °C are more substantial
                                                                       change scenario is based on a GFDL-30%
     (in periods that are relevant to active vegetation
                                                                       model77. Simulations provide the region-specific
     of agricultural crops): the period increases to
                                                                       agroclimatic indicators for the winter wheat
     215 days in central Polissya; and to 250 days in
     Southern Steppe.
                                                                       77	 The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) is
                                                                           a laboratory in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
                                                                           Administration (NOAA)/Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
                                                                           Research (OAR). GFDL   ’s accomplishments include the
                                                                           development of the first climate models to study global
                                                                           warming, the first comprehensive ocean prediction codes,
     74	 Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P ., et al.
                                                                           and the first dynamical models with significant skill in
         “Assessment of climate change impact on economic
                                                                           hurricane track and intensity predictions. Much current
                           , Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.
         sectors of Ukraine”
                                                                           research within the laboratory is focused around the
     75	 Using Geophysics Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) model           development of Earth System Models for assessment of
         at 30% increase of GHG emissions.                                 natural and human-induced climate change. A 30 percent
     76	 See note n. 3.                                                    model is one that assumes GHG emissions at that level.

54
                                                                                     Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



crop (compared with long-term data) shown                       spring cereals in Ukraine. The observations show
in Table 24. To summarize, the scenario is                      a positive soil moisture trend for the entire period
characterized by higher temperatures at all stages              of observation but with the trend levelling off in
and in particular much warmer at wintering                      the last two decades. Five global climate models
stage (mitigating winterkill effects), and slightly             were used which all show a descending trend
increased precipitation at sowing stage but                     starting from 2000, but differing one from the
substantially reduced rainfall during wintering.                other: from a rough sketch (GFDL) to a decisively
                                                                marked Center for Climate System Research
As a result, Table 25 shows the main climate                    model (CCSR) lowering trend of soil moisture.
change adaptation phenological behaviour for
winter wheat. Compared with long-term data, it is               Finally, a study done by UHMC, the Odessa State
foreseen that the following conditions will occur:              Environmental University and the Moscow Main
•	 delayed sowing dates (by 20-25 days);                        Aviation Meteorological Centre, acknowledged
•	 anticipated vegetation recovery after winter                 that extreme conditions in precipitation have
   dormancy period;                                             been observed in Ukraine during the last 30
•	 crop ripeness is proportionally delayed; and                 years and that the number of abnormally dry
•	 overall plant cycle length is substantially                  and hot years, dry summers and winters have
   unchanged.                                                   increased in some regions. Accordingly, the study
                                                                determines spatiotemporal features of droughts
In terms of crop yield performance, the growth
                                                                in Ukraine during the last 60 years by using
trend reported for the 1996-2009 period appears to
                                                                the Standardized Precipitation Index showing
be confirmed in the 2030-2040 scenario simulation.
                                                                that there is an increasing trend in droughts in
It would appear that mitigation of winterkill due to
                                                                the southern regions during the whole 60 year
higher winter temperatures, improved moisture
                                                                period. This trend is more pronounced starting
supply at vegetation recovery stages, and
                                                                from the second half of the 1990s.
diminished moisture deficiency conditions are able
to produce increased yields. Surprisingly, the best
                                                                It is worth confirming that climatic simulations
performances would be in the Steppe area.
                                                                differ widely depending on the global model
                                                                being used. The 4th IPPC report clearly depicts
Unfortunately, the scenarios analyzed in the
                                                                such wide variations as can be noted from the
referred study are silent on crop yield dynamics
                                                                projection below.
as well as on precipitation and moisture supply
dynamics. However, since all climate change
studies tend to agree that variability of climatic
conditions and frequency of extreme events will
also increase, it may be assumed that – in a best
case scenario - a similar pattern to that examined
for the 1996-2009 period may also occur in the
future (see Figures 40-42).


It is worth mentioning the findings of a previous
study78, which observed the longest data set
of soil moisture available in the world: 45 years
(1958-2002) of gravimetrically observed plant
available soil moisture data for the top 1 m of
soil, observed every 10 days during April-October
for 141 stations from fields with either winter or


78	 Alan Robock, Mingquan Mu, Konstantin Vinnikov, Iryna
    V. Trofimova, and Tatyjana I. Adamenko: Forty Five Years
    of Observed Soil Moisture in the Ukraine: No Summer
    Desiccation (Yet); 2004, in Geophysical Research Letters.

                                                                                                                                          55
                          Table 24: Agroclimatic conditions for winter wheat cultivation
                          (Numerator – by scenario GFDL model 30 %, Denominator – average long-term data)

                                         Sowing stage                                                     Wintering stage

AEZ, province                                                                                         average temperature
                             average air                 sum of                sum of sub-zero                                          sum of
                                                                                                        of the most cold
                           temperature, °C          precipitation, mm         temperatures, °C                                     precipitation, mm
                                                                                                           decade, °C
Polissya                         10.8                        97                          0                        0.4                       122
Zhytomyrska                        8.8                       87                       445                        -6.8                       211
Forest-steppe                     11.7                       82                          0                        0.4                       151
Cherkaska                          9.2                       71                       440                        -6.5                       198
Northern Steppe                    8.4                       84                          0                        1.5                       123
Dnipropetrovska                    9.2                       66                       415                        -6.4                       200
Southern Steppe                    7.1                       93                          0                        3.5                        53
Hersonska                          8.6                       65                       195                        -4.0                       182
Prykarpattya                       9.7                       83                         0                         1.8                        95
Ivano-Frankivska                   9.0                       92                       335                        -5.9                       190
                          Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             ,
                                                                           ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”
                          Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.



Table 25: Development stages of winter wheat in autumn
(Numerator – by scenario GFDL-30 % model, Denominator – average long-term data)

                                                                                     Recovery                                           Duration
 AEZ, province                    Sowing                Idle vegetation                                     Wax/ ripeness
                                                                                    vegetation                                       spring-summer
 Zhytomyrska                       28.09                      30.11                      1.03                      9.06                      101
 Polissya                            6.09                       7.11                    31.03                    13.07                       105
 Cherkaska                         29.09                      30.11                    28.02                       6.06                       99
 Forest-steppe                       9.09                      8.11                    29.03                       7.07                      101
 Dnipropetrovska                    13.10                     13.12                    25.02                       1.06                       97
 Northern Steppe                    11.09                     12.11                     27.03                      2.07                       98
 Hersonska                           1.11                      5.01                    20.02                     23.05                        93
 Southern Steppe                    19.09                     25.11                     21.03                    26.06                        98
 Prykarpattya                       23.10                    22.12                     23.02                     13.06                       111
 Ivano-Frankivska                    9.09                     11.11                    29.03                     20.07                       114
Source: Stepanenko S.M., Polovy A.M., Shkolny E.P                                                                             , Ekolohiya, Odessa 2011.
                                                 ., et al. “Assessment of climate change impact on economic sectors of Ukraine”




56
                                                                                            Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 26: Agroclimatic conditions of winter wheat in spring-summer
(Numerator – by scenario GEDL-30 % model, Denominator – average long-term data)

                                          average air temperature           average soil moisture
                                               for period, °C              supply (0-100 cm), mm           Sum of solar            Sum        Moisture
                            rain in
 AEZ, province                                                                                              radiation           evaporation   deficiency
                             mm
                                         Vegetation       Earing-wax      Vegetation       Earing-wax       kcal/ cm2              mm            mm
                                          recovery         -ripeness       recovery         -ripeness
 Polissya                     196             11.1             17.4            238              166              18.8               268           90
 Zhytomyrska                  260             13.2             17.1            207              166               21.8              312           64
 Forest-steppe                172             11.2            18.3              165              96              20.0               236           34
 Cherkaska                    189             12.9            18.1              146             123               21.2              252            52
 Northern Steppe              151             13.0            18.5              132              77              18.3               217            35
 Dnipropetrovska              147             13.3            18.7              111              90              20.5               220           101
 Southern Steppe              111             11.5             17.1             122              64               17.3              173            81
 Hersonska                    114             13.3            19.4               87              51               21.6              192           175
 Prykarpattya                 346             11.5            16.2             232              209              20.9               318          191
 Ivano-Frankivska             444             12.3             17.1            251              236              24.1               428          212


Figure 49: Ukraine: soil moisture compared with 1971-2000 mean




Source: Forty-five years of observed soil moisture in the Ukraine. Robok et al. (incl. Adamenko), in GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH
LETTERS, VOL. 32, LXXXXX, 2005.

Figure 50: SPI for southern Ukraine for 1950-2009 and trends for some periods




Source: Valeriy Khokhlov, Natalia Yermolenko, and Andrey Ivanov: Spatiotemporal features of droughts in Ukraine under climate
change, presented during a Workshop on the Development of an Experimental Global Drought Information System, 11-13 April 2012,
Frascati (Rm) - Italy.




                                                                                                                                                        57
     Figure 51: Regional climate projections




     Source: IPPC, 4th Report.




58
                                                                Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




Annex 5 - Resource-saving technologies in
Ukraine

Definitions of land preparation                                  Zero/no-till is not specifically defined in Ukraine
technologies in Ukraine                                          as it has not been studied much. The FAO
                                                                 definition is adopted.
Scientists and stakeholders describe the
following technologies as those in use79 in
                                                                 The SSAcI has made an attempt to provide an
Ukraine:
                                                                 indication on area/soil type technology suitability
                                                                 across the country. This is based on presumed
•	 combined tillage
                                                                 soil type behaviour taking account of the known
•	 mini/minimal tillage
                                                                 soil physical features, but however, with little
•	 zero tillage                                                  empirical evidence.

Combined tillage is defined as applying a plough                 The prevailing concerns of scientists in Ukraine
or a chisel, and at times both in succession,                    over CA/no-till technology include the following:
turning (plough) or not (chisel) the topsoil.                    Soil-related (hard, sandy, stony, over moisturized,
Depending on region and cultivated agricultural                  gleyish); climate-related (cold moist spring delaying
crop, the technology differentiates by depth,                    nitrification processes and causing nitrogen
number of operations, and set of tools. It allows                deficit); technical (excess of weeds, rodents, and
deep fertilization, mechanical weed control, and                 pests/diseases); organizational (need to invest
incorporation of rain water before harrowing. It                 in specialized machinery and related technical
increases loss of SOM, it facilitates compaction,                assistance, financial constraints and overuse/
and it is a high-fuel consuming technology.                      management of herbicides and agrochemicals). It
                                                                 is understood – as discussed with the scientists
Minimum tillage is when direct seeding and a                     in Ukraine – that these concerns can be all
reduced number of pre-sowing/weed removing                       addressed through experiential learning on soil-
tillage operations are also practiced. The                       and farm-specific cases. As a result, Table 27
technology in Ukraine entails a number of tillage                would need to be revised.
operations each season with wide (shoe type)
blades or with knife tillers that cut the roots of               Trials80 made on yield81 comparisons show
weeds. This disturbs the soil, although less than                contradictory though not disappointing results,
traditional ploughing. It has a beneficial effect on             comparing traditional (and combined), minimum-
erosion and reduces land preparation costs.                      till and no-till technologies. Admittedly, it must

Table 27: Ukraine: technology suitability by AEZ, million ha
                                                               Minimum tillage                             No-till
 Forest
                                                                      2                                       -
 (Turf-podzolic; Turf and meadow)
 Forest Steppe
 (black soils typical and podzolic;                                  3.4                                     3.5
 Dark grey; Grey and light grey)
 Steppe
                                                                     3.5                                      2
 (Black soils ordinary)
Source: SSAI, O.N. Sokolovsky.

                                                                 80	 Presentation made by Professor S.A. Balyuk during Round
                                                                     Table discussions in Kyiv on 23 May, 2013.
                                                                 81	 According to SSAcI data, the fertility agropotential of all
79	 Presentation by SSAI Sokolvsky researcher S.A. Balyuk            Ukrainian soils in the different agro-ecologies of the country
    during FAO-WB Round Table discussions in Kyiv on 23 May,         is certainly high for winter wheat: 31.2-39.2 q/ha (forest);
    2013.                                                            38-64 q/ha (forest steppe); and 22-40q/ha (steppe).

                                                                                                                                59
     Table 28: Ukraine: prevailing land/seed bed preparation technologies, million ha of cropped land,
     1990-2009
      Technology                        1990                2000          2005              2009        Percent of total
      Traditional/ploughing             29.5                19.5           10.0              4.9                  18
      Mini/minimum tillage                2.0                7.5           17.0             21.9                  80
      No-till                               0                0.2            0.5             0.70                  2
      Total                              31.5               27.2           27.5             27.5              100

     Source: Authors’ elaboration; and Agrosoyuz, 2013.82


     be said that the no-till technology is applied                •	 resource-saving technologies have picked
     improperly. In fact, depending on which crop                     up steadily since independence and with a
     is included in the rotation (e.g. beetroot) even                 strong impetus during the last 15 years;
     the no-till soil is ploughed for that crop. This one          •	 mini-till is currently the most popular land
     operation cancels all the gains the technology                   preparation technology in use;
     was re-establishing on that given soil. In terms
                                                                   •	 traditional land preparation through ploughing
     of soil humus content (SOM) - calculated while
                                                                      has strongly decreased with an apparent
     comparing the three technologies on soils which
                                                                      trend towards being definitely substituted;
     had a high SOM starting point (above 4 percent)
     – gains were marginal but evident at the first                •	 no-till was introduced in the late nineties and
     ten (0-10 cm) and first 20 centimetres of the                    has progressed slowly; and
     soil. Otherwise at  -20 cm and at 20-30 cm, very              •	 overall cultivated area has decreased
     slight decreases (0.02 and 0.14 percent) were                    substantially since pre-independence levels
     recorded. In this regard, an interesting trial which             because of a combination of two main
     is being conducted by SSAcI on the chlorophyll                   reasons: decreased access to financing
     content of crop leaves for the three technologies                needed for agricultural inputs and machinery
     shows that no-till plants are apparently better                  purchases and exclusion of marginally
     able to produce it (Table 5).                                    profitable land from production.

     All such trials would however need to be repeated             The trends observed above are similar to those
     extensively and at different locations and                    in many other FSU countries. Most of these
     conditions – in full respect of each technology’s             countries in their move towards a post-FSU
     correct protocol – and be documented to have a                agricultural modernization have also had to face
     formal scientific recognition.                                challenging issues such as growing erosion,
                                                                   decreasing soil fertility, and soil moisture
     Prevailing situation in Ukraine                               impoverishment as a result of an inadequate
                                                                   land resource management and an increased
     Official statistics do not mention the actual
                                                                   frequency of drought events. Depending on the
     area-coverage of different land preparation
                                                                   agro-ecological and global economic situation of
     technologies in the country. However, interesting
                                                                   each country, these challenges have had diverse
     assessments are made by practitioners and mainly
                                                                   impact and level of priority.
     by agricultural machinery suppliers who have their
     own countrywide networks and observatories.
     Accordingly, the evolution of land/seed bed                   In Ukraine, given the prevalence of its richer black

     preparation technologies in use in Ukraine is                 Chernozem soils (which by nature have higher
     estimated to be as shown in Table 28, which                   SOM content and have more resilient chemical-
     shows that:                                                   physical behaviours), soil scientists and farmers
                                                                   appear to have prioritized two such challenges
                                                                   - fighting against erosion and improving farm
                                                                   profitability by reducing fuel consumption.
     82	 Personal communication and presentation made by           Probably for these reasons, farmers have given
         representatives of the JSC AgroSoyuz in Dnepropetrovsk
         on March 13, 2013.                                        precedence to the easier - in terms of adaptation

60
                                                                                         Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 29: Ukraine: technology comparison effect on soil losses
(in kg/m2; average 2011-2012)
 Ploughing                                                                                       6
 Mini-till                                                                                       4.5
 No-till                                                                                         3
Source: In-field personal communication (SCAI of Donetsk). May, 2013.

Table 30: Ukraine: technology comparison effect on fuel consumption
(litres/ha)
 Ploughing                                                                              90-120
 Mini-till                                                                              60-80
 No-till                                                                                25-40
Source: Farm managers; Researchers. 2013.


requirements - minimum tillage as compared                          •	 In three other provinces including Sumy,
with the more complex conservation agriculture/                         through the Global Agricultural Management
no-till technology. The MAPFU which provides                            Enterprises project (included in the AP
general guidance, has issued its own strategy                           Programme) giving technical assistance to
paper to facilitate the adoption of resource-saving                     30-40 000 hectares.
techniques and technologies in Ukraine83.
                                                                    Erosion affects, with diverse intensities,
It is worth noting that the introduction of no-                     over 40 percent of arable land (see Annex 3).
till methods in the late 1990s was triggered by                     Indeed experimental trials have shown that the
technical assistance programmes, such as the                        mitigating effect of “reduced tillage” technologies
Agribusiness Partnership (AP) Program and the                       over erosion is immediately considerable.
Food Systems Restructuring Program (FSRP),
supported by the United States Agency for                           Moreover, CA/no-till while it contributes to the
International Aid84 in partnership with private                     gradual regeneration of the inherent soil structure
agribusiness companies.                                             features, also improves its “anti”- erosion
                                                                    impact which overtime may go beyond the levels
The conversion of a number of farms to a no-till                    indicated above.
or a minimum tillage system was promoted.
                                                                    From the cost of production savings standpoint,
•	 In Donetsk province in 1996, the FSRP                            and particularly in terms of fuel consumption
    introduced reduced tillage practices in                         both research trials as well as farm management
    420 private farms covering more than                            experiences in Ukraine all show and agree that
    300 000 hectares, and a year after the                          ploughing is by far the highest fuel consuming
    programme was expanded to other 460                             technology. This is greatly reduced when moving to
    farms for a land coverage of around                             minimum tillage, and is further reduced with no-till.
    420 000 hectares.
                                                                    The above indications suggest that CA/no-till
•	 In Dnepropetrovsk province, through the
                                                                    technology allows farmers to better preserve soil
    AP programme; technical assistance for the
                                                                    fertility and reduce production costs compared
    introduction of reduced tillage practices was
                                                                    with minimum tillage. This, together with a
    implemented for 250 farms with a total of
                                                                    number of other beneficial effects (on crop yields,
    200 000 hectares of land.
                                                                    carbon sequestration, increase in SOM, and
                                                                    improved soil moisture content, all discussed
83	 Agriculture State programme till 2015; September 19, 2007   ,   elsewhere in this study) should justify a gradual
    N. 1158 ((http://minagro.gov.ua/apk?nid=2976).
                                                                    but more decisive move towards adoption of this
84	 Agribusiness Partnership Program- “The impact of CNFA
    (Citizens Network for Foreign Affairs) partnership in Ukraine   technology in Ukraine. The reasons for the rather
                        , December 31, 1997 (http://pdf.usaid.
    agricultural sector “
    gov/pdf_docs/PNACG280.pdf.

                                                                                                                                              61
     sluggish adoption of CA/no-till in the country can     how the technology can be best adapted for the
     be explained with the following arguments.             different agro-ecological conditions and farms.


     As previously discussed, the main areas of
                                                            FAO definition of CA/no-till
     interest from the farmers’ point of view (erosion
     and fuel consumption), and least for the short         According to FAO (http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/), CA
     to medium-term, have been addressed by                 is an approach to managing agro-ecosystems for
     the minimum tillage technology to an extent            improved and sustained productivity, increased
     which is considered quite adequate at current          profits and food security while preserving
     scientific/technical knowledge and investment/         and enhancing the resource base and the
     organizational capacity levels.                        environment. CA is characterized by three linked
                                                            principles, namely:
     Farmers in Ukraine do not have sufficient
     evidence from the existing research and                •	 continuous minimum mechanical soil
     knowledge generation base on both the                     disturbance;
     incremental and more sustainable benefits that         •	 permanent organic soil cover; and
     can accrue by adopting CA on their farms, as well
                                                            •	 diversification of crop species grown in
     as on the appropriate measures that need to be
                                                               sequences and/or associations.
     used at different soil-climate-cropping pattern.
     The experience and evidence accumulated by the
                                                            CA principles are universally applicable to all
     few big farms that have adopted CA technology
                                                            agricultural landscapes and land uses with locally
     are too sparse and are not always comparable;
                                                            adapted practices. CA enhances biodiversity and
     at times they are not consistent or data has not
                                                            natural biological processes above and below
     been collected with scientific rigor; and, in simple
                                                            the ground surface. Soil interventions such as
     words, are thus not convincing to the broader
                                                            mechanical soil disturbance are reduced to an
     audience. In turn, scientists have insufficient
                                                            absolute minimum or avoided, and external
     means, outdated fundamental information (e.g.
                                                            inputs such as agrochemicals and plant nutrients
     on the actual status of their soils), and have had
                                                            of mineral or organic origin are applied optimally
     little to no exposure to international research
                                                            and in ways and quantities that do not interfere
     networks working in this technology area.
                                                            with, or disrupt, the biological processes.

     Indeed CA/no-till is a long-term undertaking
                                                            CA facilitates good agronomy, such as
     which is able to show its sustained benefits
                                                            timely operations, and improves overall land
     only overtime. The more these incremental
                                                            husbandry for rainfed and irrigated production.
     benefits are marginal as compared with a rather
                                                            Complemented by other known good practices,
     acceptable starting point (soil quality, SOM,
                                                            including the use of good quality seeds, and
     crop yields, etc.), the more the investors will be
                                                            integrated pest, nutrient, weed and water
     sceptical in appreciating the actual advantages.
                                                            management, CA is a base for sustainable
                                                            agricultural production intensification. It opens
     Nevertheless, the interactions that took place
                                                            increased options for integration of production
     during this study with the most concerned
                                                            sectors, such as crop-livestock integration
     stakeholders - the farmers - confirm that there
                                                            and the integration of trees and pastures into
     is a growing professional interest in CA/no-till.
                                                            agricultural landscapes.
     Ukrainian farmers do not appear to be entrenched
     in a non-critical, agnostic attitude and are eager
                                                            There are the three principles of conservation
     to learn more about what the technology can
                                                            agriculture.
     actually provide in terms of benefits to them.
     Similarly with Ukrainian researchers in soil and
     other related sciences. They are ready and willing
     to invest more time and effort to understand


62
                                                                                  Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Direct planting of crop seeds, involving                     •	 consequential reduction of runoff and erosion;
growing crops without mechanical seedbed
                                                             •	 soil regeneration is higher than soil
preparation and with minimal soil disturbance
                                                                degradation;
since the harvest of the previous crop
                                                             •	 mitigation of temperature variations on and in
The term direct seeding is understood in CA
                                                                the soil; and
systems as synonymous with no-till farming, zero
tillage, no-tillage, direct drilling, etc. Planting refers   •	 better conditions for the development of roots
to the precise placing of large seeds (maize and                and seedling growth.
beans for example); whereas seeding usually refers
                                                             Crop diversity
to a continuous flow of seed as in the case of small
cereals (e.g. wheat and barley). The equipment               The rotation of crops is not only necessary to
penetrates the soil cover, opens a seeding slot and          offer a diverse “diet” to the soil micro-organisms,
places the seed into that slot. The size of the seed         but as they root at different soil depths, they
slot and the associated movement of soil are to              are capable of exploring different soil layers for
be kept to the absolute minimum possible. Ideally            nutrients. Nutrients that have leached to deeper
the seed slot is completely covered by mulch after           layers and that are no longer available for the
seeding and no loose soil should be visible on the           commercial crop can be “recycled” by the crops
surface. Land preparation for seeding or planting            in rotation. This way the rotation crops function
under no-tillage involves slashing or rolling the            as biological pumps. Furthermore, a diversity
weeds, previous crop residues or cover crops; or             of crops in rotation leads to a diverse soil flora
spraying herbicides for weed control, and seeding            and fauna, as the roots excrete different organic
directly through the mulch. Crop residues are                substances that attract different types of bacteria
retained either completely or in a suitable amount           and fungi, which in turn, play an important role
to guarantee complete soil cover, and fertilizer and         in the transformation of these substances into
other inputs are either spread on the soil surface or        plant available nutrients. Crop rotation also has an
applied during seeding.                                      important phytosanitary function as it prevents
                                                             the carryover of crop-specific pests and diseases
Permanent soil cover, especially by crop                     from one crop to the next via crop residues. The
residues and cover crops                                     effects of crop rotation include:
A permanent soil cover is important to protect
the soil against the negative effects of exposure            •	 higher diversity in plant production and thus in

to rain and sun; to provide the micro and macro                 human and livestock nutrition;

organisms in the soil with a constant supply of              •	 reduction and reduced risk of pest and weed
“food”; and alter the microclimate in the soil                  infestations;
for optimal growth and development of soil                   •	 greater distribution of channels or bio-pores
organisms, including plant roots. The effects of a              created by diverse roots (various forms, sizes
permanent soil cover include:                                   and depths);

•	 improved infiltration and retention of soil               •	 better distribution of water and nutrients

    moisture resulting in less severe, less                     through the soil profile;

    prolonged crop water stress and increased                •	 exploration for nutrients and water of diverse
    availability of plant nutrients;                            strata of the soil profile by roots of many

•	 source of food and habitat for diverse soil                  different plant species resulting in a greater

    life: creation of channels for air and water,               use of the available nutrients and water;

    biological tillage and substrate for biological          •	 increased nitrogen fixation through certain
    activity through the recycling of organic                   plant-soil biota symbionts and improved
    matter and plant nutrients;                                 balance of N/P/K from both organic and

•	 increased humus formation;                                   mineral sources; and

•	 reduction of impact of rain drops on soil                 •	 increased humus formation.

    surface resulting in reduced crusting and
    surface sealing;

                                                                                                                                       63
     Annex 6 - Carbon sequestration and climate
     change mitigation

     The adoption of conservation agriculture has an         change in soil bulk density85 that has occurred.
     impact in terms of GHG balance. Emissions are           A relatively simple way of achieving this is to
     reduced at field level due to lower (almost zero)       sample soils on an “equivalent mass basis”
     topsoil disturbance by tillage and the maintenance      (sometimes termed “equivalent depth”) rather
     of mulch. When properly managed, this process           than equal depths. This is important when there
     can sequester carbon from the atmosphere                is likely to have been a change in soil bulk density
     storing it in soils. Moreover, the reduced              (either over time or between treatments) and
     mechanized operations also imply a decrease in          when, as is usually the case, the entire profile
     fossil fuel (mostly diesel fuel) consumption.           is not sampled. The principle is that an equal
                                                             mass of organic matter-free mineral soil should
     Sequestration rates under CA in                         be sampled between the treatments or times
     Ukraine                                                               ” This has a direct implication
                                                             being compared.
     Calculation of soil carbon (C) sequestration            when analyzing the performance of conservation
     rates                                                   agriculture in terms of C sequestration. For
     Two approaches are possible (diachronic and             instance, considering the impact of the tillage
     synchronic) to calculate soil C sequestration rates     systems observed in Ukraine and reported in
     of a new practice in comparison to a conventional       Annex 1. Ukrainian soils, when the change in arable
     one. The diachronic approach consists of                practice is from conventional tillage to zero tillage,
     measuring in years (t), on the same field plot, soil    it implies a small increase in bulk density of about
     C stocks between time 0 (installation of the new        5 percent: if the conventionally tilled soil was
     system) and time x. The major disadvantage of           sampled to a given depth (which should be slightly
     the diachronic approach is that one must wait and       greater than cultivation depth), it is necessary to
     measure over long periods of time before being          sample the soil after a period of zero tillage to
     able to evaluate the quantity of C sequestered.         slightly shallower depth in order to compare equal
     Therefore, estimates are generally based on a           masses of mineral soil and correctly quantify any
     synchronic approach. The synchronic approach            change in soil C stock.
     consists of comparing the C stock of a field
     plot, at a given time tn, (corresponding to the         Another determinant point concerns the temporal
     sequestering practice tested during × years) with       variability. For instance, Kapshtyk et al.86 showed
     that of a field (control or conventional practices)     important C dynamics in Chernozems over a four-
     under traditional management which represents           month period (see Figure 52). The period of the
     t0 state or the reference point. The major              year of the soil sampling might be determinant
     uncertainty of this approach remains the absolute       in the calculation of the sequestration rates. If
     comparability of the field plots which must be          the objective is to compare different systems,
     similar in terms of other soil properties (fertility,   sampling should be done at the same moment.
     physical variable, hydrological properties, etc.).      Based on the curve below, the differences
                                                             between conventional and no-till will be more
     Sampling methods are vital to derive sound soil C       evident in April or November.
     sequestration rates in a scientific way. As Powlson
     et al (2011) highlighted “When quantifying a change
                                                             85	 Soil bulk density is an indirect measure of soil pore space
     in soil C stock, by comparing measurements taken            which depends on soil organic matter content and texture.
                                                             86	 Kapshtyk M.V., Shikula M.K. L.R. Petrenko. 2000;
     at two times or by comparing two treatments or              “Conservation non-plough systems of crop production in
     land uses, it is essential to take account of any                                                                . In: Soil
                                                                 Ukraine with increased reproduction of soil fertility”
                                                                 Quality, Sustainable Agriculture and Environmental Security
                                                                 in Central and Eastern Europe NATO Science Series Volume
                                                                 69, 2000, pp 267-276.

64
                                                                                               Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Figure 52: Seasonal cycles of humus in 0-10 cm layer of typical Chernozem, according to
cropping system applied for more than five years

           6,1           6,05

            6
                                                        5,82                                                      5,83
           5,9
                                                                                    5,74
           5,8             5,71
           5,7
 percent




                                                         5,56                                                            5,63
           5,6
                         5,63                                                      5,47
           5,5                                                                                                         5,57
                                                         5,53
           5,4
           5,3
           5,2
           5.1
                         April                          June                      August                       November

                           Long-term grassland                  Minimum non-plow tillage              Plow tillage


Source: Kapshtyk et al., 2000..

Figure 53: Influence of 10-year tillage on soil organic carbon
(0-100 cm soil layer)




Different letters indicate significant differences (p-level of 5%) between tillage treatments: CT = Conventional tillage; DMT = deep
minimum tillage; RMT = Reduced minimum tillage; RH = Rotary harrow (minimum soil disturbance in the top 6 cm).

Source: Kravchenko et al., 2012.


Table 31: Soil layer carbon content by technology

                                                                           Tillage systems

             Soil layer (cm)           Conventional (CT)                    Minimal (MT)                        Zero (NT)

                                                                          Carbon content (%)
                  0-10                           4.37                            4.54                                4.52
                 10-20                           4.35                            4.34                                4.33
                 20-30                           4.26                            4.14                                4.12
                 30-40                           4.36                            4.44                                4.43
                 40-50                           4.33                            4.34                                4.32
Source: Agrosoyuz JSC.




                                                                                                                                                    65
     As a result, it is not straightforward to estimate                       and K2O) with an important annual application of
     sequestration rates based only on soil C                                 cattle manure at a rate of 12 tonnes per hectare.
     content. The section below reviews the available                         The authors added in their conclusion that
     information for Ukraine and the requirements                             synthetic and organic fertilizations had a greater
     to provide estimates of sequestration rates                              impact on SOM concentration than the tillage
     associated with the adoption of conservation                             practices. In other words, the tillage effect was
     agriculture in Ukraine.                                                  masked in this experiment.

     Available data in Ukraine                                                As there is a scarcity of published scientific
     Very few scientific publications (indicated in                           papers in English, unpublished data can also be
     this annex) are available in English or with an                          an important source of information. Agrosoyuz
     extended abstract in English on the evaluation                           JSC reported the following information in terms
     of the performance of reduced-tillage systems                            of C contents.
     compared with conventional tillage systems.
     Few, if any, discuss comparisons with true CA/                           Unfortunately, soil bulk measurements are not
     no-till technology. Moreover, they deal nearly                           reported. This does not permit a direct calculation
     exclusively with physical properties (bulk density)                      of C stocks, and then sequestration rates. It is
     or chemical properties linked with fertility                             known that soil management influences the
     parameters such as N and P content, Cation                               bulk density (see Annex). In order to derive an
     Exchange Capacity. Some papers presented                                 estimate, the soil bulk densities reported by the
     results focused only on a particular fraction (or                        same authors were corrected. As a result on an
     component) of the carbon pools: e.g. Kravchenko                          equivalent soil mass, soil carbon stocks were
     et al. and Kapshtyk et al. . These papers do
           87                            88
                                                                              respectively 255.7, 257.3 and 256.4 tonnes C/
     not consent the calculation of the soil carbon                           ha. Thus the benefit of no-till compared with
     sequestration rate.                                                      conventional tillage seems modest and inferior to
                                                                              1 tonne C/ha over the test period.
     Only one scientific paper reports C stocks in a
     typical Chernozem soil of Ukraine under different                        Other authors proposed to test the impact of
     long-term tillage systems .        89
                                                                              different management practices in terms of
                                                                              fertilization and irrigation. Saljnikov et al.90 presented
     Even if the systems with the reduced tillage                             detailed information on the soil carbon dynamics
     intensity have the highest C stock (441.2 t C/ha),                       for 3 case studies in Ukraine (Kharkov, Uman and
     the authors concluded that there is no significant                       Kherson). In brief, the authors reported that:
     difference after ten years, compared with CT
     (438.3 t C/ha). But it is important to highlight that                    •	 when comparing mineral and organic
     the different treatments received NPK fertilizers                            fertilizers (Uman): “The content of soil organic
     (respectively 75, 68 and 68 kg/ha of N, P2O5                                 carbon was not increased after thirty six years
                                                                                  application of mineral fertilizer in most of the
     87	 Kravchenko Y.S., Zhang X., Liu X, Song C., Cruse R.M. 2011.              treatments, compared with the control, while
         Mollisols properties and changes in Ukraine and China.
         Chin. Geogra. Science, 21, 3, 257-266. DOI: 10.1007/
                                                                                  application of high rates of manure (O) alone
         s11769-011-0467-z.                                                       maintained the higher accumulation of soil
     88	 Kapshtyk M.V., Shikula M.K. L.R. Petrenko, 2000
         “Conservation non-plough systems of crop production in                   organic carbon”; and
         Ukraine with increased reproduction of soil fertility”  . In: Soil
         Quality, Sustainable Agriculture and Environmental Security
         in Central and Eastern Europe NATO Science Series
         Volume 69, 2000, pp 267-276. http://link.springer.com/
         book/10.1007/978-94-011-4181-9/page/1. Kapshtyk M.V.,
         Shikula M.K., Balajev A., Kravchenko Y., Bilyanovska T. 2002;        90	 Saljnikov E., Cakmak D. and Rahimgalieva S. 2013. Soil
         “The ways for an extended reproduction of soil fertility                 Organic Matter Stability as Affected by Land Management
         in Chernozems of Ukraine”   . In: Book of abstract, 2002                 in Steppe Ecosystems. “Soil Processes and Current Trends
         Bangkok Thailand 17th World Congress of Soil Science.                    in Quality Assessment” , book edited by Maria C. Hernandez
         (www.iuss.org).                                                          Soriano, ISBN 978-953-51-1029-3, Published: February
     89	 Kravchenko, Y., Rogovska, N., Petrenko, L., Zhang, X., Song,             27 , 2013 under CC BY 3.0 license. 433 pages, Publisher:
         C. and Chen, Y. 2012. “Quality and dynamics of soil organic              InTech, Published: February 27 , 2013 under CC BY 3.0
         matter in a typical Chernozem of Ukraine under different                 license DOI: 10.5772/45835 (http://www.intechopen.com/
         long-term tillage systems” . In: Can. J. Soil Sci. 92: 429-438.          download/pdf/43223).

66
                                                                                      Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



•	 when studying the impact of fertilization and                 potential on a global scale, according to major
    irrigation practices (Kherson): there were no                climate zone. In this simplified classification,
    statistical differences for the top 0-20 cm.                 the Ukraine climate corresponds to “Cool
    However, treatment with fertilization plus                   Dry” (southern part of the country) and “Cool
    irrigation gave the best results.                            Moist” zones (most of the northern part of the
                                                                 country). The corresponding carbon sequestration
In conclusion, because the soil carbon content                   rates proposed for the no-tillage and residues
of Chernozem is high, up to several hundreds of                  management category is 0.15 tonnes CO2-eq /ha
tonnes of carbon per hectare in the top meter, it                /yr-1 for the Cool Dry zone and 0.51 tonnes CO2-
is really difficult to detect, in few years, variations          eq /ha /yr-1 for the Cool-Moist zone. These values
of hundreds of kg of carbon. The calculation of                  correspond to sequestration rates of 0.04 tonnes
soil C sequestration rates in Ukraine requires                   C/ha /yr-1 and 0.14 tonnes C/ha /yr-1.
detailed and high quality determination of soil
organic carbon plus soil bulk density.                           It is clear that on an annual per hectare basis,
                                                                 the level is small and certainly hard to detect,
In 2007, the IPCC published global estimates                     even in well conducted short- to medium-term
of soil carbon sequestration rates (net change                   experiments. This is made harder considering
considering all direct GHG, expressed as CO2-                    the annual variability (Figure 52). However,
eq) of broad sustainable land management                         when applied to large areas, the numbers
categories, namely agronomy, nutrient                            would be significant (see EX-ACT appraisal
management, tillage/residue management,                          below, Table 32). Moreover, the scenario of
water management, and agroforestry. Briefly,                     adoption of conservation agriculture should be
the “agronomy” category corresponds to                           compared with the business as usual scenario.
practices that may increase yields and thus                      The construction of a baseline scenario is often
generate higher residues. Examples of such                       required in analyses and prospective studies
practices, reported by Smith et al.91, include using             that aim at comparing different possible future
improved crop varieties, extending crop rotations,               situations. Thus, the dynamics of the soil
and rotations with legume crops. Nutrient                        organic content under a CA hypothesis must be
management corresponds to the application of                     compared with a baseline reference. Smith et al.
fertilizer, manure, and biosolids, either to improve             reported that decrease of soil organic carbon will
efficiency (adjusting application rate, improving                continue if no changes in management practices
timing, location, etc.) or reduce the potential                  occur. Smith et al. reported an average loss
losses (slow release fertilizer form or nitrification            observed for arable soils of 21 percent (with a
inhibitors). Tillage/residue management regards                  range of 17-32 percent) based on statistical data
adoption of practices with less tillage intensity                for different Ukrainian regions, between 1881 and
ranging from minimum tillage to no-tillage and                   2000. For a more recent period (1961 to 2000),
with or without residue retention in the field.                  there is still a loss of 11 percent on average. In
Water management brings together enhanced                        absolute terms, the current decrease in Ukrainian
irrigation measures that can lead to an increase                 croplands is estimated in the range of 0.35-
in the productivity (and hence of the residues).                 0.55 tonnes C per hectare. This is a result of the
Agroforestry encompasses a wide range of                         decrease in organic fertilization (see Table 13) and
practices where woody perennials are integrated                  suboptimal land management practices.
within agricultural crops. Due to the scarcity of
data, only simplified categories were used in
compiling mean estimates of C sequestration



91	 Smith J., Smith P ., Wattenbach M., Gottschalk P.,
    Romanenkov V.A., Shevtsova L.K., Sirotenko O.D., Rukhovich
    D.O., Koroleva P .V., Romanenko I.A., Lisovo N.V. 2007.
    Projected changes in the organic carbon stocks of cropland
    mineral soils for Europe, the Russian Federation and the
    Ukraine, 1990-2070. Global Change Biology, 13, 342-356.

                                                                                                                                           67
     Figure 54: Machinery and field operations
     No-till systems compared with traditional ploughing




     Source: Martial Bernoux..


     Table 32: EXACT Appraisal

     Description                           Function                             Method
     Set of linked Microsoft Excel         Measure of the benefits of an        Computing of the C-balance by
     sheets for the insertion of data on   investment project/programme         comparing a situation without and
     soil, climate and land use of the     through ex-ante estimates on GHG     with project.
     considered project area.              emissions & CO2


     Fossil fuel consumption                                 compute the C-balance by comparing scenarios:
     The adoption of CA would reduce farming                 “without project” (i.e. the “Business As Usual”
     operations (Figure 54) and thus fuel consumption.                                       . The main output
                                                             or “Baseline”) and “with project”
     According to values collected during field visits,      of the tool consists of the C-balance resulting
     fuel consumptions range from 90-100 litres per          from the difference between these alternative
     ha for conventionally ploughed systems, to 60-          scenarios.
     80 litres per ha for minimum tillage systems and
     25-40 litres per ha for no-till systems.                EX-ACT has been developed using mostly
                                                             the Guidelines for National Greenhouse
     EX-ACT is a tool developed by FAO aimed at              Gas Inventories92 complemented with other
     providing ex-ante estimates of the impact of            methodologies and a review of default
     agriculture and forestry development projects           coefficients for mitigation option as a base. Most
     on GHG emissions and carbon sequestration.
     It indicates a project’s effects on the C-balance,
     an indicator of the mitigation potential of the
     project. EX-ACT was primarily developed to
     support appraisal in the context of ex-ante
     project formulation and it is capable of covering
     the range of projects relevant for the land use,
     land use change and the forestry sector. It can         92	 2006 IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change)
                                                                 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.

68
                                                                                           Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



calculations in EX-ACT use a Tier 1 approach93                        2000, whereas the baseline (the without project
as default values are proposed for each of the                        option in EX-ACT) was set to a linear tendency.
five pools defined by the IPCC guidelines and                         These dynamics were used in EX-ACT to
the United Nations Framework Convention                               calculate the benefit of adoption of no-tillage for
on Climate Change (UNFCCC): above-ground                              the past period (2010 till 2013) and estimates for
biomass, below-ground biomass, soil, deadwood                         the future.
and litter. It must be highlighted that EX-ACT also
allows users to incorporate specific coefficients                     In terms of soil carbon sequestration, the linear
from project area, when available, therefore also                     trend corresponds to a total sink of 34.1 million
working at Tier 2 level. EX-ACT measures carbon                       tonnes of CO2 sequestered (for the period 2000-
stocks and stock changes per unit of land, as                         2039). This includes 3.3 million tonnes already
well as Methane (CH4) and Nitrous Oxide (N2O)                         sequestered in the period 2000-2013. Thus
emissions expressing its results in tonnes of                         without incentive for further no-till adoption, the
Carbon Dioxide equivalent per hectare (tCO2e.                         benefit forecast is 30.8 tonnes of additional CO2.
ha-1) and in tonnes of Carbon Dioxide equivalent
per year (tCO2e.year-1).                                              The Scenario of adoption corresponds to a total
                                                                      sequestration of 211.3 tonnes CO2, from which
EX-ACT consists of a set of Microsoft Excel                           208 for the period 2013-2039. When comparing
sheets in which project designers insert                              to the baseline, it means an additional benefice
information on dominant soil types and climatic                       of 176.4 tonnes CO2 in relation to the baseline.
conditions of a project area, together with basic                     These results depend heavily on the assumption
data on land use, land use change and land                            made for the climatic moisture regime. Table 33
management practices foreseen under the                               shows the results obtained by EX-ACT when
project’s activities as compared with a business                      using the dry moisture regime. As the Steppe
as usual scenario (Bernoux et al. 2010).                              region is characterized both by moist and dry
                                                                      moisture regimes, it can be estimated that the
Basic assumptions for the ex-ante appraisal                           overall benefice of the adoption of no-till systems
in Ukraine, which was performed to illustrate                         will fall in the range 52.1-176.4 tonnes CO2 with a
countrywide balance of GHG emissions after the                        best estimate close to 115 tonnes CO2 eq.
introduction of CA, were the following:
                                                                      The adoption of no-till will also result in reduced
•	 location is Eastern Europe;                                        fuel consumption and consequent permanent
                                                                      emission reduction. Considering that a
•	 dominate climate is Cool Temperate Moist;
                                                                      conventional system uses 95 litres per hectare in
    and
                                                                      average and a no-till system uses 32.5 litres, the
•	 dominant soil type is HAC Soils (which
                                                                      overall emission reduction can reach 45.7 tonnes
    correspond to High activity clay soil, e.g.
                                                                      of CO2 equivalent compared with the baseline
    fertile soils, of the IPCC classification).
                                                                      scenario.

Figure 55 shows the scenario of adoption and the
baseline used in the assessment. The scenario
of adoption corresponds roughly to a logistic
function (also named “S-curve”) starting from



93	 IPCC Guidelines provide three methodological tiers varying
    in complexity and uncertainty level: Tier 1, simple first order
    approach which uses data from global datasets, simplified
    assumptions, IPCC default parameters (large uncertainty);
    Tier 2, a more accurate approach, using more disaggregated
    activity data, country specific parameter values (smaller
    uncertainty); Tier 3, which makes reference to higher order
    methods, detailed modelling and/or inventory measurement
    systems driven by data at higher resolution and direct
    measurements (much lower uncertainty).

                                                                                                                                                69
     Figure 55: CA adoption

                                    18

                                    16

                                    14

                                    12




                         ha of CA
                                    10

                                    8

                                    6

                                    4

                                    2

                                    0
                                           2005            2009                 2013
                                         Short term     Medium term           Long term




     Table 33: Sensitivity of results to moisture regime
     “Dry” and “Moist” moisture regimes

                                                                Corresponding gross benefit
     Scenario and period
                                                                      (tonnes CO2-eq)

                                                      Dry regime                          Moist regime
     Baseline - linear trend (2000-2013)                  1.0                                   3.3
     Baseline - linear trend (2013-2039)                 9.0                                   30.8
     Baseline - linear trend (2000-2039)                10.0                                   34.9


     Scenario of adoption (2000-2013)                     1.0                                   3.3
     Scenario of adoption (2013-2039)                    61.1                                 208.0
     Scenario of adoption (2000-2039)                   62.1                                  211.3




70
                                                                         Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




Annex 7 - Financial and economic analysis


Table 34: Ukraine: potential annual benefits from adopting CA

                                                                                  Benefits for 3        Benefits for          Benefits for
 Level                                       Type               Per 1 ha             million ha         9 million ha         17 million ha
                                                                                   (short-term)      (medium-term)            (long-term)
 Annual farm                    Incremental net
                                                                USD 136         USD 0.41 billion      USD 1.23 billion    USD 2.31 billion
 benefits                              income
                           Off-farm additional
 Annual national             output value and
                                                                USD 123         USD 0.37 billion      USD 1.11 billion     USD 2.10 billion
 benefits                additional soil fertility
                                           value
 Total national benefits                                       USD 259          USD 0.8 billion      USD 2.3 billion       USD 4.4 billion

 % share of agricultural GDP                                                                     6                  18                     34
                                Improved food
                            security (additional
                                                                                                          16.1 million         30.4 million
                             people fed during                2.4 people      5.4 million people
                                                                                                               people               people
                           drought years, non-
 Annual global               monetary benefit)
 benefits
                                                                                       1.5 million         4.4 million          8.3 million
                                                        0.5 tonnes CO2         (equivalent to the       (equivalent to       (equivalent to
                            Reduced emission
                                                               per year         emissions of 0.3     the emissions of      the emission of
                                                                                     million cars)    0.9 million cars)    1.7 million cars)
                                Investments in
 Total                         farm equipment
 investment                     and herbicides,                 USD 200          USD 0.6 billion       USD 1.8 billion      USD 3.4 billion
 requirements                plus research and
                                     extension
Source: Team estimates.

The potential cumulative benefits deriving from                            The model was constructed to simulate
a large-scale adoption of CA in Ukraine can be                             investments profitability for three different
divided into the following three main types:                               crop production/land preparation technologies:
farm/enterprise, national, and global level. The                           conventional, minimum tillage, and CA/no-till.
summary of the main economic and financial                                 Assuming a 10 year project life and based on
gains from CA introduction at each level is                                the cost-benefit analysis for each technology the
provided in Table 1 (repeated as Table 34).                                model calculates – for each technology – specific
                                                                           and incremental95 net incomes. The model
                                                                           simulates actual and incremental cash flows
Farm/enterprise level
                                                                           and calculates the main investment efficiency
As a result of the adoption of CA/no-till                                  indicators such as investment and credit needs,
technology, agriculture enterprises are expected                           and NPV.
to obtain more stable yields, decrease the use of
inputs and reduce land degradation. These factors                          The following crop rotation was considered:
can lead to a significant improvement of farm
                                                                           winter wheat, corn, sunflower and soybeans.
economic and financial efficiency. In this respect,
                                                                           The investment was calculated for each
we built a model to illustrate the efficiency of
                                                                           technology assuming a start-up business with all
investment in conservation agriculture using a
                                                                           other conditions being the same.
4 000 hectare farm94 as an example.


94	 A 4 000 hectare farm was considered as a start-up farm
    size at the initial stages of no-till introduction. The underlying
    reason for this assumption was that 4 000 hectares farm
    can be serviced by two 6-meter wide seed drills (one disk              95	 No-till technology adoption as compared with conventional
    and one anchor). These seed drills are among the smallest                  tillage and No-till technology adoption as compared with
    available in the Ukrainian agriculture machinery market.                   minimal tillage.

                                                                                                                                      71
                      Table 35: Investments and depreciation

                         USD thousands                                 Conventional tillage          Minimum tillage                 No-till

                         Investment in machinery                                 620                       880                        880

                         Tractors                                                180                       360                        360
                         Depreciation in %                                        15                           13                       10
                         Seeders                                                  90                       170                         170
                         Depreciation in %                                        15                           15                       15
                         Sprayers                                                 50                           50                       50
                         Depreciation in %                                        10                           10                       10
                         Harvesters                                              300                       300                        300
                         Depreciation in %                                        10                           10                       10

                         Other investments                                       500                       880                       1 360

                         Depreciation in %                                         5                            5                           5

                         TOTAL INVESTMENTS                                   1 120                       1 760                       2 240

                         Investment per hectare                                  280                       440                        560
                         depreciation per ha per year                             25                           38                       41


                      Table 36: Crop budgets

                                          Winter wheat                   Corn                        Sunflower                      Soya
USD per ha
                                Conv.         Min.       No.   Conv.     Min.      No.       Conv.     Min.          No.    Conv.    Min.        No.

Seeds                               180       180        180    141       141          141     78        78           78     92.4    92.4        92.4
kg                                  250       250        250     25        25           25     10        10           10      110     110         110
price (USD/kg)                      0.72      0.72   0.72       5.64      5.64     5.64        7.8       7.8          7.8    0.84    0.84        0.84
Fertilizers                         109       109        109    245       245          245    122       122          122     135     135         135
N (kg)                              100       100        100    200       200          200     90        90           90     200     200         200
N price (USD/kg)                0.40          0.40   0.40      0.396    0.396     0.396      0.396    0.396         0.396   0.396   0.396       0.396
P (kg)                              100       100        100    190       190          190    100       100          100      50      50          50
P price (USD/kg)                0.69          0.69   0.69       0.69      0.69     0.69       0.69     0.69          0.69    0.69    0.69        0.69
K (kg)                                0         0          0     80        80           80     40        40           40      50      50          50
K price (USD/kg)                0.43          0.43   0.43       0.43      0.43     0.43       0.43     0.43          0.43    0.43    0.43        0.43
Pesticides                           11        11         11      7         7            7      4         4            4       5        5          5
Fungicides and other chem.           41        41         41      0         0            0      0         0            0       0        0          0
Herbicides                            4         4         24     25        25           76     12        12           51      10       10         51
Fuel                                110        66         33    110        66           33    110        66           33     110      66          33
L                                   100        60         30    100        60           30    100        60           30     100      60          30
price (USD/L)                        1.1       1.1       1.1     1.1       1.1         1.1     1.1       1.1          1.1     1.1     1.1         1.1
Total materials                     455       411        398    528       484          502    326       282          288     353     309         317
Land lease                           60        60         60     60        60          60      60        60           60      60      60          60
Machinery Maintenance                22        16         10     33        22           10     18        14           10      18      14          10
Labour                               50        38         26     50        38          26      50        38           26      50      38          26
Product handling (per Tonne)          9         9          9      9         9           9       9         9            9       9        9          9

Total production costs              633       569        537    729       659      653        472       412          402     497     437         429




72
                                                                              Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Table 37: Crop yields, prices and revenue

                                    Wheat               Corn             Sunflower               Soya

Yields (tonnes/ha)                    4.7                6                    2                   1.8

Price (EXW, USD/tonne)                200               185                  460                  460

Sales                                 940               1 110                920                  828


Minimum tillage and no-till are characterized by         assumed that yields over a three year cycle will
higher investment needs in machinery (more               be influenced by one normal, one favourable and
powerful tractors and modern direct seeding              one unfavourable year in order to reflect typical
equipment) and additional investment cost for new        grain production variability. In the favourable year
technology adoption (considered under other costs        the yields under all three technologies should
in Table 35. This additional investment cost for new     increase by 20 percent, but in the unfavourable
technology adoption was estimated at USD 240             year yields are expected to decrease by
per hectare for CA/no-till and USD 120 per               25 percent with the use of conventional and
hectare for minimum tillage; including the costs of      minimum tillage technologies and only by
maintaining productivity during the transition period    19 percent with the adoption of CA/no-till.
(additional application of mineral fertilizers).
                                                         Sales revenues for each crop and technology
Based on anticipated machinery use (wear and             were calculated based on EXW96 demand prices
tear) we assumed different depreciation rates            (average over the last three years).
and calculated depreciation cost per hectare. The        In order to account for the negative effects of
model also assumed that different technologies           erosion after the 5th project year, we considered
may require various levels of replacement after          a gradual decrease of yields up to minus
full depreciation.                                       25 percent in farms adopting conventional tillage
                                                         and up to minus 21 percent in farms adopting
Financial needs for each technology were                 minimum tillage.
calculated by taking into account both initial
investment capital (resources spent in purchasing        Based on the Ukrainian fiscal legislation
and substitution of machinery and other assets)          applicable to the agricultural sector, a Single
and operational capital (resources spent to cover        Agricultural Tax (SAT) was charged. SAT is
first year operational costs and possible negative       calculated as 0.5 percent of the official value of
cash flows). Sixty percent of all the financial          agricultural lands used by the company.
needs are expected to be covered by the farms
own capital. The remainder is considered to be           Based on the above assumption, for each
covered through loans from commercial banks at           specific technology the following financial
a 15 percent annual interest rate.                       aggregates were calculated over a 10 year
                                                         period: EBITDA (earnings before interest taxes
The estimated crop budgets for each technology           depreciation and amortization, EBITDA = Gross
and each crop are shown in Table 36.                     Sales – Production Costs), net operative profit
                                                         (Net Operative Profit = EBITDA – Depreciation),
Many of the costs in the crop budget of each             EBT (earnings before taxes, EBT = Net
technology are the same, while the main                  Operative Profit – Interest on capital) and net
difference is determined by herbicides, fuel             income (Net Income = EBT – Taxes). Based on
costs, machinery and labour costs.                       a specifically designed net cash flow (Net CF
                                                         = Net Income – Investment +Depreciation +
Average reference yields were assumed to                 Interests on capital) at a 15 percent discount rate
remain the same for each technology (see                 (r) the NPV (NPV= – (Investment) +
Table 37). These reference yields are expected           ) of the investments was calculated. Based
to fluctuate over time with different intensity
depending on the technology. In particular we            96	 Ex Works.

                                                                                                                                   73
     Table 38: Main investment efficiency indicators for specific technology

      USD thousands                 Conventional tillage           Minimum tillage                       No-till

      Total investment                      1 201                         1 883                            2 291

      Total credit                         1 380                          1 535                            1 704

      inc. operational capital               900                             782                            788

      Total loan servicing                   277                             336                            405

      NPV                                  4 723                          5 523                            6 685

      Net income                            8 766                        11 286                         15 473

      Net income per ha (USD)                219                             282                            387


     Table 39: Main investment efficiency indicators (incremental)

      USD thousands                               No-till Vs. conventional                  No-till Vs. minimum

      Additional investment                                1 120                                     480

      NPV                                                 1 962                                    1 162

      IRR                                                  41%                                      41%

      Net income                                          6 706                                    4 186

      Net income per ha per year (USD)                       167                                     104


     on incremental net cash flow the model also               CA/no-till generates a positive incremental98 NPV
     calculates the incremental NPV and IRR97.                 of almost USD 2 million over a -year project,
                                                               compared with conventional technology. The
     The model has shown that additional investments           corresponding incremental increase in the internal
     required for the adoption of the technology (new          rate of return (IRR) approximates 41 percent; and
     machinery, investment in maintaining soil fertility       an incremental annual net income of USD 167 per
     and weed control during the initial stages of             hectare. If compared with minimum tillage, CA/
     technology adoption, etc) are well recouped by            no-till generates: (i) a positive incremental NPV of
     the additional income generated.                          USD 1.2 million in ten years; (ii) an incremental IRR
                                                               of 41 percent; and (iii) an incremental annual net
     Under the above-mentioned assumptions, our                income per hectare of USD 104.
     investment simulation model generated the
     following main efficiency indicators for each             Based on the scale factor assumed in this analysis
     specific technology (conventional, minimum                (adoption of no-till on 3 million hectares in the
     tillage and no-till).                                     short-term, 9 million hectares in the medium-
                                                               term and 17 million hectares in the long-term),
     In particular, CA/no-till farm with almost                the incremental net income from the introduction
     USD 2.3 million of investment can expect                  of no-till can generate a cumulated countrywide
     to obtain a NPV of over USD 6.6 million.                  financial benefit to farmers would be99:
     Conventional technology is less demanding in
     initial investments and is characterized by lower         •	 short-term: USD 0.41 billion;
     NPV of USD 4.7 million.                                   •	 medium-term: USD 1.23 billion; and
                                                               •	 long-term: USD 2.31 billion.
     With conventional technology farmers can expect
     on average USD 219 of net income per hectare per
     year, switching to CA/no-till allows them to increase
                                                               98	 Indicators were calculated based on incremental CF which
     net incomes to USD 387 per hectare per year.                  was calculated as the difference between specific CF of
                                                                   each technology.
                                                                   The cumulated country-wide financial benefit to farmers
                                                               99	 
                                                                   was calculated multiplying average incremental net income
     97	 Internal rate of return.                                  by the scale factor.

74
                                                                                   Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Sensitivity of investment in CA/no-till                  negatively on the country’s image as a reliable
to main risks                                            trade partner.

In order to evaluate the vulnerability of
                                                         We assumed a reduction of crop production
investments in each specific technology to risks,
                                                         variability with the introduction of CA/no-till in our
we also performed an investment sensitivity
                                                         investment model (no-till technology mitigates
analysis. The main risk for Ukraine is the market
                                                         the negative effects on yields in drought years by
risk. EXW demand prices in the country are
                                                         25-35 percent). Reduction of production volatility
strongly influenced by international prices and
                                                         would allow the country to maintain higher export
sharp declines of international grain prices are
                                                         levels during climatically unfavourable years.
quickly transmitted from international markets
                                                         On the basis of the scale factor assumed in this
directly to producers.
                                                         analysis, the introduction of CA/no-till would
                                                         produce the following additional supply of cereals
The sensitivity analysis took into account
                                                         (wheat and corn equivalent) in drought years
EXW demand price fluctuations. The analysis
                                                         (once every three to five years):
shows that investment in the CA/no-till farming
model is more resistant to market risks than
the conventional one. A CA/no-till farm would            •	 short-term: 0.3 million tonnes of wheat and
probably remain profitable even if grain sale                0.6 million tonnes of corn;
prices decreased by 34 percent from the baseline         •	 medium-term: 1 million tonnes of wheat and
scenario considered in the model. This is not the            1.7 million tonnes of corn; and
case of investment in conventional technology.           •	 long-term: 2 million tonnes of wheat and
The conventional tillage technology generates a              3.3 million tonnes of corn.
negative return (NPV) if prices decrease by more
than 24 percent.                                         This additional supply of cereals is also expected
                                                         to generate off-farm benefits (mainly to traders
Country level benefits                                   and intermediaries). In drought years (once every
                                                         three to five years) additional benefits were
Reduced variability of production as a result of
                                                         estimated to amount to101:
CA at the enterprise level can result in positive
economic benefits at country and global level
                                                         •	 short-term: USD 54 million;
through increasing agricultural production and
export stabilization, which will ultimately lead to      •	 medium-term: USD 161 million; and
improved global food security.                           •	 long-term: USD 304 million.


Reduction in volatility of national production of        Additional benefits at the national level are
cereals and oilseeds is particularly important           expected to derive from the reduction of erosion
as it affects the country’s capacity to export           as an effect of CA/no-till introduction.
grains, oilseeds and vegetable oils. This aspect is
particularly relevant in the light of highly volatile    The benefit from reduced soil erosion was
yields. In 2003, because of the lowest production        quantified on the basis of expert estimates
of cereals and high grain exports in the previous        on SOM and NPK nutrient losses because of
marketing year, Ukraine had to import wheat.             erosion in Ukraine. Of 32.5 million hectares
Based on what was considered a potential threat          of arable land, SOM losses amount to 20-
to national food security, MAPFU imposed bans            25 million tonnes per year (0.6-0.8 tonnes of
on grain exports in 2006, 2007 and 2010. These           SOM per hectare per year) and NPK nutrients
three episodes caused not only economic losses           losses amount to 0.96 million tonnes of
for grain traders and farmers       100
                                          but impacted


                                                              The amounts were calculated with the assumption that
                                                         101	 
                                                              the area under CA/no-till is cultivated only under wheat and
                                                              corn. The total corresponding values have been computed
     Due to a fall of internal EXW demand prices.
100	                                                         in average FOB export prices minus EXW demand prices.

                                                                                                                                        75
     nitrogen, 0.68 million tonnes of phosphorus               supply of cereals deriving from CA/no-till area
     and 9.7 million tonnes of potassium per year.             would be able to feed a further:
     The market value of eroded NPK nutrients            102


     amounts to over USD 5 billion per year (USD 157           •	 short-term: 5.4 million people;
     per hectare). Adopting CA/no-till would reduce
                                                               •	 medium-term: 16.1 million people; and
     erosion by up to 75 percent and thus save
                                                               •	 long-term: 30.4 million people.
     about USD 117 per hectare. At country level
     (considering the adoption factor assumed in this
                                                               Carbon sequestration provides global benefits
     analysis), the introduction CA/no-till would allow
                                                               with a potential to generate income at national
     savings of:
                                                               level. Benefits in terms of carbon sequestration
                                                               and decreased emissions have been calculated
     •	 short-term: up to USD 0.35 billion;
                                                               through EX-ACT103.Thanks to its capacity to
     •	 medium-term: up to USD 1.06 billion; and               mitigate CO2 emissions, the introduction of
     •	 long-term: up to USD 2 billion.                        CA/no-till in Ukraine can reduce annual CO2
                                                               emissions by:
     The adoption of CA/no-till is expected to reduce
     fuel consumption for grain and oilseed production         •	 short-term: 0.5 million tonnes;
     by 50 litres per hectare on average (70 and 30
                                                               •	 medium-term: 4.6 million tonnes; and
     litres compared with conventional and minimum
                                                               •	 long-term: 5.6 million tonnes.
     tillage). At country level it will allow an average
     annual saving of:
                                                               Carbon markets are diverse, unstable and
                                                               unreliable. For these reasons we avoid showing
     •	 short-term: 150 million litres;
                                                               among the actual projected benefits those
     •	 medium-term: 450 million litres; and                   that would accrue by providing a value to the
     •	 long-term: 850 million litres.                         sequestered amounts of carbon in our scenarios.
                                                               Should the reader want a value, at a price of
     Based on fuel import prices the average values            USD 0.5 per tonne (Nasdaq Certified Emission
     would be:                                                 Reduction104), the benefits from CO2 reduction
                                                               would amount to:
     •	 short-term: USD 110 million;
     •	 medium-term: USD 331 million; and                      •	 short-term: USD 0.3 million;

     •	 long-term: USD 625  million.                           •	 medium-term: USD 2.3 million; and
                                                               •	 long-term: USD 2.8 million.
     However, such benefits have not been calculated
     at the national level. They have been considered
     exclusively as farm/enterprise level benefits.


     Global level benefits
     CA/no-till introduction is expected to generate
     benefits also at a global level. Additional amounts
     of cereals produced during drought years
     can reduce export supply volatility and thus
     contribute to improving global food security.
     Considering average annual consumption of 130                   X-ACT is a tool developed by FAO and aimed at providing
                                                               103	 E
                                                                    ex-ante estimates of the impact of agriculture and forestry
     kg of cereals/per capita/per year, the increased               development projects on GHG emissions and carbon
                                                                    sequestration, indicating its effects on the C-balance, an
                                                                    indicator of the mitigation potential of the project.
                                                                     owever, considering CO2 EU Allowances carbon is
                                                               104	 H
                                                                    assumed traded at the same stock market at a price of
          AgroInvest UA Index, http://www.uaindex.net.
     102	                                                          USD 4.44 /tonne.

76
                                                                  Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience




Annex 8 - Institutional settings


According to Regulation Nr.500 of MAPFU,                           of unproductive, degraded and contaminated
approved by the President of Ukraine on April 23                   agricultural land.106
2011, the Ministry is responsible for the formation
and implementation of the Agrarian Policy of                       The State Agency of Land Resources of Ukraine
Ukraine. The Department of Engineering and                         is the central executive authority on land
Technical Support and Agricultural Engineering of                  resources activity. It is directed and coordinated
MAPFU is a subdivision of the Ministry. The main                   by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine through
tasks of the department are implementation of                      the MAPFU; it is included in the system of
state policy on engineering and technical support                  bodies of the executive power and ensures the
and development of the national agricultural                       implementation of state policy in the field of land
machinery production, which includes:                              relations.107 This agency is the central executive
                                                                   authority on land resources activity and is
•	 development of standardization systems                          responsible for all land legislation application and
    and certification of agricultural technical                    administrative matters, including the obligations
    equipment;                                                     to ensure preparation and performance of
                                                                   organizational, economic, ecologic and other
•	 development and implementation of
                                                                   measures directed at a rational use and
    the measures aimed at technical and
                                                                   protection of lands. Through a statutory State
    technological modernization of agriculture;
                                                                   Committee of Land Resources it ensures
•	 development of energy saving technologies;
                                                                   preparation and performance of organizational,
    and
                                                                   economic, ecologic and other measures directed
•	 ensuring and promoting scientific research.                     at a rational usage of lands, their protection from
                                                                   harmful anthropological impact, as well as at
In the last decade, amongst the various                            increasing soil fertility and productivity.
strategic objectives of the Ministry and its
departments, much emphasis was placed on                           UHMC108 is responsible for meteorological,
soil fertility preservation in Ukraine. In view                    agrometeorological and hydrological data and
of the battle against soil degradation and loss                    information. The centre represents Ukraine
of fertility due to erosion, for the last eight to                 at the World Meteorological Organization. As
ten years MAPFU has been advocating for the                        such it also participates in the implementation
advancement of resources savings technologies                      of the UNFCCC. UHMC has a modern
in Ukraine and in particular of no-till105. This                   approach to agrometeorology: “Agricultural
target is part of a strategy that was issued by                    meteorology has passed the development of
MAPFU in 2007, the “State target programme                         qualitative, descriptive level of observations
of the development of Ukrainian village for the                    and assessments of soil and crops to
                 . This programme outlines the
period until 2015”                                                 modern methods of observations, including
urgent needs of innovation and investments in                      satellite information, modelling processes
strengthening the material and technical base                      and phenomena occurring in the “agricultural
of the agricultural sector, the introduction of                    object - environment”109. Agrometeorological
environmentally friendly, resource and energy                      observations are carried out at meteorological
saving technologies, implementing conservation

                                                                   106	 See http://minagro.gov.ua/apk?nid=2976.
                                                                   107	 See http://www.dazru.gov.ua/terra/control/en/.
105	 ìSee http://www.kmu.gov.ua/control/en/publish/article?art_    108	 See www.meteo.gov.ua.
    id=20455267&cat_id=244315200.                                  109	 http://www.meteo.gov.ua/.

                                                                                                                          77
     stations located at a distance of about 50 km         •	 slow technical and technological
     from each other (there is a network of 140                modernization; and
     agro-met stations), that allows highlighting the      •	 consequent low productivity.
     agrometeorological situation at national level
     and in specific areas, with sufficient accuracy to    Amongst the main goals of this strategy are:
     obtain current weather conditions data and their
     influence on major crops. Agrometeorological
                                                           •	 increasing competitiveness of agricultural
     information is produced daily and at fixed decade
                                                               production;
     intervals. Observations include: phenology;
                                                           •	 increasing manufacturability and decreasing
     crop height; crop population density; weeds,
                                                               use of input material in agricultural
     pest and disease damage; productive humidity;
                                                               production;
     crop wintering and overall crop conditions’
     assessment. Main crops being observed are:            •	 increasing share of the soil cultivated by using
     wheat, rye, barley, canola, oats, corn, buckwheat,        minimal or no-tillage technologies.110
     millet, peas, soybeans, sunflower, spring rape,
     sugar beet, perennial herbs, fruit and grapes.        The national Institute for Soil Sciences and
                                                           Agro-chemistry Research (O.N. Sokolovskiy) of
     The National Academy of Agrarian Sciences of          NAAS was established in 1959 as a successor
     Ukraine (NAAS) is a state research organization       of the Department of Soil Sciences at the
     responsible for ensuring the scientific               Kharkiv Agricultural Institute and the Ukrainian
     development of agricultural in Ukraine. It            Scientific-Research Institute for soil sciences of
     conducts fundamental scientific research in the       the Ministry of Agriculture of the USSR. Basic
     field of agriculture by developing on the basis of    activities of this NSC include:
     the scientific knowledge of new products aimed
     at sector efficiency development. The NAAS is         •	 development of the new scientific directions
     composed of 301 institutions, research institutes,        in soil science, agrochemistry and soil
     centres and enterprises. The Academy employs              protection;
     25 500 people including 5 000 scientists, 331         •	 scientific provisions of rational exploitation of
     doctors and 1 698 science candidates. With                the land resources, protection and increase of
     the aim of the practical application of scientific        soil fertility;
     achievements the NAAS has a vast network of
                                                           •	 scientific justification of the national and state
     associated institutes and research centres all over
                                                               programmes;
     the country. In 2012 NAAS adopted a strategy
                                                           •	 scientific-methodological standardization and
     of development of the agricultural sector (until
                                                               metrological provisions in soil sciences and
     2020). The strategy aimed at development of
                                                               agro-chemistry industries;
     an effective, resource-saving, environmentally-
     friendly, socially oriented, knowledge-based          •	 elaboration of the modern agro-technologies
     economy that can satisfy domestic demand and              in soils fertilization and increase of soil
     ensure a leading position in world market for             fertility;
     Ukrainian agricultural and food products. The main    •	 preparation of scientific personnel;
     problems of agricultural development accordingly      •	 creation of modern soil/geo-information
     to this strategy are:                                     systems with the aim of improving the
                                                               diagnosis of soils conditions, and their
     •	 insufficient dissemination of highly innovative        estimation and classification; and
        technologies, and their adaptation to
        the needs and economic possibilities of            Development of methodology of observation
        agricultural production;                           of soil coverage on the basis of modern
     •	 low level of innovation in the agricultural        technologies.
        sector;

                                                           110	 See http://uaan.gov.ua/.

78
                                                                                Ukraine: Soil fertility to strengthen climate resilience



Main achievements of the NSC include:                  The development of machinery and technologies
                                                       testing activities in Ukraine is directly related to
•	 large-scale soil mapping (1957-1961);               the creation of the “Ukrainian Research Institute
                                                       of Forecasting and Testing of Equipment and
•	 soil grouping, zoning and classification;
                                                       Technologies for Agricultural Production named
•	 identification of regularities in soil processes
                                                       after Leonid Pogorilyy” (Ukr SRIFTT named after
    and regimes;
                                                       L.Pogorilyy).
•	 studies on soil fertility; and
•	 studies on erosion of soils.                        The National University of Life and Environmental
                                                       Sciences of Ukraine (NULES) is one of the
Recently the Institute elaborated:                     leading educational, scientific and cultural
                                                       establishments of Ukraine. Over 37 000 students
•	 strategy of balanced exploitation,                  and more than 600 PhD Doctoral students are
    reproduction and management of soil                studying at 21 faculties of the Kyiv Territorial
    resources;                                         Centre, at the Southern Affiliate “Crimean Agro-
•	 national report “On state of Ukrainian soils        Technological University” and at 12 regional
    fertility”;                                        higher educational institutions. Regarding the
                                                       agricultural research sector, NULES educational
•	 concept papers on chemical amelioration of
                                                       activities are aimed at the dissemination of
    acid and salty soils; and
                                                       scientific and technical knowledge and advanced
•	 concept papers on agrochemical procurement
                                                       experience among employees of the agricultural
    of agriculture for the period until 2015.
                                                       economic sector, in order to improve their
                                                       educational and professional level.
The National Scientific Centre “Institute of
Agriculture”111 of NAAS has a history going back
                                                       •	 The Department of Soil Science and Soil
to 1900 with the creation of the agrochemical
                                                           Conservation named after Prof M.K.Shykula113
laboratory of Kyiv Society of Agriculture and
                                                           was founded in 1922. Students, post-
Agricultural industry to conduct analysis on soil
                                                           graduate, and master students are involved
samples and seeds in order to help increase
                                                           in scientific work. The department presents
agricultural productivity. Since then the Institute
                                                           a scientific school of conservation farming -
has developed significant theoretical information
                                                           research and development of soil cultivation
on crop rotation, optimization of seeding
                                                           technology based on minimum tillage and
processes, anti-erosion measures and practices
                                                           organic agriculture. Scientific works on soil
and fertilization.
                                                           conservation technologies were developed by
                                                           the scientists of the Department on the basis
The National Scientific Centre “Institute of
                                                           of long-term field researches for the main
Mechanization and Electrification”112 of NAAS
                                                           soil-climatic zones of Ukraine, demonstrating
was founded on April 3rd, 1930 by Council
                                                           the advantages that these technologies
decision of the People’s Commissars of the
                                                           provide on soil properties and fertility and
Soviet Union. The Institutes main activities are:
                                                           consequently on crop production.

•	 development of energy-saving technology;
•	 development mechanization, automationan
    delectrification of agricultural production; and
•	 creation of modern competitive machines,
    mechanisms, equipment and other technical
    facilities.




111	 See http://zemlerobstvo.com/.
112	 See http://nnc-imesg.gov.ua.                      113	 See http://nubip.edu.ua/node/1232.

                                                                                                                                     79
Please address questions and comments to:
Investment Centre Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla – 00153 Rome, Italy
                                                                I3905E/1/06.14




investment-centre@fao.org
www.fao.org/investment/en

Report No. 9 – June 2014
