                                                              91863


       Improving Health Outcomes and Services for Kenyans

Sustainable Institutions and Financing for Universal Health Coverage



                    Kenya Health Policy Forum



            18-20 March, 2014, Windsor Hotel, Nairobi




            FINAL REPORT ON THE PROCEEDINGS




                                 1
Table of Contents


I.     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................ 4
     KEY MESSAGES AND POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE MoH.......................................... 4
II. CONTEXT .................................................................................................................... 8
III.        SCOPE OF THE REPORT ....................................................................................... 15
IV.         EMERGING GLOBAL EXPERIENES FOR ACHIEVING UHC ............................ 15
V. SERVICE DELIVERY ................................................................................................ 16
VI.         ENSURING SUSTAINABLE FINANCING ............................................................ 19
VII.        ENHANCING GOVERNANCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE HEALTH SY...21
VIII. PROMOTING CLIENT SAFETY AND QUALITY OF HEALTH ......................... 26
IX.         ACCERELATING PROGRESS TOWARDS UHC: THE WAY FORWARD .......... 29
       1.      SERVICE DELIVERY ......................................................................................... 29
       2.      HEALTH FINANCING ........................................................................................ 31
       4.      CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES ACROSS THE FOUR THEMATIC AREAS ........... 32
X. POTENTIAL AREAS OF WBG SUPPORT ................................................................ 33
XI.         CONCLUSIONS ...................................................................................................... 35
XII.        Annex 1: Programme ................................................................................................ 36




                                                                 2
Abbreviations

EMMS            Essential Medicines and Medical Supplies

FBOs            Faith Based Organizations

HLF             High Level Forum

HSSF            Health Sector Services Fund

KEMSA           Kenya Medical Supplies Agency

KENAS           Kenya Accreditation Services

KQMH            Kenya Quality Model for Health

LMICs           Low-and-middle income countries

MDGs            Millennium Development Goals

MoH             Ministry of Health

MoF             Ministry of Finance

NCDs            Non Communicable Diseases

NHIF            National Hospital Insurance Fund

OOP             Out-of-pocket

PETS+           Public Expenditure Tracking and Service Delivery Indicators Survey

PPP             Public Private Partnership

THE             Total Health Expenditure

UHC             Universal Health Coverage

USAID           United States Agency for International Development

WBG             World Bank Group




                                       3
  I.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


Kenya is currently going through transformational changes in its health system with the
ongoing devolution and strong commitment shown by the Kenyan Government to achieve
Universal Health Coverage (UHC). The Kenyan Ministry of Health (MoH), in collaboration
with the World Bank Group (WBG) and United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), convened the Kenya health policy high level forum (HLF) in March 2014 to share
national and international experiences and find options for achieving UHC. The HLF
specifically focused on four themes:

       •   Delivering services to improve health outcomes among women and children, with
           emphasis on poorer segments of the population;
       •   Enhancing governance and effectiveness of the health system to deliver quality
           health care in a devolved setting;
       •   Ensuring sustainable health financing to achieve UHC; and
       •   Promoting client safety and quality of health care.

The forum was guided by the following principles:

       •   Leadership by Kenyan experts and institutions with global experts and institutions
           sharing knowledge and experiences;
       •   Learning with emphasis on practical know-how from countries with devolved
           health systems (e.g., Brazil, Ghana, India etc.); and
       •   Providing analytical and advisory inputs to inform pros and cons of different
           options, and ensuring that choices are compatible with the Kenyan context.

The HLF brought together Kenyan and international experts to share their hands-on
experiences to help Kenya in identifying options that will ensure sustainable institutions and
financing to achieve UHC. Representatives from national and county levels of Government
actively participated in the HLF and experiences from Brazil, Ethiopia, Ghana, India and
Mexico provided insightful directions for Kenya. The high level participation from the
WBG, USAID and other key partners supporting the health sector reflects strong
commitment from development partners to support Kenya’s vision to achieve UHC.

KEY MESSAGES AND POLICY OPTIONS FOR THE MoH


SERVICE DELIVERY
Key messages:

   1. Over 60% of Kenyans use public primary health care services, which are most
      equitable.
   2. Ensuring functional primary health care system that delivers quality essential health
      services remains most critical for achieving UHC and improving health outcomes.




                                              4
   3. There is need for transparent and timely information that provides credible data on
      service delivery.
   4. The Kenyan public hospitals need to improve their efficiency. Networking of public
      hospitals would help to rationalize resources and strengthen referral.
   5. Kenya is uniquely placed to harness partnership with the private sector to improve
      service delivery.

Policy Options:

   1. Focus on improving the delivery of primary health care services with county health
      teams taking lead, working in close partnership with the National Government, to
      address specific gaps in service delivery identified by the recent Service Readiness
      Assessment and the public expenditure tracking and service delivery indicators survey
      (PETs+), for achieving Vision 2030 and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

   2. Develop an investment case and seek additional resources, both domestic and donor,
      to make existing primary health care services fully functional in all counties.

   3. Introduce Conditional Grants to counties linked to improved delivery of primary
      health care.

   4. Optimize hospital efficiency through networking and effective referral systems.
      Additional investments in hospitals should be linked to improved efficiency and
      access to underserved populations.

   5. Develop a roadmap in consultation with counties to sustain ongoing successful
      engagement with faith based organizations (FBOs) in the devolved health system.

   6. Build on the existing dialogue with the private sector healthcare providers and test
      different models of public private partnerships (PPP) to inform appropriate policies
      and regulatory frameworks.


HEALTH FINANCING

Key Messages:

   1. Healthcare utilization in Kenya is improving but out of pocket (OOP) expenditure
      continues to be high, which is inequitable and inefficient.

   2. Each country needs to evolve a health financing system relevant to its context and
      sustainable for achieving UHC.

   3. Tax based financing from domestic resources will be necessary to subsidize the poor
      and informal sector to reduce inequities.


                                            5
   4. Fiscal space is limited and there are competing demands which pose an important
      constraint for achieving UHC.

   5. UHC requires strong political commitment and leadership. Kenya currently has both,
      which provides a unique window of opportunity.

   6. UHC cannot be achieved without effective and transparent institutions and strong
      regulatory systems providing oversight. High administrative costs are not desirable in
      UHC.
Policy Options:

   1. Provide leadership to finalize the healthcare financing strategy and prepare a roadmap
      for UHC, describing the milestones and targets.

   2. Start with a small benefit package that is affordable, and ensures access to quality
      basic health services for all.

   3. Ensure sustainable domestic financing by demonstrating efficient use of budgeted
      resources and seek additional resources from both the Government of Kenya and
      partners by demonstrating tangible results.

   4. Proactive engagement of MoH with the Counties and the National Treasury is
      essential to get more domestic resources for health including innovative approaches
      for raising revenues.

   5. Reform and regulate National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) to provide a strong
      institutional base for achieving UHC with improved legal framework and required
      capacity, especially information technology for claim processing and rationalizing
      human resources to effectively play its role.


DEVOLUTION

Key messages:

   1. Devolution requires good understanding of the change process and new roles and
      responsibilities. This will involve building relationships and finding accountable
      ways of working together by all stakeholders at both levels of government.

   2. The two levels of government should maintain a well-coordinated health system
      guided by the national priorities as identified by country’s health policy and strategic
      vision to achieve national and global commitments such as Vision 2030 and MDGs.

   3. Timely supply of quality commodities is essential for delivering quality health
      services. Most public procurement and supply chain management systems face

                                             6
       challenges in timely flow of finances, poor demand forecasting and weak supply
       chain management.

   4. A shorter cycle for ordering and fewer layers in distribution help to improve
      forecasting and availability of commodities at health facilities.

   5. Implementation research coupled with transparent and credible monitoring and
      evaluation systems helps to inform and improve reform policies to scale-up evidence
      based interventions.

Policy Options:

   1. Develop an effective communication strategy to inform all stakeholders in the health
      sector about devolution, and their complementary roles and responsibilities.

   2. Strengthen the dialogue between two levels of government through the newly
      established intergovernmental and chief executives of health forums by strengthening
      liaison mechanisms.

   3. Ensure that the national health policy guides strategic planning and budgeting at both
      levels of government with credible monitoring and evaluation systems in place to
      assess performance in a transparent way.

   4. Ensure commodity security for national priority programs building on the gains made
      by the Kenya Medical Supplies Authority (KEMSA), and involve counties in
      KEMSA’s governance structures.

   5. Counties need to focus on enhancing capacity at facility level for demand forecasting,
      making ordering cycles shorter and ensuring rational use.

   6. Counties also need to allocate adequate budgets for essential medicines and medical
      supplies (EMMS), and make timely payments to suppliers to sustain the supply chain.

   7. Monitor the availability and quality of EMMS at all public facilities.


CLIENT SAFETY AND QUALITY STANDARDS

Key messages:

   1. Government has a clear role in setting standards of care at different levels and putting
      in place systems for regulation and enforcement of quality. This however needs to be
      complemented by approaches that promote the drive for quality such as accreditation.

   2. Each country needs to evolve a framework for accrediting health facilities with
      appropriate institutional arrangements to improve quality of care.




                                              7
   3. Incentives and recognition of improved quality of care through accreditation can
      improve the provider behaviour and reduce the gap between the knowledge and
      practice.

   4. Credible systems need to be put in place to monitor the quality of care objectively.

Policy Options:

   1. Review and amend relevant laws and strengthen existing regulatory bodies to ensure
      effective enforcement.

   2. Support existing institutions such as Kenya Accreditation Service (KENAS) to
      develop tools and build capacity for accrediting health facilities.

   3. Create incentives for improved quality through Results Based Financing (RBF), and
      provider enrolment for providing UHC.

   4. Ensure that NHIF focusses on its core competencies of pooling and purchasing
      services, while dedicated agencies such as KENAS will gradually take over the role of
      accreditation.

 II.   CONTEXT


The Kenyan health system is currently undergoing transformation in line with
devolution

With the devolution, decision-making, finance and responsibilities for delivery of essential
health services in Kenya are now transferred to the newly created 47 county governments.
The national government is now responsible for policy formulation, capacity building and
providing oversight for the national referral facilities. The Kenya Health Policy 2012-2030
identifies policies and actions required to achieve health goals and specifies institutional and
management arrangements required under the devolved health system. Timely and effective
implementation of the policies and actions under the new health policy will be critical for
Kenya to sustain health gains made in the last decade and further improve health outcomes
envisaged by its Vision 2030.

The current government, which came to power in April 2013, is keen to ensure that there is a
smooth transition to a devolved health system and that all Kenyans enjoy the right to health
as stipulated by the Constitution. UHC is among top priorities identified by the government
to achieve these noble goals. Such renewed strong political commitment to achieve UHC
requires Kenya to ensure effective coverage for essential health services while ensuring
financial protection. The country needs to take strategic decisions to: (a) implement well-
tailored programs relevant to the Kenyan context to improve equitable access to quality
health services, especially for the rural poor; (b) enhance governance and efficiency of the

                                               8
health systems and relevant institutions to get better value for money; and (c) provide more
domestic funding for the sector.

Kenya has made steady and significant progress in improving health outcomes and
utilization of essential services

Kenya achieved notable reduction in child mortality and effectively reduced the burden of
major communicable diseases during the past decade. As shown in the Table 1, infant and
under-five mortality declined by nearly a third during the period 2003 to 2008. During the
same period, the proportion of children fully immunized increased by a tenth. The recent
data suggests that the prevalence of HIV among Kenyan adults declined from 7.2 % in 2007
to 5.6 % in 2012. The ownership of bed nets increased threefold and tuberculosis treatment
success rates are now close to 90%.

                          Table 1. Kenya’s Achievements in the Health Sector
                Health outcome/output                  KDHS      KDHS               Change
                                                        2003      2008
Under 5 mortality rate                                  115        74       Decreased by 36%
Infant mortality rate                                    77         52      Decreased by 32%
Children fully immunized                                 57         68      Increased by 11%
                                                                            points
Contraceptive prevalence rate                            39         46      Increased by 7% points
Prevalence of HIV (population 15-49 years)1              7.2        5.6     Decreased by 1.6%
                                                                            points
Women receiving antenatal care                           88         92      Increased by 4% points
Ownership of Bed nets                                    22         61      Increased by 39% points
TB treatment success rate (World Development             80         87      Increased by 7% points
indicators)


Despite notable achievements in child health and control of communicable diseases,
indicators on maternal health and nutrition stagnated and Kenya is now facing a dual
burden of disease.

       a. Maternal mortality ratio remains high and estimated to be around 448 per 100,000 live
          births in 2008 and the UN estimates2 suggest that nearly 7,900 women die every year
          due to pregnancy related causes.
       b. Utilization of maternal health services continues to remain low with less than a half of
          pregnant women receiving skilled care at child birth, while the proportion of women
          making at least four antenatal visits declined from 64% in 1993 to 52% in 2003 and to
          47% in 2008.
       c. Over a third of Kenya children (35%) are shorter for their age, which adversely
          affects their future economic productivity and this statistic did not significantly
          change since early 90s.
1
    Kenya AIDS Indicator Surveys 2007 and 2012
2
    Trends in maternal mortality 1990-2008, WHO, UNFPA, UNICEF and the World Bank

                                                   9
   d. The burden of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in Kenya is increasing faster than
      the global average. NCDs related deaths in Kenya are higher at 624 per 100,000
      compare to 573 deaths per 100,000 globally.
   e. Kenya is estimated to have more deaths due to injuries compared to the global
      average (116 vs. 78 deaths per 100,000).
   f. Current life expectancy in Kenya is comparable to life expectancy of China in late
      1960s while the total fertility rates are comparable with Brazil in early 1970s (Figures
      1 and 2 below).

               Figure 1: Life Expectancy of African Countries in 2011 compared to China




           Figure 2: Total Fertility of African Countries in 2011 compared to Brazil




Kenya still faces significant challenges in health service delivery

The Kenyan health system faces several challenges typical of many low-and-middle-income
countries (LMICs). Some of these challenges include:

   a. Geographical and socioeconomic inequities in access to health care services

The number of health care facilities per 10,000 populations compares to the World Health
Organization (WHO) recommendation of two facilities, and is above that of many countries

                                              10
in the region. For example, health facility density per 10,000 populations in Tanzania,
Zambia, and Burkina Faso is estimated as 1.5, 1.3, and 1.6 respectively.

The main challenge for Kenya is wide disparities between counties. Bungoma had the lowest
facility density of less than one facility per 10,000 persons, while Mombasa had the highest
density of over 3.5 facilities per 10, 000 population (Figure 3). The national average facility
density was 2.04 facilities per 10,000 persons.

Figure 3: County Health Facility density, per 10,000 populations




About half of the Kenyan population lives more than five kilometers away from the nearest
health facility (Figure 4). Wide disparities exist between regions, ranging from 20.2% in
Nairobi to 85.7% in North Eastern.

The poorest populations have limited access to health care services and report poorer health
outcomes (Table 2). Only one woman out of five from the poorest wealth quintile was
delivered by a skilled birth attendant during their recent deliveries, compared to four out of
five women (81.4%) in the highest quintile. Wide disparities are also reported for access to
antenatal care and family planning. Further, child mortality and stunting are much higher
among the poorest households.




                                              11
        Figure 4: Proportion of people living 5 Km or further from the nearest health
        facility3

                   Kenya                                                     47.7
                    Rural                                                       51.5
                   Urban               11.9
                 Nairobi                           20.2
                 Central                                   28.6
                   Coast                                                                    60.3
                 Eastern                                                                       63.8
           North Eastern                                                                                           85.7
                 Nyanza                                                  43.7
              Rift Valley                                                    48
                Western                                                   45
                             0    10          20          30      40        50         60        70    80           90
                                                                  Percentage


Table 2: Socioeconomic inequities in coverage of key services and health outcomes4

Socio-           Skilled birth   Unmet need          Infant            Neonatal        Child          % of stunted
economic         delivery        for family          Mortality         Mortality       Mortality      children
quintile                         planning            Rate              rate            Rate
Lowest                20.3            20.1                 98               39               34             44.4
Second                31.3            15.8                102               33               40             39.2
Middle                41.9            10.6                 92               31               26             34.4
Fourth                52.9            11.0                 51               41               12             29.1
Highest               81.4             8.7                 68               29               13             24.5

    b. Inadequate numbers of health workers, unequal distribution and poor skills mix

Kenya is estimated to have a total of 16.8 health workers for 10,000 populations, which is
less than the minimum density recommended for achieving the health related MDGs5. The
WHO estimates that countries with fewer than 23 doctors, nurses and midwives per 10,000
population as unlikely achieving health related MDGs. In 2010, Kenya had about a half of
the recommended doctors, nurses and midwives (Figure 5).




3
  Kenya Integrated Household and Budget Survey 2005/06
4
  Kenya Demographic Health Survey 2008-2009
5
  Kenya Service Availability and Readiness Assessment Mapping (SARAM) 2013

                                                          12
                                                   The bigger problem is the uneven distribution of
                                                   the existing workforce as shown in Figure 6.
Figure 5: Density of doctors, nurses and
midwives in 49 WHO priority countries              While the counties in Northern Kenya tended to
                                                   have lowest availability of health personnel per
                                                   population, Mombasa and Uasin Gishu had the
                                                   relatively higher staff availability.

                                                      Figure 6: Number of health workers per 10,000
                                                                      population6

                                                                                        60.0




                                                        Health workers per 10,000 pop
                                                                                               50.0
                                                                                        50.0              46.1

                                                                                        40.0
                                                                                        30.0                             24.8 24.2
                                                                                                                                            18.5                                                           16.8
                                                                                        20.0                                                           14.0
                                                                                                                                                               10.6
                                                                                                                                                                             7.4 5.3
                                                                                        10.0                                                                                         4.6

                                                                                         0.0




                                                                                                                                             Nairobi
                                                                                                                                   Nakuru




                                                                                                                                                                             Kajiado
                                                                                                                                                                                       Turkana
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mandera
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kenya
                                                                                                           Uasin Gishu
                                                                                                                          Kiambu




                                                                                                                                                        Lamu
                                                                                                                                                                Tana River
                                                                                                Mombasa



The recent PETS+ showed that about a third of the health staff were absent from duty on an
unannounced visit. The Kenyan providers were found to have much better knowledge in
diagnosing and treating common health conditions. However, such knowledge is not getting
translated in to better health due to a large gap in translating such knowledge into actual
practice (Figure 77). Close to 90% of doctors are able to reach the correct diagnosis but only
                                    54% give the full treatment required for the condition.

                                                c. Need to get better value for investments made in
                                            the health sector:
      Figure 7: Know-do-gap

                                            Hospitals still receive the largest share of the health
                                            budget compared to primary health care facilities, which
                                            are critical for delivering essential healthcare and known
                                            to be more equitable. In 2010/2011 Financial Year, the
                                            Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation, which was
                                            responsible for primary health care services, received
                                            40.5% of funds allocated to the health sector. Further,
                                            the absorption of allocated funds remained low in the
                                            sector and both public and private facilities operate




6
    Kenya Service Availability and Readiness Assessment Mapping (SARAM) (2013)
7
    Health Service Delivery Indicators and Public Expenditure Tracking in Kenya, PETS Plus (2012)

                                                      13
below their maximum levels of efficiency. For example, in 2011/2012, total absorption
capacity was 87.1%. Absorption capacity for development expenditure was much lower at
65.3%.

High levels of OOP payments, low levels of government spending on health, and high
dependency on external funding characterize the Kenyan health financing system

There is very limited risk pooling and prepayment in Kenya. OOP payments continue to
remain an important source of health care funding, accounting for 36.7% of Total Health
Expenditure (THE) in 2009/20108. Government funds accounted for 28.8% of THE, while
donor funding accounted for 34.5%. The share of government spending on health has
continued to increase in absolute terms. In 2010, total government spending on health
amounted to US$1,047 million, compared to US$ 788 million in 2005/2006. However,
government spending on health as a percentage of the THE has recorded a declining trend
from 8.0 % in 2001/02 to 4.6 % in 2009/10, which is relatively low compared to other
countries in the region (Figure 8). A large share of donor funds is channelled off-budget to
support priority national disease control programmes. Heavy reliance on external funds that
support national priority national programs
contributes little towards overall health systems
strengthening and has negative implications for
sustainability including the risk of contingent               Figure 8: Share (%) of
                                                           governments’ allocation to the
liabilities. Clearly, the need to reform the health
                                                                   health sector
financing systems and increase domestic resources
for health has never been greater.

Devolution presents opportunities to address
existing challenges

Kenya’s devolution has been described as one of the
most ambitious implemented globally9. Devolution
presents opportunities to address challenges in the
Kenyan health system, by taking resources closer to
the people, promoting accountability, improving
equity and efficiency. But devolution also poses new
challenges for the country especially the rapid
transition to devolved systems due to political
compulsions. International experiences show that
creating the right governance and accountability
structures, clarifying functions, policies and
legislations and establishing strong working relationships between local and national
governments are critical in making devolution successful.



8
    Kenya National Health Accounts 2009/10
9
    Decentralisation and Sub-National Regional Economics (World Bank)

                                                     14
Kenya can draw from lessons from countries with devolved health systems

Several Low-and-Middle Income Countries (LMICs) including Ethiopia, Ghana, India,
Mexico, and Thailand have implemented devolution with differing degrees of success and
some have made remarkable progress in reforming their health financing systems for UHC.
Pathways need to be explored based on lessons from these countries as well as innovations
undertaken within Kenya to find appropriate mechanisms for improving health outcomes,
pooling resources, making strategic purchasing and establishing sustainable institutions for
achieving UHC. Recent decisions taken by the Government to eliminate payment at the point
of primary health care service delivery and free access to maternal health services are in the
right direction. The challenge however is in delivering these important commitments under a
devolved health system and ensuring sustainable financing for UHC.

III.   SCOPE OF THE REPORT

The HLF provided an opportunity for Kenya to draw on local and international lessons, by
bringing together experts to share experiences, deliberate and identify the way forward for
Kenya. This report summarises discussions from the HLF, and draws on these deliberations
to provide policy options for Kenya for achieving UHC including identification of potential
areas of WBG’s support over the medium term to the Kenya health sector. The report is
structured around the four key themes guiding the HLF.


IV.    EMERGING GLOBAL EXPERIENES FOR ACHIEVING UHC


The main message in the opening session was that health systems reforms for UHC should be
context specific, informed by social, economic and political environment and responsive to
country needs, while drawing on lessons within Kenya and from countries that made progress
towards to UHC.

In the opening remarks, made on behalf of Mr. James Macharia, Cabinet Secretary for
Health, Dr. Masasabi, Head, Directorate of Policy Planning and Health Care Financing, noted
that UHC is a major priority in Kenya. He reported that devolution presents new challenges
and opportunities for service delivery in the country, and emphasized that the HLF should
help Kenya to identify new ways to respond to these challenges and to better utilize
opportunities. The importance of linking outcomes from the HLF to the Kenya Health Policy
(2012-2030) was also highlighted.

Dr. Tim Evans, Director, Health, Nutrition, and Population Network, World Bank, noted that
there is no magic bullet to achieve UHC, but implementation experiences show that
challenges across countries are similar. He also emphasized the importance of country
leadership for making UHC a priority and meeting expectations of the people. UHC involves
making fragmented health systems better integrated to ensure continuum of care while
providing financial protection for the worse off. There is now strong evidence to show that
investing in health is a wise investment for economy and health should no longer be

                                             15
considered as a consumption sector. He summarized the key issues that need to be
considered for UHC based on global implementation experiences (Box 1).

While making a strong case for UHC in Kenya, he summarized the key lessons from UHC
implementation experiences emphasizing the importance of country driven reforms,
managing the political economy, and credible systems for monitoring progress towards UHC.

Dr. Ariel Pablo-Mendez, Global Health Administrator, USAID, emphasized the great
window of opportunity in Africa to further improve health outcomes. Nearly 20 countries in
the region, including Kenya, are moving in to middle income status. There has been a huge
decline in infant mortality that contributed to saving lives of nearly 100 million infants and
the rate of reduction of under-five mortality has nearly doubled in Africa. However, high
levels of maternal mortality and fertility still remain major challenges.

                                                            As economies are growing in the
                              BOX 1.
                                                            region, more resources will be
          KEY IMEPLEMENATION ISSUES FOR                     potentially available. This provides a
                     ACHIEIVNG UHC                          great opportunity for the health sector to
      •    Who? Targeting the poor and disadvantaged,       leverage such resources to improve
           mandatory enrolment, information sector and      health outcomes. He encouraged Kenya
           overcoming discrimination (beyond income
           poverty).
                                                            to: (i) support collaborative efforts to
      •    What services? A prioritized benefit package     address high OOP payments for health
           that goes beyond health MDGS including NCDS      which are known to be an important
           based on burden of disease and cost              contributor for impoverishment; and (ii)
           effectiveness                                    promote PPP and other innovations to
      •    How to deliver? Addressing supply side
                                                            improve access to new technologies.
           constraints (human resources, commodity supply
           chain, and quality of care), facility vs.
                                                      While celebrating the health gains, there
           community, public vs. private.
    •      How to finance? Tax based vs. contributory,
                                                      is urgent need to focus on eliminating
           Using sin tax : Tobacco, Alcohol, low valueextreme poverty and it is possible to
           nutrition foods, high sugar drinks         further reduce preventable maternal and
    •                                                 child deaths. The UHC is timely and
           How to pool? Large pools more cost effective
    •      How to pay? Incentive based payments are   provides a wise way forward to address
           better associated with improved results
                                                      these two challenges. He encouraged
                                                      strong South-South collaboration and
learning and emphasized the criticality of mobilizing more domestic resources for health.

 V.        SERVICE DELIVERY

           a. Key messages

Kenya can derive more from current investments to the health sector by reducing
inefficiency. Ensuring functional primary health care system that delivers quality essential
health services remains most critical for achieving UHC and improving health outcomes.
Networking of public hospitals would help to rationalize resources and strengthen referrals.
Health systems reforms for UHC should take advantage of the rapidly growing private sector

                                                     16
and existing networks of FBOs by developing partnerships to optimally use available health
care resources.

       b. Detailed discussions from presentations and panel discussions

Dr. Patrick Amoth from the MoH presented achievements and key challenges in service
delivery. He highlighted Kenya’s achievements in improving various health outcomes, but
effective delivery of essential health services still remains a challenge. The main service
delivery challenges faced by Kenya are : (a) suboptimal human resources for health due to
shortage, mal-distribution, unfavourable working conditions and low motivation; (b)
inadequate equipment that gets further compounded by poor maintenance and rapidly
changing technologies; (c) poor supply chain management leading to frequent stock-out of
essential medicines; (d) weak leadership and management at all levels with limited cross
sector coordination and community participation; and (e) low levels of investment in the
sector as well as poor efficiency in allocating and using budgets provided to the sector.
These supply side challenges get further compounded by poor demand for essential health
services due to socioeconomic, cultural and geographic barriers, resulting in low and
inequitable coverage of essential health services and poor health outcomes. Scaling up high
impact interventions, strengthening county health systems, promoting public-private
partnerships, and enhancing accountability were identified as potential mechanisms for
addressing existing challenges.

Results from the recent PETs+ showed that supply side constraints are enormous in the health
sector but often do not receive required attention. While physical constraints such as
availability of basic infrastructure including water and sanitation and essential commodities
are high, quality related constraints including absenteeism, large knowledge practice gap and
underutilization of existing infrastructure are also considerable. Dispensaries and health
centres are more constrained compared to hospitals.

The efficiency study undertaken by Dr. Urbanus Kioko, University of Nairobi, revealed that
Kenya can derive more value for money by improving efficiency in both public and private
health sectors. While inefficiencies exist in the public and private sectors, the private sector is
generally more efficient for higher levels of care, while the public sector is relatively more
efficient at the level of health centres. Despite limitations in data availability and scope of the
analysis, findings of the study clearly highlighted that UHC initiatives should be
accompanied by efforts to strengthen health systems and reduce inefficiencies. Such efforts
should involve a detailed assessment of the causes of inefficiencies, redistribution of
resources across geographical regions and levels of care where necessary. It is however
important not to lose the equity focus in public sector provision and link payments to
performance. Both individual and institutional incentives need to be built into health
financing arrangements to improve efficiency and contribute to better health outcomes.

The panel discussion following the formal presentations highlighted the importance of
adopting a holistic approach to service delivery through PPP and the need for a PPP
framework, which creates a conducive environment for mutual benefit. The existence of a


                                                17
thriving private sector and the strong network of FBOs in Kenya present a great opportunity
for collaboration and drawing combined resources to undertake innovations to address
service delivery challenges. The need for engaging with the private sector in the provision of
publicly funded essential services was highlighted.

Experiences of the African Medical Research Foundation (AMREF), Kenya, showed that the
private sector can make significant contributions for improving maternal and child health
outcomes through community based primary health care interventions. Key lessons drawn
from AMREF’s experience working in challenging settings are: (a) promoting collaboration
between the MoH and implementing partners; (b) engaging the community early on as an
important partner for delivering services; and (c) encouraging local innovations and adopting
interventions to local settings is also critical. All panellists stressed potential opportunities to
improve efficiency and achieve better health outcomes from a well-structured PPP including
sharing equipment, training of health workers, supply chain management and common
quality standards. Building health workers’ capacity and monitoring quality should be
important aspects of any intervention.

The FBOs represented by the Christian Health Association of Kenya emphasized their
commitment to improve service delivery and achieve UHC. FBOs are widespread in Kenya
and operate in some of the remotest parts of the country. The FBOs have much stronger
footprint in remote parts of the country and have been actively engaged in service delivery by
the MoH in the past by seconding staff and provision of essential medicines to deliver
affordable health services in marginalised areas. The devolution however has posed some
new challenges for these ongoing partnerships and FBOs are uncertain on how this
partnership will continue in the devolved health system.

H. E. Capt. Ali Ibrahim Roba, the Governor of Mandera, who represented the Council of
Governors, shared early experiences of county governments including initiatives to improve
service delivery. He specifically focused on the practical challenges being faced by
marginalised counties in delivering essential health services. Such counties inherited non-
functional health systems from the national government and health indicators were poor.
Devolution presented an opportunity to address service delivery challenges through, for
example, reviving non-functional health facilities by employing additional staff, and
purchasing equipment and supplies that are responsive to local health needs. However,
counties urgently need capacity and support to translate health policies into effective service
delivery. He also emphasized the importance of credible monitoring and evaluation systems
to inform ongoing strategies to enable mid-course corrections and promoting synergy among
all counties for achieving national outcomes.

During the Questions and Answers session, the participants emphasized the need for
purposeful investments for making the health systems functional and importance of having an
effective referral backup. They also stressed that all counties are not equal and special needs
of some counties needs to be addressed to bring them on par with others. For the PPPs to
effectively function, there is need for honesty from both the public and private sectors. Some
practical questions were also raised regarding the contractual staff recruited under the

                                                18
Economic Stimulus Package; inclusion of FBOs under the free maternity care; and who will
pay for warehousing and distribution costs for national program supplies being made by
KEMSA.

VI.    ENSURING SUSTAINABLE FINANCING

       a. Key messages

There is ‘no one size fits all’ solution to UHC. Health systems in each country are unique
and UHC reforms should be designed based on country’s own experiences and specific
needs. The reforms should also be dynamic so that they can respond to implementation
experiences. Mandatory health insurance remains the primary vehicle to expand UHC but it
requires complementary interventions to expand coverage. Regardless of the approach
adopted, tax based financing plays a critical role by providing subsidies for the poor and
informal sector to improve equity. A strong national risk pool and a well-managed single
purchaser institution that ensures efficient and transparent use of resources are important
features of success stories.

           b. Detailed discussions from presentations and panel discussions

Mr. Elkana Ong'uti, Chief Economist, MoH, in his presentation on health financing
challenges and efforts towards UHC in Kenya highlighted that a UHC agenda is in line with
the right to health as articulated by the Kenyan constitution and the Vision 2030. There is an
agreement among stakeholders that UHC is the way to go and a strong political will currently
exists in the country. This political will along with coordinated support from development
partners presents a policy window, which can be used to fast track the implementation of
UHC. Moving away from OOP payments to risk pooling is an important step towards
realization of these rights. Low levels of government funding, fragmentation in health
financing and service delivery, limited absorptive capacity and uncertainty related to
devolution are some of the challenges hindering the progress to UHC. Earmarking tax funds
for UHC, improving efficiency in revenue collection and service delivery, having a single
national risk pool and improving governance of institutions responsible for revenue collection
and purchasing can help to address these challenges.

Mr. Stephen Muchiri, Chief of Party, Health Policy Program-Kenya shared the preliminary
results of the Health Expenditure and Utilization Survey (2013) that covered 34,000
households from 44 counties. These results showed overall increased utilisation of health
care services. The outpatient visits increased from 1.9 annual visits per capita in 2003 to 3.1
in 2013. The inpatient admissions also increased from 15 to 38 per 1000 population. During
this period the proportion of sick not seeking healthcare decreased from 22.8% to 12.7%.
Inability to bear the cost still remained the main barrier for accessing care. The public sector
remains the main source of health care services for the majority of Kenyans, accounting for
more than 60% of outpatient and inpatient visits. Even though OOP payments have declined
over the past decade, they still remain high and potentially contribute to impoverishment of



                                              19
about a tenth of the Kenyan households. Coverage for health insurance remains low,
especially among the poorest compared to the richest quintile (3% vs. 42%).

The Panel discussion identified the urgent need for additional resources for achieving UHC,
while ensuring that such resources need to be equitably distributed to benefit the poorest
population. An analysis of fiscal space identified three main ways of finding resources for
financing UHC: (i) rationalizing current health financing by reducing wastage; (ii) increasing
tax revenue by improving tax compliance and introducing new taxes that target the rich in
society (e.g., consumption tax on luxury items, capital gains tax, etc); and (iii) increasing
borrowing as Kenya is still within the sustainable levels, but such borrowing should be done
from external sources rather than internal borrowing with higher interest payments. The role
of domestic resources for sustaining priority national programs such as HIV/AIDS was also
discussed. Currently, 85% of the HIV financing comes from partners. Potential sources of
funding identified included health insurance contributions, establishment of a trust fund
supported through 1% of total government revenue, innovative financing mechanisms such as
charging airtime levy and taxes on remittances from Kenyan diaspora among others. The
important advocacy role the civil society could play for increased domestic funding for
HIV/AIDs and other priority programmes was also highlighted. The findings of a benefit
incidence study highlighted that inequities in outpatient and inpatient care had declined over
the years. However, wide income and geographical inequalities still exist for the hospital
care. The FBOs and public primary health care facilities actually serve the poorest
population more. The findings suggest that outpatient care could also be quite catastrophic
highlighting the importance of including it in the national health insurance cover.

International experiences from India and Mexico clearly showed the role of political
economy in driving UHC. The Indian experience highlighted the need for a strong
autonomous regulatory institution, with adequate power to enforce regulations. This could be
done through an existing institutional mechanism such as the broader Insurance Regulatory
Authority (as done in case of India) or creating a dedicated institution for regulating health
insurance (as done in Chile and Columbia). Effective regulation will help to safeguard
against systemic risks, prevent market misconduct and anti-competitive behaviour, minimize
information asymmetry and make sure that social objectives are being achieved. Such
regulation requires appropriate legal framework and the agency should have independent
source of financing. The MoH however still needs to play a role in product regulation by
defining the benefit package and provide leadership for regulating the provider market. The
Indian experience also highlighted the need to start with a limited benefit package, which can
be expanded as the economy grows, as an option for countries facing resource constraints.
The challenges of controlling provider irregularity, containing cost, purchasing services
through private health insurance, with no capacity to monitor them, also came out clearly.
There were also challenges in institutional and managerial capacity, inadequate consumer
information and too much emphasis of quality assessments of structures and staffing rather
than processes.

Mexico over the past few years moved in to a single national social health insurance scheme
with a strong stewardship role played by the MoH. This helped to address the large

                                             20
inequalities between insured and non-insured as well as between states resulting in poor
overall health outcomes. The popular health insurance for basic health services caps the
administrative cost at 6% and the country maintains a catastrophic health insurance fund for
covering highly complex interventions. The key achievements are: everyone is covered with
a fully funded benefit package, reduced inequalities and steep increase in public expenditure
on health. However, the OOP payments still remains high and contribute to nearly half of the
total health expenditures. Experiences from Mexico clearly highlight the importance of
political economy of engaging with sub-national governments and the role of the national
government in providing stewardship including setting quality standards. Engaging the
Ministry of Finance (MoF) at early stages of the process improves political buy-in. The
Mexican experience also emphasized the importance of long-term investments in research
that generate evidence for policy. Having a sufficiently funded and staffed economic analysis
unit within the MoH equipped the ministry with evidence to support negotiations between the
MoF and MoH on matters related to increasing fiscal space for health. Adopting “a phased
approach” to implementation based on resource availability and promoting harmonization of
risk pools from the start is important as it is difficult to subsequently harmonise a fragmented
system.

Global experiences highlight that UHC is a concrete and funded reform and requires
fundamental changes. Cosmetic changes and continuing to do business as usual will not help.
Tax based financing is a must for UHC and health insurance remains the primary vehicle.
Experiences from the Philippines suggest that giving local governments the responsibility of
funding services for the poor can be challenging. The country therefore ended up
recentralising health care funding for the poor and earmarking a part of health care funds for
expanding effective coverage.

VII.   ENHANCING GOVERNANCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE HEALTH
       SYSTEMS TO DELIVER QUALITY HEALTH CARE

       a. Key messages from the session

Devolution calls for different governance, organizational and management structures,
including new institutions, new relationships and new ways of working, which should ensure
transparency, responsiveness and mutual accountability. The two levels of government
should maintain a well-coordinated health system guided by the national priorities as
identified by country’s health policy and strategic vision to achieve national and global
commitments such as Vision 2030 and MDGs. Timely supply of quality commodities is
essential for delivering health services. Most public procurement and supply chain
management systems face challenges in timely flow of finances, poor demand forecasting
and weak supply chain management. National and county governments, health providers and
other stakeholders need to be accountable to the people they serve. Without improving
governance at all levels, Kenya cannot get full benefits from investments in the health sector.
Implementation research coupled with transparent and credible monitoring and evaluation
systems helps to inform and improve reform policies to scale-up evidence based
interventions.



                                              21
Detailed discussions from presentations and panel discussion


Dr. S. K. Sharif, Former Director of Public Health and Sanitation, MoH, in his presentation
on key health systems governance challenges emphasized the importance of effective
management of the political process within a country for improving governance. The key
aspects of good governance were listed (Box 2) and the need to identify policy champions
who will push the reform agenda highlighted. Improved governance and commitment should
start from the highest level and that all stakeholders should be accountable to communities
they serve. For improving accountability, there is urgent need to strengthen capacity at the
county level.

Several tools exist in Kenya to monitor governance and collect evidence to inform reforms.
These include regular PETS and National Health Accounts and Citizen Report Cards.
Results from these tools have informed the design of reforms to improve accountability and
efficiency. Based on such assessments the Kenyan government introduced new interventions
to promote good governance in the public health sector. Key among these are the Health
Sector Services Fund (HSSF), which provides direct funding to primary health care facilities
and addresses the constraint of operation and maintenance funds not reaching rural health
facilities identified by successive PETS. Introduction of the pull system of supply chain
management coupled with capitalization and reforms of KEMSA to improve timely
availability of high quality and appropriate medicines and medical supplies at health
facilities.

Dr Ruth Kitetu, from the MoH, presented the opportunities and challenges of devolution in
Kenya. She noted that the country has made significant progress in implementing different
aspects of devolution (Table 3) and emphasized MoH’s commitment towards ensuring that
health policies are aligned to the constitution. Challenges remain at all levels and relate to
limited finances, lack of clarity on roles, functions and responsibilities and weak leadership
and management capacity at the national and county levels. Successful transition to devolved
health systems will largely depend on: (a) clarifying functions, policies and regulations, (b)
establishing strong working relationships between county and national governments, and (c)
investing in capacity building.




                                             22
       Table 3: Progress in health systems building blocks under devolved health system


Leadership                                           Policy and Strategy
   • Assignment and transfer of functions                • Development of the Kenya Health Policy
       between the two levels of government                  (2012-2030), Strategic Plan and Draft
   • Restructuring the national level to be                  Health Law
       more responsive to county needs                   • Development of the Functional Assignment
   • Establishment of County Executives                      Policy Paper to guide devolution process
       and Health Management Teams
   • Establishment of the health sector
       Inter-governmental Forum
Finance                                              Human Resources for Health (HRH)
   • Budgets disaggregated to match newly              • Transfer of HRH payroll to counties
       transferred functions                           • Establishment of County Public Service
   • Conditional transfer grants for Level 5              boards
       hospitals
   • Removal of user fee for primary health
       care
   • Free maternal health at all public
       health facilities



                                 Box 2: Key aspect of good governance

   •   Policy Direction: Maintaining the strategic direction of policy development and implementation;
   •   Intelligence gathering: Detecting and correcting undesirable trends and distortions;
   •   Collaboration and coalition : Articulating the case for health in national development;
   •    Regulating the behaviour of a wide range of actors - from health care financiers to health care
       providers;
   •   System design: Ensuring a fit between strategy and structure and reducing duplication and
       fragmentation.
   •   Establishing transparent and effective accountability mechanisms.



Commodities and shared services
  • All Counties have signed
     Memorandum of Understanding with
     KEMSA and started placing orders
  • Counties have been given authority to
     manage level 5 hospitals that provide
     referral services for clusters of counties


Experiences shared by Chief Executives from counties showed that counties have made good
progress in developing strategic plans and ensuring continuity in service delivery.
Presentations by two County Executive Committee Members for Health from Busia and
Kisumu counties Dr. Maurice Siminyu and Dr. Elizabeth Ogaja respectively, noted that
devolution has enabled counties to improve management systems, provide closer supervision
to staff, generate information for better planning and allow closer interactions between


                                                    23
community members, local leaders and county governments. Despite some challenges such
as limited understanding within the health sector, weak leadership and governance, limited
fiscal space, low revenue allocation and limited capacity, the devolution presented huge
opportunities to prioritize county needs and work with local implementing partners. It also
facilitated better stakeholder participation in county level planning to improve service
delivery. Establishment of County Assembly health committees helped in lobbying and
resource mobilization. Increased government allocations to the health sector, development of
norms and standards and county capacity development in legislation and management were
identified as important for addressing implementation challenges at the county level.

In the panel discussion, Dr. James Nyikal from the Parliamentary Health Committee noted
that lack of clarity on roles and responsibilities and limited interactions between county
governments and parliament have contributed towards challenges in devolution of health care
services. The parliamentary health committee can play an active role in designing the right
legislations and lobbying for more resources allocations to the sector.             Effective
communication and sensitization are identified as critical factors to enable people to
understand their entitlement as well as the health staff and other stakeholders to understand
the new governance structures in devolved health systems to maximize benefits. The
provisions in the Kenyan constitution are based on principles of UHC and he encouraged
MoH and other stakeholders to make use of these provisions to promote accountability and
support the implementation of UHC. There is need for effective engagement between MoH
and county governments for improving governance, efficiency and service delivery.

Dr. Dabar Abdi from the Transitional Authority noted that while progress has been made to
transfer health functions based on institutional assessments and legal notices, there have been
challenges related to numerous pieces of legislation that are difficult to understand and
implement. Limited sensitisation of devolution process contrary to expectations, political
interference, and delayed transfer of payroll to county level also adversely affects service
delivery. Improved communication and stakeholder involvement, development of relevant
policies to clarify issues and improvement in human resource management are important for
successful transition. He called for more public education on what the Constitution provides
for in devolution, and the roles of both levels of government.

Discussions on governance of pharmaceutical supply chain systems in Kenya revealed that
the KEMSA has achieved some notable success in strengthening pharmaceutical supply chain
management. However, more efforts should be directed towards health facilities to improve
quantification, ordering and rational use of medicines. Other challenges such as inadequate
capacity, related to sub-optimal management and coordination skills, lack of criteria to
allocate budgets for medicines supply at the central level and weak capacity of EMMS
management at the county level should also be addressed. While devolution presents
opportunities for increased public participation and competition in the supply chain, it is
important to build capacities in supply chain management to avoid waste.




                                              24
Global experiences shared by Prof Prashant Yadav, Director, Healthcare Research,
University of Michigan noted that supply chain systems in many settings face similar
challenges being encountered by Kenya
                                             Box 3: Key questions faced by supply chain
(Box 3). These include how to leverage systems globally
public and private investments and how
to be responsive to patients. Mixed • How to leverage public and private investments
models of pharmaceutical supply exist,           to build, strengthen and improve mixed
                                                 pharmaceutical supply networks?
but in most countries supply chain is
                                             • How to build patient-centric medicine supply
managed by semi-autonomous agencies              chains?
regulated by the government. The major • How to optimize supply networks to suit the
challenge of medical supplies chain is           growing and changing needs of the health system
frequent uncertainties in financial,             e.g. UHC?
                                             • How to listen to “signals of demand” and in them
demand, and physical flows. Other
                                                 into the supply chain planning process?
challenges include: weak incentives for • How to keep track of flows through the supply
performance       management;         poor       chain?
information flows; lack of transparency;
and poor or no consumption tracking. Shorter cycles for forecasting and fewer layers in the
distribution system can improve accountability and efficiency, and reduce wastage. He
highlighted the need to derive strategies to manage uncertainties in the supply chain system
by understanding health facility demand and establishing a well-managed financial and
procurement process. Currently KEMSA has systems in place that are comparable with best
global practices and these structures should be protected. In addition, some competition
should be encouraged and governments should recognise the private sector’s role in
supplying essential commodities, as they are often effective and can reach the remotest parts
of the country better with well aligned incentives.

                                    Prof. David Peters, Head, International Health, John
                                    Hopkins University shared international lessons on
                                    delivering health services. He emphasized that there is no
  “If you are overseeing            ‘magic bullet’ to successful implementation. While
                                    countries follow their own implementation path, good
    or implementing an
                                    outcomes require enabling contexts, evidence based
 important health policy
                                    interventions and effective implementation. He
 or program, you should             highlighted the important role of innovation and
 have an implementation             organization change, flexible and inclusive planning and
 research agenda”. Prof             problem solving in effective implementation. Learning
   David Peters, Head,              by doing underlies successful implementation in many
                                    settings. An implementation research agenda that is
   International Health,
                                    supported by a team of experts and which engages key
       John Hopkins
                                    stakeholders is critical for ensuring that investment in
         University                 UHC policies will work.

                                    Experiences from India, Ghana, Ethiopia, Brazil and
elsewhere highlighted that effective implementation of reforms requires an enabling context,


                                              25
 political commitment and evidence based interventions. The Indian experience emphasized
 that money in itself is not enough. Carefully designed institutions, which allow flexibility and
 timely flow of resources from the treasury to the local level, and which have the right mix of
 human resources are important determinants of success. The need to strengthen supply and
 have a robust monitoring and evaluation framework to match demand side interventions also
 came out clearly from the Indian experience. Assignment of functions, clarity of roles,
 simplicity in guidelines, and flexibility in operation are also critical.

 Ethiopia and Brazil shared their experiences of strengthening primary health care services
 and the positive impacts on health outcomes arising from these reforms. Infant Mortality Rate
 (IMR) in Ethiopia declined from 133 per 1,000 live births in 1999 to 59 in 2010, while in
 Brazil a 10% increase in Family Health
 Teams (i.e. primary health care units)              Box 4: Primary Health Care in Brazil: Key
                                                                    design features
 decreased IMR by 4.56 and reduced
 maternal mortality by 41 per cent. Brazil             • Additional funding for Family Health
 also       recorded       126,000         fewer            Units (new buildings, equipment, health
 hospitalizations related to diabetes and                   workers etc.)
                                                       • Financial incentives from the national
 respiratory diseases in three years, saving
                                                            government for Family Health Teams
 the country an equivalent of US$ 63                        to help municipalities retain health
 million. The Brazilian experience also                     workers in rural areas
 emphasized the importance of political                • Continuous training of teams in
 support beyond technical aspects of primary                partnership with academic institutions,
 health care. Retaining human resources in                  drawing heavily on use of ehealth,
                                                            including telemedicine.
 remote rural areas and providing facilities
 with financial incentives are keys to
 success. The Ethiopian experience also emphasized the need for strong governance structures
 and a well-coordinated system that is built on one health plan. The need for shared strategic
 priorities and targets at all levels also enabled realization of effective primary health care in
 Ethiopia.

 Ghana’s experiences further reiterated the need for a health system that effectively engages
 the community in planning and a systematic process of translating research findings into
 national health programme. Effective coordination of development partners that included a
 common health sector reform agenda, joint annual planning and review summits, agreed
 sector-wide indicators and common management arrangements played a critical role in
 transforming the Ghanaian health systems towards UHC.

VIII.   PROMOTING CLIENT SAFETY AND QUALITY OF HEALTH SERVICE
        DELIVERY

        a. Key messages

 Government has a clear role in setting standards of care and putting in place systems for
 regulation and enforcement of quality. This however needs to be complemented by
 approaches that promote the drive for quality such as accreditation. Each country needs to

                                                26
evolve a framework for accrediting health facilities with appropriate institutional
arrangements to improve quality of care. Systems need to be in place to monitor the quality
of care objectively. Incentives and recognition of improved quality of care through
accreditation can improve provider behaviour and reduce the gap between the knowledge and
practice.

       b. Detailed discussions from presentations and panel discussion

Dr Pacifica Onyancha, Head, Directorate of Health Standards Quality Assurance and
Regulation (DHSQAR) Safety of the MoH noted that quality of care remains important
constraint for achieving better health outcomes in Kenya. Limited capacity for inspection of
facilities and periodic review of provider competence; inadequate resources to effectively
implement quality assurance systems; lack of a central agency for regulating training; and
lack of a national accreditation framework and fragmented quality improvements activities
were identified as important challenges for improving quality and patient safety. Quality can
be improved by implementing step-wise innovative and realistic quality assurance
programmes for healthcare providers and facilities. To address quality challenges, a
Directorate of Health Standards, Quality Assurance and Regulations that is responsible for
quality assurance, norms and standards, regulations and patient safety, has been established
within the MoH. The Kenya Quality Model for Health (KQMH), an integrated approach to
improved quality of health care, has also been put in place.

Ms. Doris Mueni, Assistant Director, Health and Safety, the Kenya Accreditation Service
(KENAs) noted that currently KENAS does not provide accreditation of health facilities due
to a lack of an accreditation framework in the country. Currently accreditation of health
services in Kenya is limited to private medical laboratories. The KENAS works closely with
established regulators across different sectors. Discussions with the MoH and other
stakeholders on a way forward for accreditation of health facilities in Kenya are ongoing.
She emphasized that accreditation improves quality of internal operations, safeguard
credibility of results and enhance market image of providers.

Experiences from the National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF), presented by Ms. Julia
Ouko, Senior Benefits and Quality Assurance officer, highlighted that the NHIF act gives the
fund mandate to accredit health facilities to deliver health services for NHIF beneficiaries.
The NHIF is currently working with IFC and PharmAccess to integrate and implement the
SafeCare quality accreditation process that places health facilities on a quality improvement
trajectory and works with facilities to improve quality to an acceptable standard. A step-wise
accreditation approach (Box 5) that eventually leads to certification is being implemented by
NHIF to improve quality of services.




                                             27
International     experiences    in      Box 5: NHIF step-wise accreditation process
measuring Quality and Safety,            • Step 0 – Entry level- poor quality
shared by Mr. Jishnu Das, of The         • Step 1 – Very Modest Quality- continuous need
World Bank revealed that the link            for technical support
between increased health care            •   Step  2 – Modest Quality Strength- requires
                                             medium technical assistance
spending and improved health
                                         • Step 3 – Medium Quality Strength- acceptable
outcome is weak. He noted that               but vulnerable to changing environment.
quality of care is the missing link      • Step 4 – Strong Quality Systems- quality
between health care spending and             systems in place
improved health outcomes. Drawing        •   Step  5 – Continuous Quality Improvement-
on the Indian experiences Mr Jishnu          evident  long term commitment to quality
                                         • Step 6 – Excellent Quality Systems-
noted that while increase in both
                                             Accreditation
demand and supply side health
financing have dramatically increased deliveries in health facilities. However, health
outcomes such as IMR and Neonatal Morality Rate have not improved much due to poor
quality of care. Hence, Kenya will need to focus more on quality of care along with the
increased focus on improving access of care to reduce inequalities between counties.
Incentives for improved performance may work but can also distort treatment away from
what doctors may consider optimal.

He noted that data collection on quality remains a challenge due to the multidimensional
nature of quality. Improving quality of care requires simple but relevant measurement
indicators that can be monitored over time to improve performance. Examples of how quality
can be measured include Generalized, Reducible Metrics indicators of care that lead to higher
                                 rates of correct diagnosis and treatment for all illnesses or
                                 tracer conditions that allows for better measures of diagnosis
                                 and treatment. The Kenyan health providers are more
                                 knowledgeable relative to other countries, but such
“You can’t improve
                                 knowledge is not getting translated in to practice. A pilot
   what you don’t                study exploring different approaches to measurement is
      measure.”                  ongoing  in different parts of the country.

 Mr. Jishnu Das, The            Ms. Nicole Spieker, Director SafeCare, PharmAccess
                                Foundation shared experiences of using a step-wise quality
     World Bank
                                improvement process tailored to small and medium-sized
                                health care providers. She noted that quality improvement
                                based on realistic standards for health care providers
                                contributes to trust for willingness to pay (by various
                                financiers and users), sustainability of quality improvement,
and accountability. Introducing standards enables healthcare facilities in resource-restricted
settings to measure and improve quality, safety and efficiency of their services and allows for
benchmarking of providers across the health system.




                                              28
IX.       ACCERELATING PROGRESS TOWARDS UHC: THE WAY FORWARD


Achieving UHC is high on the Kenyan Government’s policy agenda. This political
commitment, existing support from development partners and the global momentum to UHC
present an opportunity for Kenya that should not be missed. While it is clear that political
commitment currently exists and that UHC is the way to go, there is scope for further
improvements in health policies to ensure and sustain efficient, equitable and high quality
services, while providing financial risk protection to all Kenyans. This section highlights
some of the most important recommendations from HLF.

KEY POLICY OPTIONS

    1. SERVICE DELIVERY
Improving coverage and quality of services depends largely on availability of key inputs, how
these are combined and distributed across different levels of care and how services are
organised and managed to ensure communities can access them, when needed. Policy options
to address service delivery challenges in Kenya include:

             a. Strengthen primary health care services

Primary health care services are cost-effective and contribute significantly to improved health
outcomes more than any other interventions. Devolution provides a unique opportunity to
strengthen primary healthcare service delivery in Kenya. With counties now responsible for
delivering health care services, some of the chronically persisting weaknesses to make the
existing facilities operational will be addressed. Counties like Mandera have taken initiatives
to make all 52 primary health care facilities in the county operational by recruiting staff,
while Machakos is focusing on improving access to safe deliveries by providing maternity
units to all primary health care facilities. Such initiatives are extremely important for
improving access to health care services in Kenya and should be encouraged. Potential areas
of support include:

      •   Providing counties with additional funding for primary health care services for
          construction, equipment, EMMS and recruitment of health workers.
      •   Equipping primary health care facilities to offer basic emergency obstetric care. The
          Governors and Chief Executives of Health need to give priority attention to address
          the existing gaps including effectively coordinating support from partners in their
          respective counties to achieve this objective.
      •   Most primary health centres have 20-30 beds which are grossly underutilized.
          Therefore the option of using some beds for servicing pregnant women as maternity
          waiting beds could be an option, especially in counties where road connectivity is
          poor.
      •   Providing incentives to primary health care facilities through conditional grants to
          help them attract and retain health workers in rural areas, address issues related to
          absenteeism and other service delivery challenges.


                                               29
   •   Continuously engaging county governments to sensitize them on the criticality of
       addressing gaps in services delivery related to absenteeism and know-do-gap.

           b. Create opportunities to engage with the private sector

PPPs enable governments and other organization to work together to reach a common goal by
sharing resources and competencies. PPP can involve different levels of engagement
including policy and dialogue, public service provision, regulation, financing and information
exchange. Kenya has a vibrant private sector, which is rapidly expanding to rural areas
through franchised networks. It is important to effectively leverage such networks for public
goods. Key areas that require attention include:

   •   Developing a roadmap in consultation with counties to sustain ongoing successful
       engagement with FBOs including support for EMMS and deployment of health
       workers in resource limited settings.
   •   Establishing a clear PPP framework to guide policy, procedures, institutions and rules
       that define and govern the implementation of PPPs at national and county level.
   •   Testing different models of PPPs to inform appropriate policies.
   •   Strengthening the institutional framework and the capacity of the PPP unit in the
       MoH to effectively manage PPPs at national level and to provide similar support to
       county level.

           c. Rationalize hospital resources for improved efficiency

   To promote technical efficiency and ensure that resources are allocated where they are
   needed most, it is important to focus on developing networks of hospitals across counties,
   rather than directing investments to build high level hospitals in each county. Working
   closely with counties, the national government should develop comprehensive 5 year
   plans for efficient hospital resource use. Such a process will require:

   •   Development of national guidelines for rationalizing hospital services and staff for the
       whole country and for all levels of care.
   •   A review of hospital capacity including equipment, hospital beds and occupancy rates
       and determining reasons for low or high occupancy rates in individual facilities.
   •   A needs analysis of county health service including an understating of how these
       needs can be met through provision of health services within or beyond Counties
       through, for example, implementing contracts with a variety of service providers to
       meet these needs in a cost-effective way.
   •   Developing a network of strongly regulated providers that can be contracted by
       national and county governments to deliver specific services within or outside the
       public sector, based on agreed targets and in line with the approved county and
       national budgets.




                                             30
   2. HEALTH FINANCING


           a. Develop a vision and strategy for advancing progress towards UHC

A UHC strategy highlights the guiding principles, the actions needed to make progress to
UHC and identifies a roadmap based on country’s priorities and context. It also provides a
guiding framework for all players in the sector. The UHC process requires continuous
dialogue, exchange of ideas and coordination of activities. A committee with representation
from different stakeholders is essential to spearhead the UHC agenda, including guiding the
development of a vision, strategy and a roadmap. The following actions are required for the
development and implementation of a UHC strategy in Kenya:

   •   Bring together stakeholders from FBOs, private sector, non-governmental
       organisations (NGOs), other ministries, and development partners to contribute
       towards preparing a roadmap for UHC that describes the milestones and targets.
   •   Provide leadership to finalize the health financing strategy and effectively manage the
       necessary changes taking into considerations interests of different stakeholders, while
       remaining focused on the principles of UHC goals.
   •   Establish a high-level multi-sectoral of relevant stakeholders with representatives
       from the MoF, County governments and social protection secretariat. The committee
       should hold regular meetings and provide feedback to the Cabinet Secretary, through
       the Head, Directorate of Policy, Planning and Financing.

           b. Increase domestic resources for health

Sustainable domestic health financing is central to improved service delivery and UHC. The
Kenyan health financing system needs to be re-engineered towards attracting more domestic
resources to support priority health programmes and to strengthen health systems. However,
advocating for increased domestic resources for health should go hand in hand with efforts to
promote efficient use of existing resources.

   •   The national government should explore ways to increase government revenue
       through improved revenue collection and innovative taxes that target the richest in
       society.
   •   Supporting counties to develop resource allocation formulas that reflect local needs
       and guide resource allocation process across and within sectors would be useful tools
       for counties to advocate additional resources from the national level and for the
       county MoHs to negotiate with treasury.

           c. Create a strong legal and regulatory framework for health insurance and
              reform the NHIF

A strong regulatory framework for health insurance is needed to safeguard the interests of
contributors, enforce minimum standards, provide a grievance channel for consumers and
ensure that health insurance arrangements significantly contribute to UHC goals.

                                             31
       •   Review the Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) Act to include both private and
           public health insurers. Existing laws should be amended to make them explicit in
           matters related to the health insurance and ensure that they conform to
           international standards and that the regulatory body has the mandate to sanction
           and disqualify insurances that fail to abide by the rules.
       •   Strengthen the capacity of the IRA to regulate the health insurance market in
           Kenya.
       •   Establish or strengthen mechanisms for health insurance members to raise
           complaints related to service provision and financial risk protection to the
           regulatory bodies.
       •   Reform the NHIF to make it an efficient purchaser for all Kenyans based on
           recommendations from the strategic review, the high level task force and other
           available evidence.

   3. CLIENT SAFETY AND QUALITY STANDARDS

Providing people-centered, safe and effective care is at the core of health systems. Patient-
centered care improves patient experiences and creates public values for health services.
Quality standards are central to supporting the delivery of effective health care services and
for ensuring that Kenyans realize the right to health outlined in the constitution. The MoH
with support from development partners and other stakeholders should:

   •   Develop a national quality and patient safety strategy anchored in a core set of
       principles shared by all stakeholders including national and county governments,
       provider organizations, consumers and local communities among others.
   •   Review and amend relevant laws, regulations and frameworks so as to strengthen
       DHQRS and existing regulatory bodies to ensure effective enforcement of patient
       safety standards and quality of care.
   •   Include patient-centred care as a dimension of quality in its own right in strategic and
       policy documents and feedback about patients’ experiences in organizational
       approaches to quality improvement.
   •   Support ongoing efforts on quality improvement such as SafeCare, evidence based
       research and others as key tools for implementing KQMH
   •   Support existing institutions such as KENAS to develop tools and build capacity for
       accrediting health facilities
   •   Adopt valid and reliable quality and patient satisfaction measurement tools and put
       mechanisms in place to measure and monitor whether adopted efforts contribute to
       quality of care .

   4. CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES ACROSS THE FOUR THEMATIC AREAS


           a. Capacity building
Limited capacity remains a major challenge across all four themes discussed at the HLF.
Strengthening capacity is crucial for efficient policy and strategy development, financial and

                                             32
contractual negotiations, regulation, monitoring and evaluation. Such core capacity needs to
be developed within different units of the MoH at the national and county level. The MoH in
collaboration with stakeholders should work closely with county governments to identify
capacity challenges and derive measures to address them.


             b. Generate local evidence to inform policy
Evidence will be needed at all stages in the process from informing the vision and strategy for
UHC, to implementation and evaluation. The economic analysis of health systems reforms
for UHC as well as monitoring and evaluation of programs in a real world setting are needed.
In addition, budget preparation at the national and county level needs to be based on sound
analysis of issues, evidence and options. Achieving this requires establishing a well-staffed
UHC research unit within the MoH, with the technical capacity to generate and use research
evidence to inform policy and practice and to manage the UHC implementation process,
including capacity for learning from experience and adopting reforms to achieve UHC goal.

 X.      POTENTIAL AREAS OF WBG SUPPORT


The discussion and priorities arising from the HLF have provided important inputs to the
WBG support for Kenya over the medium term. Such support involves a combination of
learning and lending activities complemented by relevant technical assistance and South-
South exchange initiatives. Some potential areas of proposed support are listed below:

Lending:

Building country capacity for achieving UHC

Implementing Kenyan context specific UHC reforms requires sufficient capacity, continuous
dialogue and knowledge exchange to learn from other countries that have implemented UHC.
Such experience sharing helps Kenya to avoid some of the mistakes made by other countries
while Kenyan experiences help other countries keen to make progress towards the UHC.
Specifically the WBG can support Kenya through:

      1. Working closely with the MoH and county governments, identify human capacity
         gaps to develop and implement specific capacity building activities. The potential
         areas for such capacity building include leadership and management; organizational
         and human resource development in devolved health system; financial management
         and procurement; PPPs in service provision, planning, monitoring and evaluation of
         health service delivery.
      2. In collaboration with local training institutions, support flexible capacity building
         efforts especially targeting the marginalised counties (i.e., Arid and Semi-Arid
         Lands). This will include the option of scholarships for diploma level nurses and
         medical technician training to youth with required qualifications selected by county
         governments and other specific training needs identified through capacity needs
         assessments.



                                              33
   3. Strengthen existing mechanisms for intergovernmental dialogue such as
      Intergovernmental Forum on Health and County Chief Executives of Health Forum
      by strengthening existing liaison mechanisms with the national government.
   4. In collaboration with the World Bank Institute, support knowledge exchange
      programmes on UHC reforms.

   Strengthening institutions

   1. Identify specific areas of weakness in institutional arrangements, organisational
      practices and governance set-up of key institutions responsible for health care
      financing, quality of care and regulation.
   2. Provide technical support to address identified areas of weakness collectively with
      other partners for key institutions that are expected to play an important role in the
      transition to UHC. The main institutions would include the NHIF, IRA and KENAS.

   Supporting health financing reforms for UHC

      1. The recently approved additional financing to the ongoing Health Sector Support
         Project will support the phase I of two key health financing reforms. These two
         reforms include :
             a. The Results Based Financing design will be further improved based on the
                 lessons learnt from the Samburu pilot and scaled up to 20 counties in arid
                 and semi-arid parts of Kenya.
             b. The Health Insurance Subsidies for the Poor will be piloted in all counties
                 covering 500 households in each county. This will be complemented by
                 targeted initiative to provide similar subsidies for the vulnerable and
                 marginalized populations.
      2. The follow-on operation planned in FY 2016 will support the next phase of
         reforms in Kenya to accelerate progress towards UHC and this will be informed
         by the findings of the impact evaluation to be undertaken by the WBG. The WBG
         will also play catalytic role to convene all partners that are keen to support UHC.

Learning:

Supporting evidence based policy making

   1. Support capacity building for the design and implementation of evidence based
      policies. This will be done through supporting the creation of an UHC unit in the
      MoH, supporting investments in capacity building for the unit and offering technical
      support when needed.
   2. Strengthen partnerships with local training/research institutions (including universities
      and the Kenya Medial Training Colleges) to generate just in time evidence to inform
      UHC policies and make midcourse corrections. .
   3. Prepare policy briefs and technical papers on various topics related to service
      delivery, health financing, governance and quality such as:

                                             34
             o Strategic options for improving delivery of quality primary health care
               services
             o Networking to rationalize hospital services for improving access to effective
               referral care in Kenya based on analysis of distribution of hospitals (including
               number of beds, large equipment), relative need and utilization patterns
             o Qualitative research to identify the main causes of inefficiencies in health
               service delivery and inform the design of interventions to promote efficiency.
             o Innovative options for increasing domestic financing for health based on
               internal experiences to provide policy options to the MoH and the National
               Treasury.

Strengthening strategic policy dialogue

      •   Continue to provide technical support towards developing the        UHC vision and
          strategy through active participation in relevant committees and   technical working
          groups for health financing.
      •   Catalyse support from key partners committed to support the        UHC agenda by
          identifying common areas of interest including possibility of      jointly supported
          programs.


XI.       CONCLUSIONS


The report has highlighted key messages from the HLF and identified areas of consideration
and interventions for accelerating progress towards UHC. A clear vision, evidence-based
strategy and a well laid out roadmap are essential for making progress towards UHC. Some
progress has been made, but much more needs to be done. The political commitment that
currently exists in the country presents an opportunity to move forward with this notion that
has dominated the health policy agenda in the country for close to a decade. The national and
county governments, private sector, NGOs/FBOs, development partners and other
stakeholders should all work together to make UHC a reality in Kenya.




                                               35
        XII.    Annex 1: Programme
                                    March 18, 2014– Policy Perspectives
Moderator: Mr. Francis Musyimi, Secretary Administration, MoH
09:00 –09.55     Opening Session:      Mr. Francis Musyimi, Secretary Administration – Ministry of Health
                 introduction of
Chair – Mr.      institutions
Francis          Expectations from     Dr. Masasabi, Directorate od Policy, Planning and Healthcare
Musyimi,         the Forum             Financing (15 Mins)
Secretary        The Challenge of      Dr. Timothy Evans, Director, Health Nutrition and Population, The
Administration, UHC and its            World Bank (15 Mins)
MoH              relevance to Kenya
                                       Dr. Ariel Pablo-Mendez, USAID/ Global Health Administrator (15
                                       Mins)
09.55-10.15      Tea
10:15-10:30      Summary of            Mr. Elkana Onguti, Chief Economist, Ministry of Health
                 expectations
10:30-13:00      Delivering health     • Key challenges in service Delivery- Dr William Maina, MoH (20
                 services for rural        Mins)
                 women and             • Key findings from Efficiency Study –Dr Urbanus Kioko, UON
                 children: Access          (20Mins)
                 and Quality           Panel Discussion:
                                       Kenyan Experiences
                 Panel chair: Mr.      1. Primary Health Care especially maternal health: Challenges and
                 Elkana Onguti,            progress: Dr. David Ojakaa, AMREF - (10 Mins)
                 Chief Economist,      2. Supply side constraints – Evidence from PETS Plus Survey, 2012:
                 Ministry of Health        Mr. Thomas Maina, USAID/HPP (10Mins)
                                       3. Role of Private Sector in service delivery: Dr. Sam Thenya,
                                           Nairobi Women’s Hospital (10 Mins)
                                       4. Role of Faith Based Organizations in service delivery: Dr. Sam
                                           Mwenda, CHAK (10 Mins)
                                       Q & A followed by panel chair Summary (40 Mins)
13:00-14:00      Lunch
14:00-17:00      Ensuring              • Key health financing challenges and efforts towards UHC - Mr.
                 sustainable               Elkanah Onguti, Chief Economist, MoH (20 Mins)
                 financing to          • Healthcare utilization and expenditure – Evidence from the
                 achieve universal         Household Survey of 2013: Mr. Stephen Muchiri-USAID/HPP (20
                 health coverage for       Mins)
                 Kenyans
                                       Panel Discussion:
                 Panel Chair: Dr. J.   Kenyan Experiences
                 Masasabi Wekesa- 1. Fiscal space options for Health financing in Kenya– Ms.
                 Head, Directorate         Benadette M. Wanjala, KIPPRA, Kenya (10 Mins)
                 of Policy Planning    2. Sustainable HIV Financing : Ms. Regina Ombam, NACC (10
                 and Healthcare            Mins)
                 Financing             3. Benefits Incidence Analysis: Dr. Jane Chuma, USAID/HPP
                                           (10Mins)
                                       4. Health Insurance Subsidies for the poor and Role of NHIF: Ms.
                                           Nellie Keriri, NHIF (10 Mins)
                                       International Lessons:

                                                    36
                                     5. Lessons from India: Dr. Somil Nagpal, World Bank - Health
                                        Insurance Regulation (20 Mins)
                                     6. Developing sustainable health insurance programs - Lessons from
                                        Mexico: Mr. Jorge Coarasa, IFC (20 Mins)
                                     7. Global lessons from health financing reform for UHC: Dr.
                                        Matthew Jowett, Senior Health Financing Specialist, WHO
                                        (20Mins)

                                     Q&A followed by panel chair summary (40 Mins)

18:00 – 20.00   Reception            All invited Participants.
                              March 19, 2014 Implementation Perspectives
8:30-11:00      Enhancing            • Key Health Systems Governance Challenges - Dr. S. K. Sharif,
                governance and           Former Director of Public Health and Sanitation (20 Mins)
                effectiveness of the • Emerging issues on governance in health sector – County
                health systems to        experience: Dr. Maurice Siminyu, CEC-Busia County (20mins)
                deliver quality      Panel Discussion:
                health care          Kenyan Experience
                                     1. The role of Parliamentary Health Committee in supporting
                Panel chair:             governance in the health sector: Dr. James Nyikal, MP and
                Tawhid Nawaz,            member of the Parliamentary Committee on Health (20Mins)
                Acting Sector        2. Governance in Pharmaceutical supply chain system in the public
                Director, Human          sector: challenges and opportunities: Dr. Maureen Nafula,
                Development,             Strathmore University (15 Mins)
                Africa Region        International Lessons
                                     3. International experiences in promoting governance in
                                         pharmaceutical supply chain: Prof. Prashant Yadav, Director,
                                         Healthcare Research, University of Michigan (20mins)

                                     Q&A followed by panel chair Summary (40 Mins)
11:00-11:30     Tea
11:30-13:00     Strengthening        •  Kenyan Devolution: Opportunities and challenges for the health
                Health Systems in       system: Dr. Ruth Kitetu – Ministry of Health (20Mins)
                devolved Setting:    • Opportunities and challenges in devolution in the health sector,
                The Kenyan              county experience: Dr. Elizabeth Ogaja, CEC – Kisumu County
                challenges              (20Mins)
                Panel Chair: Dr.     Panel Discussion
                Sharma Suneeta,      Kenyan Experiences
                Project Director,    1. Devolution in the health sector. Transition Authority’s own
                USAID/HPP               experiences and challenges with devolution in the health sector:
                                        Dr. Dabar Abdi Maalim, Transition Authority (10 Mins)

                                     International Experiences
                                     2. Prof. David Peters, Head, International Health, Johns Hopkins
                                         University (20Mins)
                                     Q&A followed by panel chair summary (30 Mins)
13:00-14;00     Lunch




                                                   37
14:00-17:00   Health Systems in a International Experiences
              devolved setting:   3. Indian experiences in managing devolved health systems. National
              More Kenyan             Rural Health Mission -Ms. Sujatha Rao, Former Secretary of
              experiences and         Health, Government of India (20 Mins)
              International       4. Lessons from Ghana in health sector devolution – Dr. Abdulai
              experiences             Tinorgah–Former Director, Health Services, Govt. of Ghana (20
                                      Mins)
              Panel chair: Dr.    5. Brazilian experiences in devolution: Ms. Marcia Huculak –
              Olusoji Adeyi,          Superintendent of Health - Brazil, State of Parana (20 Mins)
              Sector Manager,     6. Ethiopian experiences in effective delivery of primary healthcare
              Health Nutrition        services in devolved health systems: Ms. Roman Tesfaye, Director
              and Population,         General - Heath Insurance Agency, Ethiopia (20 Mins)
              Eastern and         Q&A followed by panel chair Summary (40 Mins)
              Southern Africa.




                               March 20,2014 Service Quality Perspectives
09:00-11:00     Promoting client safety • Regulatory and Quality assurance challenges in Kenya – Dr.
                and quality of health        Pacifica Onyancha, MoH (20Mins)
                service delivery          Kenyan Experience

                Panel Chair: Dr. J.       1. Role of KENAS in regulating quality of health services – Ms.
                Masasabi Wekesa-Head,         Doris Mueni, KENAS (20Mins)
                Directorate of Policy     2. NHIF step-wise accreditation process – Early experiences : Ms.
                Planning and Healthcare       Julia Ouko, Senior Benefits and Quality Assurance officer, NHIF
                Financing                     (20Mins)
                                          International Lessons
                                          3. International experiences in measuring Quality and Safety- Mr.
                                              Jishnu Das, The World Bank (20Mins)
                                          4. Experiences on quality improvement in Nigeria and Tanzania –
                                              Ms Nicole Spieker, Director of quality, Safecare, PharmAcces
                                              Foundation (20 Mins)
11.00-11.30     Tea Break
11.30-12.15                               Q&A followed by panel chair Summary (40 Mins)
12:15-12:45                               Way forward – Nzoya Munguti, Deputy Chief Economist (30 Mins)




                                                   38
