                                                      92166




UNDERSTANDING RISK
IN AN EVOLVING WORLD
Emerging Best Practices in Natural Disaster Risk Assessment



GLOBAL FACILITY FOR DISASTER REDUCTION AND RECOVERY
UNDERSTANDING RISK
IN AN EVOLVING WORLD
Emerging Best Practices in Natural Disaster Risk Assessment




GLOBAL FACILITY FOR DISASTER REDUCTION AND RECOVERY
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development / International Development Association or
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with
external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily
reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.


The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of
the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map
in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




Rights and Permissions


The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because
The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in
part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution
to this work is given.


Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary
rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433,
USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
UNDERSTANDING RISK IN AN EVOLVING WORLD




TABLE OF CONTENTS
13	Foreword
14	Acknowledgments
16	Abbreviations
18	Overview
20    Risk Information as the Basis for Decision Making

22    A Framework for Quantifying and Understanding Risk

23    Advances in Disaster Risk Assessment and Key Remaining Challenges

27    Recommendations for Future Risk Assessments.

30    Recommendations toward the Next Hyogo Framework for Action

31    Endnotes

31    References


      Chapter 01
32	   Introduction
34	   About This Publication

35    A Brief History of Risk Assessment

38    The Rise of Open Models and Data: The Changing Risk Assessment Paradigm

41	   Aligning and Targeting Risk Assessments

43    Endnotes

43    References


      Chapter 02

44	   Progress, Achievements, & Remaining Challenges
      in Risk Assessment
45	   Hazard Assessment

53    Exposure

59    Vulnerability and Loss

64	   Hazard and Risk Assessment Tools

68    Creating Platforms and Partnerships to Enable the Development of Risk Assessments

71    Endnotes

71    References
                                                     U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




Case Study Color Key                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
                              Chapter 03

                       74	    Case Studies Highlighting Emerging Best Practices
                       76	    Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI)
Data for Risk
                       80	    Open Cities: Application of the Open Data for Resilience Initiative in South Asia and the
                              Lessons Learned

                       86	    Preliminary Survey of Government Engagement with Volunteered
                              Geographic Information

                       91	    Collection of Exposure Data to Underpin Natural Hazard Risk Assessments in Indonesia
                              and the Philippines

                       95	    International Collaboration of Space Agencies to Support Disaster Risk Management
                              Using Satellite Earth Observation

                       98	    Global Earthquake Model

                       101	   Global Probabilistic Risk Assessment: A Key Input into Analysis for the 2013 and 2015
Modelling                     Global Assessment Reports
Developments
                       107	   Global Water-related Disaster Risk Indicators Assessing Real Phenomena of Flood
                              Disasters: Think Locally, Act Globally

                       112	   Government-to-Government Risk Assessment Capacity Building in Australasia
Risk Assessment
Case Studies           120	   Informing Disaster Risk Management Plans in Aqaba, Jordan, through Urban Seismic Risk
                              Mapping

                       123	   Tsunami Risk Reduction: Are We Better Prepared Today Than in 2004?

                       127	   World Bank Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Program for Latin America and the
                              Caribbean: Experiences and Lessons Learned

                       132	   Detailed Island Risk Assessment in Maldives to Inform Disaster Risk Reduction and
                              Climate Change Adaptation

                       136	   Malawi: How Risk Information Guides an Integrated Flood Management Action Plan

                       141	   Reducing Seismic Risk to Public Buildings in Turkey

                       145	   Applying Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment to the Development of a Seismic Retrofit
                              Program for Public Schools in Metro Manila, Philippines

                       149	   Morocco Comprehensive Risk Assessment Study

                       153	   Risk Assessment for Financial Resilience: The Approach of the World Bank

                       160	   The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment Initiative
TABLE OF CONTENTS                                                                    Case Study Color Key


163	      From Multi-Risk Assessment to Multi-Risk Governance: Recommendations for
          Future Directions                                                                 Participation,
                                                                                       Collaboration, and
168	      Build Back Better: Where Knowledge Is Not Enough                               Communication

172	      InaSAFE: Preparing Communities to Be a Step Ahead

177	      Global River Flood Risk Assessments

185	      Delivering Risk Information for a Future Climate in the Pacific                  Future of Risk

191	      A Framework for Modelling Future Urban Disaster Risk

198	Endnotes
201	References

          Chapter 04
210	      Recommendations
219	Endnotes
220	      Photo Credits




U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D
                             U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




                                                   LIST OF FIGURES
18	Overview
21	   Figure O—1  The components for assessing risk and the difference between “impact”
      and “risk.”

23	   Figure O—2  Risk as a function of hazard, exposure, and vulnerability.


      Chapter 01
32	   Introduction
39	   Figure 01—1  What makes data “open.”


      Chapter 02

44	   Progress, Achievements, & Remaining Challenges
      in Risk Assessment
47	   Figure 02—1  Hypothetical drought index showing periods of extreme dryness (above
      the dotted red line) and periods of extreme wetness (below the dotted blue line); the
      historical record does not capture extreme dry and wet periods experienced prior to its
      start in 1900.

59	   Figure 02—2  The relationship between hazard intensity and damage to structures.

65	   Figure 02—3  Sample software package review.


      Chapter 03

74	   Case Studies Highlighting Emerging Best Practices
77	   Figure 03—1  Examples of locations of GeoNodes supported by the World Bank
      and GFDRR.

87	   Figure 03—2  Change detection using OSM.

92	   Figure 03—3  LiDAR provides an opportunity to map and visualize in detail the highly
      urbanized environment of Manila.

93	   Figure 03—4  Application of aerial imagery, LiDAR data, and land-use mapping to
      develop exposure database (Taguig City).

94	   Figure 03—5  Growth in exposure data through crowdsourced (OSM) mapping of
      buildings and infrastructure in three locations in Indonesia.

99	   Figure 03—6  A fuller picture of seismic history is obtained when instrumentally recorded
      events are combined with events from historical records (in pink).
LIST OF FIGURES
103	      Figure 03—7  Example of the 5km x 5km grid constituting the exposure database
          for GAR13.

109	      Figure 03—8  Effects of water infrastructure in reducing flood inundation depths for 50-
          year floods.

113	      Figure 03—9  Earthquake hazard map of central Sulawesi Province, developed
          collaboratively by Badan Geologi and AIFDR.

114	      Figure 03—10  Badan Geologi and Geoscience Australia staff working collaboratively on
          probabilistic seismic hazard maps for Indonesia.

115	      Figure 03—11  Badan Geologi and Geoscience Australia staff collect volcanic ash samples
          from a roadside agricultural plot of land approximately 10km from the summit of Ciremai
          volcano, West Java, in 2010.

116	      Figure 03—12  The dispersal of volcanic ash from the last historical eruption of Guntur in
          1840, as produced by the Volcanology and Geological Disaster Mitigation Centre.

117	      Figure 03—13  Modelled depths for a flood equivalent to that experienced in Manila
          during Typhoon Ketsana in 2009.

120	      Figure 03—14  Historical seismicity in Jordan.

121	      Figure 03—15  Jordan’s fault system.

133	      Figure 03—16  The safe island concept.

134	      Figure 03—17  The islands selected for detailed multi-hazard risk assessment.

138	      Figure 03—18 1-in-100-year flood extent (in pale blue) around the Elephant Marshes of
          the Lower Shire Valley, Malawi.

138	      Figure 03—19  Flood zoning in the area of the Elephant Marshes based on different
          return period flood events.

142	      Figure 03—20  Prioritization methodology for high seismic risk public buildings.

147	      Figure 03—21  Estimated Metro Manila student fatalities per school building for a
          magnitude 7.2 West Valley fault scenario earthquake occurring in the daytime.

154	      Figure 03—22  Flowchart for financial decision making.

169	      Figure 03—23  Two common housing types in Padang: Unreinforced masonry
          construction using river stone and mortar with no reinforcement (left) versus confined
          masonry construction using steel-reinforced concrete columns in the corners and tops
          of walls (right).

173	      Figure 03—24  InaSAFE can be used to improve understanding of the impact of disaster
          events, such as floods in Jakarta.




U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D
                              U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




                                                     LIST OF FIGURES
176	   Figure 03—25  QGIS2.0 with the InaSAFE 2.0 dock showing a map and indicative results
       for an assessment of the impact of flooding on roads in Jakarta.

178	   Figure 03—26  Observed flood extents in Bangladesh during July and August 2004:
       Dartmouth Flood Observatory database versus GLOFRIS model.

179	   Figure 03—27  Map of modelled inundation extent and depth in Nigeria using GLOFRIS.
       Maps of this type can be used to assess which areas are exposed to flooding.

180	   Figure 03—28  Maps of Nigeria showing the modelled results of the number of people
       affected per state (expressed as a percentage of the total population per state) for
       floods of different severities. Maps of this type can be used for identifying risk hot spots.

181	   Figure 03—29  People living in flood-prone areas in different regions, 2010–2050.

182	   Figure 03—30  Annual exposed GDP to flooding in 2010 and 2050, under different
       assumptions of flood protection standards.

184	   Figure 03—31  Historical tropical cyclone tracks for the period 1981–2000 (top) and
       tropical-cyclone-like vortices extracted from a 20-year simulation using a general
       circulation model (bottom).

187	   Figure 03—32  Ensemble mean proportion of cyclones for current and future climate in
       the Northern Hemisphere (left) and Southern Hemisphere (right).

188	   Figure 03—33  Individual regional end-of-century exceedance probability curves for
       ensemble members (blue) compared to the current climate exceedance probability
       curve (green).

189	   Figure 03—34  Ensemble mean 250-year losses across the Pacific as a proportion of
       Pacific Island countries’ GDP for current climate conditions (1981–2000).

189	   Figure 03—35  Ensemble mean change in 250-year return period loss.

192	   Figure 03—36  The three components of risk and their time dependence.

193	   Figure 03—37  Incrementally expanding buildings and corresponding changes
       in vulnerability.

194	   Figure 03—38  Number of buildings sustaining heavy damage or collapse from a single
       ground motion field, at six different time periods.

195	   Figure 03—39  Full distribution of the number of buildings sustaining heavy damage or
       collapse, for six different time frames.

196	   Figure 03—40  Expected number of buildings sustaining heavy damage or collapse as a
       function of time, with confidence interval.
LIST OF BOXES
          Chapter 01

32	       Introduction
34	       Box 01—1  How Risk Information Contributes to Mainstreaming of DRM in World Bank
          Group Operations

38	       Box 01—2 OpenStreetMap

39	       Box 01—3  Community Mapping in Indonesia

41	       Box 01—4  Defining “Open”


          Chapter 02

44	       Progress, Achievements, & Remaining Challenges
          in Risk Assessment
46	       Box 02—1  Multi-Peril Risk Assessment: An Overview

47	       Box 02—2  Assessing Damage and Loss Caused by Drought: Example of a
          Deterministic Assessment

48	       Box 02—3  A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Livestock Protection in Disaster Risk Management

51	       Box 02—4  The Importance of Accurate Elevation Data for Understanding
          Tsunami Hazard

54	       Box 02—5  Global Exposure Data Sets

57	       Box 02—6  Indirect Characterization of Exposure

58	       Box 02—7  How Study Scale Drives Exposure Data Collection Methods

60	       Box 02—8  The Uses of Loss Inventories

61	       Box 02—9  Incorporating Disaster Resilience into Cultural Heritage Buildings in Bhutan

66	       Box 02—10  Training in Use of Risk Models: The GEM Perspective

67	       Box 02—11  The Understanding Risk Community

69	       Box 02—12  Willis Research Network

70	       Box 02—13  Participatory Earthquake Risk Assessment in Dhaka


          Chapter 03

74	       Case Studies Highlighting Emerging Best Practices
78	       Box 03—1  Typhoon Yolanda GeoNode: An Example of the Collaborative Effort Possible
          under OpenDRI




U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D
                             U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




                                                      LIST OF BOXES
96	    Box 03—2  International Charter Space and Major Disasters

97	    Box 03—3  Innovations in Earth Observation over the Coming Decade

118	   Box 03—4  Factors Leading to Successful Technical Capacity Building

124	   Box 03—5  The Challenge of Multiple Tsunami Hazard Maps in Padang, Indonesia

150	   Box 03—6  Risk Assessments as an Advocacy Tool for DRM in the Middle East
       and North Africa

157	   Box 03—7  R-FONDEN: The Financial Catastrophe Risk Model of the Ministry of Finance
       and Public Credit in Mexico

159	   Box 03—8  Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
LIST OF TABLES
          Chapter 01

32	       Introduction
42	       Table 01—1  Sample Risk Assessment Products and Their Attributes


          Chapter 02
44	       Progress, Achievements, & Remaining Challenges
          in Risk Assessment
49	       Table 02—1  Examples of Globally Available Hazard-related Data

55	       Table 02—2  Categories of a Comprehensive Exposure Model

63	       Table 02—3  Sources of Disaster Loss Data


          Chapter 03

74	       Case Studies Highlighting Emerging Best Practices
107	      Table 03—1  Basic Characteristics of the Three River Basins

108	      Table 03—2  Historical Flood Disasters in the Three River Basins

110	      Table 03—3  Potential Flood Inundation Areas in the Three River Basins (considering or
          omitting dams and flood protection)

110	      Table 03—4  People Potentially Affected by Flood Inundation (considering or omitting
          dams and flood protection)

121	      Table 03—5  Seismic Risk Scenario for Aqaba (maximum magnitude 7.5 earthquake)

122	      Table 03—6  Economic and Financial Impacts of Earthquake Scenario (magnitude
          7.5 earthquake)

143	      Table 03—7  Building Classifications Used in Prioritization Methodology

144	      Table 03—8  Prioritization for Reconstruction and Rebuilding

174	      Table 03—9  Hazard Data Accepted in InaSAFE 2.0

174	      Table 03—10  Exposure Data Accepted in InaSAFE 2.0

174	      Table 03—11  Sample Impact Functions

186	      Table 03—12  Changes in Key Tropical Cyclone–related Parameters for the Five-
          member Ensemble




U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D
FOREWORD
In 1999, the most powerful tropical cyclone ever          effect the social and political will necessary to build
recorded in the North Indian Ocean made landfall          resilience before disasters occur, sparing countless
in the state of Odisha, India, bringing catastrophic      lives and better preserving the fragile prosperity
losses in human life and property. With nearly            gains of the world’s most vulnerable communities.
10,000 fatalities and US$5 billion in damages,
                                                          Today, another powerful storm is forming at
the tragedy revealed a stark need for disaster risk
                                                          the intersection of population growth, rapid
reduction and preparedness.
                                                          urbanization, and climate change—one that
The following decade saw an impressive and                threatens to undo decades of progress toward
sustained effort by the government of Odisha              development goals. To prepare communities to
and partners to identify and mitigate cyclone             weather its impact, we will need to prioritize
risk, resulting in the construction of emergency          disaster risk assessment to inform our collective
roadways, reinforced bridges, shelters, improved          resources, and enable risk management with
coastal embankments, and extensive early warning          unprecedented levels of innovation, cooperation,
systems. When the similarly intense Cyclone Phailin       and scale.
made landfall in Odisha late last year, fatalities were
                                                          Underpinning successes like these is accurate
minimal: the region experienced a 99.6 percent
                                                          and actionable risk information. This publication
reduction from the 1999 storm, in large part due to
                                                          highlights some of the influential efforts—by
these effective disaster risk management initiatives.
                                                          technical specialists, institutions, and governments
Case studies like this clearly show the potential of      around the world—to create and communicate risk
targeted interventions to reduce human suffering          information faster and at lower cost, to improve the
and lessen the impact of major natural disasters.         quality and transparency of risk information, and to
What makes these and other efforts possible,              enable more local engagement in the production of
however, is accurate and actionable risk assessment.      authoritative risk information than ever before.

Far too often, tragedies like the 1999 Odisha cyclone     This publication is a small but valuable contribution
are the drivers for change, but the future can be         toward that effort. We hope you will work alongside
different. If brought to scale and embedded within        us as we seek to better understand risk in a
development efforts, disaster risk assessment can         changing world.




Francis Ghesquiere
Head, GFDRR Secretariat, Manager DRM Practice Group, The World Bank




                                                                                                                    13
14
     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
     This publication was prepared by a team led by Alanna          (GFDRR); M. V. De Guzman (Department of Foreign

     Simpson and consisting of Rick Murnane, Keiko Saito,           Affairs and Trade, Manila); Manuela Di Mauro (UNISDR);

     Emma Phillips, Rob Reid, and Anne Himmelfarb.                  Angela Di Ruocco (Analisi e Monitoraggio del Rischio

                                                                    Ambientale); Andrew Eddy (Athena Global); Christopher
     This publication benefited from inputs and contributions
                                                                    T. Emrich (Hazards and Vulnerability Research Institute,
     from the following: Jeroen C. J. H. Aerts (Institute for
                                                                    University of South Carolina); Nicole Fassina (World
     Environmental Studies and Amsterdam Global Change
                                                                    Society for the Protection of Animals); Nishara Fernando
     Institute, VU University Amsterdam); Vyron Antoniou
                                                                    (University of Colombo); Kevin Fleming (Helmholtz Centre
     (Hellenic Military Geographical Service); Christoph Aubrecht   Potsdam, German Research Centre for Geosciences
     (World Bank); W. C. Arthur (Geoscience Australia); Elif        [GFZ], Potsdam); Marc Forni (World Bank); Sergio Freire
     Ayhan (World Bank); Abigail Baca (World Bank); Claudia         (European Commission Joint Research Center); Stuart Frye
     Bach (UNU-EHS); Axel Baeumler (World Bank); Philippe           (NASA); Francesco Gaetani (Group on Earth Observations
     Bally (European Space Agency); Sofia Basiouka (National        Secretariat); Melanie Gall (Hazards and Vulnerability
     Technical University of Athens); B. C. Bautista (Philippine    Research Institute, University of South Carolina); Alexander
     Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); M. L. Bautista       Garcia-Aristizabal (Analisi e Monitoraggio del Rischio
     (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); Mendy    Ambientale); Paolo Gasparini (Analisi e Monitoraggio

     Bengoubou-Valerius (Bureau de Recherches Géologiques           del Rischio Ambientale); , Amir S. J. Gilani (Miyamoto

     et Minières); Marc F. P. Bierkens (Department of Physical      International); Jonathan Griffin (Geoscience Australia);

     Geography, Utrecht University); Joern Birkmann (UNU-           Rashmin Gunasekera (World Bank); Muki Haklay (University

     EHS); Michael Bonte (World Bank); Arno Bouwman (PBL            College London); Carl B. Harbitz (Norwegian Geotechnical

     Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency); Jason            Institute); Sven Harig (Alfred Wegener Institute); S.

     Brown (Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction);   Hidayati (Badan Geologi); Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (World

     Philip Bubeck (Adelphi); Nama Raj Budhathoki (World            Bank); Nick Horspool (Geoscience Australia); Steven

                                                                    Hosford (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales); Chu Ishida
     Bank); K. Chapman (Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team);
                                                                    (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency); Oscar Ishizawa
     John Crowley (GFDRR); Helen Crowley (GEM Foundation);
                                                                    (World Bank); M. Jakab (Geoscience Australia); A. T. Jones
     P. Cummins (Geoscience Australia); Susan L. Cutter
                                                                    (Geoscience Australia); Brenden Jongman (Institute for
     (Hazards and Vulnerability Research Institute, University
                                                                    Environmental Studies and Amsterdam Global Change
     of South Carolina); P. Dailey (AIR Worldwide); James Daniell
                                                                    Institute, VU University Amsterdam); Swarna Kazi (World
     (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology); Vivien Deparday
                                                                    Bank); Nicole Keller (GEM Foundation); Anne Kiremidjian

                                                                    (Stanford University); Kamal Kishore (UNDP); Nadejda

                                                                    Komendantova (Institute for Environmental Decisions,

                                                                    ETH Zurich; Risk, Policy and Vulnerability Program,

                                                                    International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis);

                                                                    Widjo Kongko (Agency for Assessment and Application

                                                                    of Technology, Indonesia); Heidi Kreibich (GFZ German

                                                                    Research Centre for Geosciences); Jolanta Kryspin-Watson

                                                                    (World Bank); Daisuke Kuribayashi (International Centre
for Water Hazard and Risk Management); Youngjoo               Neysa J. Setiadi (UNU-EHS); Iain Shuker (World Bank);

Kwak (International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk          Benedikt Signer (World Bank); Robert Soden (World Bank);

Management); David Lallemant (Stanford University);           R. U. Solidum Jr. (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and

Hamzah Latief (Bandung Institute of Technology); Juan         Seismology); Kate Stillwell (GEM Foundation); Joaquin

Carlos Lam (World Bank); Sangeun Lee (International           Toro (World Bank); Dechen Tshering (World Bank); Rens

Centre for Water Hazard and Risk Management); Willem          van Beek (Department of Physical Geography, Utrecht

Ligtvoet (PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment            University); K. Van Putten (Geoscience Australia); Charlotte

Agency); Finn Løvholt (Norwegian Geotechnical Institute);     Vinchon (Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières);

Olivier Mahul (World Bank); Gusyev Maksym (International      Pieter Waalewijn (World Bank); Philip J. Ward (Institute for

Centre for Water Hazard and Risk Management); I.              Environmental Studies and Amsterdam Global Change

Meilano (Bandung Institute of Technology); Erwann             Institute, VU University Amsterdam); A. Wibowo (Badan

Michel-Kerjan (Wharton Business School, University of         Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana); Marc Wieland

Pennsylvania); H. Kit Miyamoto (Miyamoto International);      (Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, German Research Centre

Daniel Monfort (Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et           for Geosciences [GFZ], Potsdam); Hessel C. Winsemius

Minières); Charlotte Morgan (Geoscience Australia); Roger     (Deltares); Steven Wong (Stanford University); H. Martine

Mrzyglocki (German Committee for Disaster Reduction           Woolf (Geoscience Australia); Jianping Yan (UNDP); Nario

[DKKV]); J. Murjaya (Indonesian Agency for Meteorology,       Yasuda (International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk

Climatology and Geophysics); Zubair Murshed (UNDP);           Management); Andrea Zanon (World Bank).

Farrokh Nadim (Norwegian Geotechnical Institute);
                                                              For comments and advice that improved this publication,
I. C. Narag (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and
                                                              the team is grateful to the following World Bank and
Seismology); Francis Nkoka (World Bank); Ariel Nunez
                                                              GFDRR colleagues: Abigail Baca, Jack Campbell, John
(World Bank); Toshio Okazumi (International Centre
                                                              Crowley, Vivien Deparday, Marc Forni, Ben Fox, Rashmin
for Water Hazard and Risk Management); A. Orquiza
                                                              Gunasekera, Oscar Ishizawa, Daniel Kull, James Newman,
(Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manila);
                                                              Fernando Ramirez, Robert Soden, Annegien Tijssen,
Anthony Patt (Institute for Environmental Decisions,
                                                              Joaquin Toro, and Jon Walton.
ETH Zurich; Risk, Policy and Vulnerability Program,

International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis); Ivan   Special thanks go to Kate Stillwell (Global Earthquake

Petiteville (European Space Agency, Committee on Earth        Model), Kamal Kishore (UNDP), Andrew Jones (Geoscience

Observation Satellites Disasters Working Group); Emma         Australia), and UNISDR for support and feedback.

Phillips (GFDRR); Massimiliano Pittore (Helmholtz Centre
                                                              Finally, the team greatly appreciates the support and
Potsdam, German Research Centre for Geosciences
                                                              guidance received from Francis Ghesquiere, Zoubida
[GFZ], Potsdam); Fernando Ramírez-Cortés (World Bank);
                                                              Allaoua, Rachel Kyte, James Close, and Ede Jorge
David Robinson (Geoscience Australia); Sahar Safaie
                                                              Ijjasz-Vasquez.
(GEM Foundation); Artessa Saldivar-Sali (World Bank);

Hisaya Sawano (International Centre for Water Hazard

and Risk Management); Kerry Sawyer (Committee on

Earth Observation Satellites); Charles Scwarthon (Kyoto

University, emeritus); Andreas Schäfer (Karlsruhe Institute

of Technology); Anna Scolobig (Institute for Environmental

Decisions, ETH Zurich; Risk, Policy and Vulnerability

Program, International Institute for Applied Systems

Analysis); Guy Seguin (International Space Consultant);




                                                                                                                             15
16
     ABBREVIATIONS
     AAL      average annual loss                         CEOS         Committee on Earth Observation
     AIFDR    Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster                Satellites
              Reduction                                   CEPREDENAC   Central American Coordination Center
     ASEZA    Aqaba Special Economic Zone Authority                    for Natural Disaster Prevention
     ASI      Italian Space Agency                        CMIP         Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
     AusAID   Australian Agency for International         CNES         National Center for Space Studies
              Development                                              (France)
     BCR      benefit-cost ratio                          CSA          Canadian Space Agency
     BMKG     Indonesian Agency for Meteorology,          CSCAND       Collective Strengthening of Community
              Climatology and Geophysics                               Awareness on Natural Disasters
     BNPB     Badan Nasional Penanggulangan               CV           coefficient of variation
              Bencana (Indonesian National Disaster       DEM          digital elevation model
              Management Agency)                          DFAT         Australian Department of Foreign
     BRACE    Building the Resilience and Awareness                    Affairs and Trade
              of Metro Manila Communities to Natural      DLR          German Aerospace Center
              Disaster and Climate Change Impacts
                                                          DRFI         disaster risk financing and insurance
     BTOP     block-wise TOP
                                                          DRM          disaster risk management
     BUET     Bangladesh University of Engineering
                                                          ENSO         El Niño-Southern Oscillation EO earth
              and Technology
                                                                       observation
     CAPRA    Central American Probabilistic Risk
                                                          EU           European Union
              Assessment
                                                          Europa Re    Europa Reinsurance Facility
     CIMA     Centro Internazionale in Monitoraggio
                                                          FEMA         Federal Emergency Management
              Ambientale
                                                                       Agency
     CIMNE    International Centre for Numerical
                                                          FEWS-NET     Famine Early Warning Systems Network
              Methods in Engineering                      FONDEN       Fondo Nacional de Desastres Naturales
                                                          GAR          Global Assessment Report on Disaster

                                                                       Risk Reduction
                                                          GCM          general circulation model
                                                          GDP          gross domestic product
                                                          GED          Global Exposure Database
                                                          GED4GEM      Global Exposure Database for GEM
                                                          GEM          Global Earthquake Model
                                                          GFDRR        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction

                                                                       and Recovery
                                                          GHSL         Global Human Settlement Layer
                                                          GIS          geographic information system
                                                          GLOFRIS      GLObal Flood Risk with IMAGE

                                                                       Scenarios
GMMA RAP   Greater Metro Manila Area Risk           PIC         Pacific Island country

           Assessment Project                       PML         probable maximum loss

GMPE       ground motion prediction equation        PTHA        probabilistic tsunami hazard

GPS        Global Positioning Satellite                         assessment
GPWv3      Gridded Population of the World          RCM         Radarsat Constellation Mission
GSNL       Geohazard Supersites and Natural         RHoK        Random Hacks of Kindness

           Laboratories                             SAR         synthetic aperture radar

GRUPMv1    Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project       SEEC CRIF   Southeast Europe and Caucasus

GUF        Global Urban Footprint                               Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
GUI        graphical user interface                 SOPAC       Secretariat of the Pacific Community
HEC        Hydrologic Engineering Center                        Applied Geoscience Technology Division
HFA        Hyogo Framework for Action               SRTM        Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
HOT        Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team          TAP         Technical Assistance Project
IDCT       Inventory Data Capture Tool              TCLVs       tropical-cyclone-like vortices
IMD        India Meteorological Department          UR          Understanding Risk
InaSAFE    Indonesian Scenario Assessment for       UNDP        United Nations Development
           Emergencies                                          Programme
InSAR      Interferometric SAR                      UNEP-GRID   United Nations Environment
IPCC       Intergovernmental Panel on Climate                   Programme–Global Resource
           Change                                               Information Database
IRM        integrated risk management               UNISDR      United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
ISMEP      Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and                 Reduction
           Emergency Preparedness Project           USAID       U.S. Agency for International
JAXA       Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency                   Development
JICA       Japan International Cooperation Agency   VGI         volunteered geographic information
LGU        Local Government Unit                    WSPA        World Society for the Protection of
MASDAP     Malawi Spatial Data Portal                           Animals
MATRIX     New Multi-HAzard and MulTi-RIsK

           Assessment MethodS for Europe
MnhPRA     Morocco natural hazards probabilistic

           risk assessment
NASA       National Aeronautics and Space

           Administration
NGO        nongovernmental organization
OSM        OpenStreetMap
OpenDRI    Open Data for Resilience Initiative
PACCSAP    Pacific-Australia Climate Change

           Science and Adaptation Planning
PacRIS     Pacific Risk Information System
PAGER      Prompt Assessment of Global

           Earthquakes for Response
PCRAFI     Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment

           and Financing Initiative




                                                                                                          17
18
     OVERVIEW
     T    he 10-year-long Hyogo Framework for Action
          (HFA) set out to substantially reduce impacts
     from natural disasters by 2015. Despite efforts
                                                             Across the globe, emerging consensus is highlighting
                                                             the central importance of risk information in
                                                             disaster risk management (DRM):
     toward this goal, economic losses from natural
                                                               The foundation for DRM is understanding
     disasters are rising—from US$50 billion each year
                                                               the hazards, and the exposure and
     in the 1980s, to just under $200 billion each year
                                                               vulnerability of people and assets to
     in the last decade (World Bank and GFDRR 2013).
                                                               those hazards. By quantifying the risks
     The economic losses sustained by lower- and
                                                               and anticipating the potential impacts of
     middle-income countries alone over the last 30
                                                               hazards, governments, communities, and
     years represent a full third of all total development
     assistance in the same time period, offsetting            individuals can make informed prevention

     tremendous efforts by governments, multilateral           decisions. Such information can be

     organizations, and other actors.                          used to set priorities for development
                                                               and adaptation strategies, sector plans,
     As the HFA period ends against a backdrop of              programs, projects, and budgets. (World
     challenging disaster risk trends, and consultations       Bank 2012, 5)
     toward a post-2015 framework move forward, it
     is important to reflect on the role of disaster risk    This report contains case studies spanning 40
     assessments in achieving disaster and climate           countries that showcase emerging best practices,
     resilience, and on the contributions risk assessments   demonstrate how risk assessments are being
     have made over the last 10 years. Understanding         used to inform DRM and broader development,
     Risk in an Evolving World: Emerging Best Practices      and highlight lessons learned through these
     in Natural Disaster Risk Assessment, which was          efforts. Taken as a group, these case studies
     developed to inform post-HFA discussions and the        evidence the need for continued investment in
     2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk          accurate and useful risk information and provide
     Reduction (GAR),1 reports on the current state of       recommendations for the future.
     the practice of risk assessment and on advances
                                                             Experience has shown that a purely technical
     made over the last decade.
                                                             assessment of risk, however sophisticated and
                                                             cutting-edge, is by itself unlikely to trigger actions
                                                             that reduce risk. Successful risk assessments
                                                             produce information that is targeted, authoritative,
                                                             understandable, and usable. Thus, the first steps
                                                             in a risk assessment include understanding why
                                                             the assessment is needed and wanted, defining
                                                             the information gaps that currently prevent DRM
                                                             actions, and identifying the end-users of the
                                                             information. These steps can be completed only if
                                                             the process of generating and using risk information
is integrated with institutional processes, and           between public officials, affected communities,
if there is communication and trust among all             and financial providers. Hence the importance of
involved parties: scientists, engineers, decision         authoritative information, which can be fit into a
makers, governmental authorities, and community           regulated framework backed by the necessary legal
representatives. A risk assessment designed               and institutional context.
along these lines will enable the development of
                                                          This publication is not a "how-to" guide for
information useful for risk mitigation.
                                                          risk assessment, nor does it provide a technical
But it is also important to recognize that                articulation of the risk assessment process. Rather,
understanding risk is more than just modelling risk;      it provides insight into the potential richness and
it requires an understanding of the development           range of risk assessment approaches and their
and social processes that underlie and drive the          capacity to meet a variety of purposes and contexts
generation of disaster risk, such as the political        within the same overarching framework. For
and social nature of disaster risk information and        scientists, engineers, and others producing risk
its use. For example, the decision of an individual       information, the publication highlights some of
or government to construct a building that is             the challenges in understanding risk—beyond the
resilient to seismic events will be a result of a         strictly technical aspects that are described in many
complex interplay between awareness of, belief in,        other publications.
and acceptance of the potential risks; the financial
and technical capacity to design and construct the
resilient structure; and the appropriate (enforced)
legal, institutional, and regulatory framework (e.g.,
enforcement of building codes). Similarly, land
scarcity in rapidly developing urban environments
forces often uncomfortable trade-offs between the
urgent needs of today, such as the need to build
on vacant land near employment and educational
opportunities, and the potential risks of tomorrow,
such as a 1-in-20-year flood event.

Moreover, from a public policy perspective, risk
information can be sensitive information, as it
requires—government officials, private sector
companies, community, or individual—to decide
on action (or inaction) to reduce the impacts of
a potential hazardous event. The decision—for
example, to relocate communities away from high
flood risk areas—will come with explicit (e.g.,
financial/resource) costs and implicit (e.g., political
and/or social capital) costs, all of which have to
be weighed within a broader context. The chance
of risk information translating into action, then,
depends to a large extent on sensitive negotiations




                                                                                                                  19
20
     Risk Information as the
     	                                                        1.	 Risk identification: Understanding,
                                                                communicating, and raising awareness
     Basis for Decision Making                                  of disaster risk. Managing disaster risk is just
                                                                one of myriad challenges faced by governments,
     Risk information provides a critical foundation
                                                                communities, and individuals, and it is one that
     for managing disaster risk across a wide range of
                                                                may be easy to neglect. Because the damages and
     sectors. In the insurance sector, the quantification
                                                                losses caused by historical disasters are often
     of disaster risk is essential, given that the solvency     not widely known, and because the potential
     capital of most non-life insurance companies is            damages and losses that could arise from future
     strongly influenced by their exposure to natural           disasters (including infrequent but high-impact
     catastrophe risk. In the construction sector,              events) may not be known at all, DRM is given
     quantifying the potential risk expected in the             a low priority. Appropriate communication of
     lifetime of a building, bridge, or critical facility       robust risk information at the right time can raise
     drives the creation and modification of building           awareness and trigger action.
     codes. In the land-use and urban planning sectors,
                                                              2.	 Risk reduction: Informing policies,
     robust analysis of flood risk likewise drives
                                                                investments, and structural and
     investment in flood protection and possibly effects
                                                                nonstructural measures intended to
     changes in insurance as well. At the community
                                                                reduce risk. Hazard and risk information may
     level, an understanding of hazard events—whether
                                                                be used to inform a broad range of activities to
     from living memory or oral and written histories—
                                                                reduce risk, from improving building codes and
     can inform and influence decisions on preparedness,
                                                                designing risk reduction measures (such as flood
     including life-saving evacuation procedures and the
                                                                and storm surge protection), to carrying out
     location of important facilities.                          macro-level assessments of the risks to different
                                                                types of buildings (for prioritizing investment in
     Building on the DRM framework proposed in the
                                                                reconstruction and retrofitting, for example).
     Sendai report (World Bank 2012), we highlight
     here the role of risk identification in five key         3.	 Preparedness: Informing early warning
     areas of decision making. Each of the case studies         systems and emergency measures and
     included in this publication deals with the planning,      supporting preparedness and contingency
     development, and application of risk information for       planning at various levels. An understanding
     at least one of these areas.                               of the geographic area affected, along with the
                                                            Ha za rd
                                                         HAZARD                                                     Exposure
                                                                                                                  EXPOSURE
The Components
  The Components                                           Ha
                                                           Haza
                                                           The  zardrd probability, or chance of a
                                                               likelihood,                                        Exposure
                                                                                                                  Exposure
                                                                                                                  The location, attributes, and values of

   The
  The
The     Components
       Components
     Components
                                                        HaHa
                                                          za za
                                                             rd
                                                           The
                                                        TheThe
                                                                 rd destructive
                                                           potentially
                                                               likelihood,
                                                           The likelihood,
                                                         a potentially destructive phenomenon.
                                                              potentially
                                                                likelihood,
                                                            likelihood,
                                                              potentially
                                                                                  phenomenon.
                                                                           probability
                                                                           probability
                                                                          destructive
                                                                        probability
                                                                          destructive
                                                                                        orchance
                                                                                      ,,or chanceof
                                                                                                 ofa
                                                                                   , orphenomenon.
                                                                            probability ,chance of aof a
                                                                                          or chance
                                                                                       phenomenon.
                                                                                                    a            Exposure
                                                                                                               Exposure
                                                                                                                  assets
                                                                                                                  The
                                                                                                               TheThe
                                                                                                                         that are
                                                                                                                  Thelocation,
                                                                                                                       location,
                                                                                                                  that are important to communities.
                                                                                                                    assets  that
                                                                                                                       location,
                                                                                                                   location,
                                                                                                                     assets
                                                                                                                                attributes,
                                                                                                                             that
                                                                                                                                  important
                                                                                                                                 attributes,
                                                                                                                                 are
                                                                                                                                  areimportant
                                                                                                                                  attributes,
                                                                                                                              attributes,
                                                                                                                                              to communities.
                                                                                                                                            and
                                                                                                                                             and
                                                                                                                                       important
                                                                                                                                                  valuesof
                                                                                                                                                 values
                                                                                                                                             andand  to
                                                                                                                                                        of
                                                                                                                                                        values
                                                                                                                                                   values
                                                                                                                                                       tocommunities.
                                                                                                                                                            of of
                                                                                                                                                          communities.
   for
   for Assessing
       Assessing Risk
                 Risk
                                                           potentially
                                                        potentially     destructive
                                                                    destructive      phenomenon.
                                                                                phenomenon.                       assets
                                                                                                               assets      are are
                                                                                                                         that
                                                                                                                      that
                                                                                                                                  27° 43' 0" N 85° 19' 0" E
                                                                                                                                    important
                                                                                                                               important
                                                                                                                                   27°
                                                                                                                                    27°43'
                                                                                                                                        43'0" N85°
                                                                                                                                            0"N
                                                                                                                                                   to communities.
                                                                                                                                              to communities.
                                                                                                                                                    19'0"
                                                                                                                                                85°19'  0" EE
Risk
  for
for   Assessing
    Assessing   Risk
               Risk                                                                                                              27°
                                                                                                                            27° 43'    N 0"
                                                                                                                                     43'
                                                                                                                                    0"   85°N19'
                                                                                                                                              85° 19'E0" E
                                                                                                                                                 0"




                                                                                                                                               material: cinder block
                                                                                                                                                      roof: steel block
                                                                                                                                               material:
                                                                                                                                                material:cinder
                                                                                                                                                           cinder block
                                                                                                                                                      roof:
                                                                                                                                                       roof:steel
                                                                                                                                                             steel
                                                                                                                                             material:
                                                                                                                                         material:      cinder
                                                                                                                                                   cinder blockblock
                                                                                                                                                     steelsteel
                                                                                                                                               roof:roof:
     Vuln er abil
VULNERABILITY              it y                               Impact
                                                           IMPACT                                            Risk
                                                                                                          RISK
        Vuln
         Vuln
        The     er
                er  abil
                     abil
            likelihood     it
                            it
                         that  y
                               yassets will
The likelihood that assets will be damaged  be damaged   or   Impact
                                                               Impact
                                                              For use in preparedness, an evaluation of      Risk
                                                                                                              Risk
                                                                                                             Is the composite of the impacts of  ALL poten-
  Vuln Vuln
          erlikelihood
        destroyed
        The
         The  er abil
             abil   it
                    when
             likelihoodyit  y
                         thatexposed
                          that  assets to a be
                                 assetswill
                                        will hazard event.
                                             bedamaged
                                                damaged  orImpact
                                                          or Impact
                                                              what
                                                               Foruse
                                                              For  might
                                                                  use in   happen to people
                                                                       inpreparedness,
                                                                         preparedness, anevaluation
                                                                                       an evaluation       Risk
                                                                                                     of Risk
                                                                                            and assets
                                                                                                     of      ALL
                                                                                                             Is
                                                                                                              Isthepotential
                                                                                                                 thecompositeevents
                                                                                                                     composite  of  (100’s
                                                                                                                                ofthe
                                                                                                                                   the     or 1,000’s
                                                                                                                                      impacts
                                                                                                                                       impacts  of
                                                                                                                                                of
or destroyed when exposed to                                     might
                                                          whatfrom   a  happen
                                                                       single    to people and assets
                                                                              event.
   TheThedestroyed
            likelihood
       likelihood
         destroyed   when
                    thatthat
                      when  exposed
                             assets
                         assets       to
                                will60%
                             exposedwill
                                     beto a
                                          ahazard
                                         be damaged
                                         damaged
                                            hazardevent.
                                                   or or For For
                                                   event.      what
                                                             use  use in preparedness,
                                                                  in preparedness,
                                                                what might
                                                                      might  happen
                                                                             happen   to
                                                                                     an  people
                                                                                         an
                                                                                          people and
                                                                                            evaluation
                                                                                       toevaluation
                                                                                                 and assets
                                                                                                    of  of
                                                                                                      assets        Is of
                                                                                                               Is the  ALL
                                                                                                                       the
                                                                                                                       ALLmodels).
                                                                                                                           potential
                                                                                                                           composite
                                                                                                                        composite   of events
                                                                                                                            potential   of the
                                                                                                                                       the impacts
                                                                                                                                       events  (100’s
                                                                                                                                                impacts
                                                                                                                                                (100’s or
                                                                                                                                                       or1,000’s
                                                                                                                                                      of  of
                                                                                                                                                          1,000’s
a hazard   event.     50%
      destroyed
   destroyed   whenwhen   exposed
                      exposed       to
                                to a60%
                                     hazard
                                       a hazard event. what
                                             event.            from
                                                             what
                                                               might
                                                                from a single
                                                                    might
                                                                      a    happen
                                                                       happen
                                                                        singleevent.to people
                                                                                to people
                                                                               event.      andand  assets
                                                                                                assets         ALLALL  of
                                                                                                                       ofmodels).
                                                                                                                          potential
                                                                                                                     potential events
                                                                                                                          models).  events   (100’s
                                                                                                                                         (100’s      or 1,000’s
                                                                                                                                                 or 1,000’s
                      50%            60%
                       50%                                   from
                                                          from     a single
                                                               a single     event.
                                                                         event.                                     of models).
                                                                                                               of models).
                              60% 60%
               50% 50%




   intensity and frequency of different hazard                         new risk information is critical. It is important                     Figure O—1 
   events, is critical for planning evacuation routes,                 to recognize that investment in risk information                      The components for
   creating shelters, and running preparedness                         for insurance or financial purposes is typically                      assessing risk and the
   drills. Providing a measure of the impact of                        resource-intensive and needs to adhere to                             difference between
   different hazard events—potential number                            specific standards of analysis.                                       "impact" and "risk."
   of damaged buildings, fatalities and injuries,
                                                                                                                                             Source: GFDRR 2014.
   secondary hazards—makes it possible to establish                 5.	 Resilient reconstruction: Informing
   detailed and realistic plans for better response                    early and rapid estimates of damage
   to disasters, which can ultimately reduce the                       and providing critical information for
   severity of adverse natural events.                                 reconstruction. Risk assessment can play a
                                                                       critical role in impact modelling before an event
4.	 Financial protection: Developing financial
                                                                       strikes (in the days leading up to a cyclone, for
   applications to manage and/or transfer
                                                                       example), or it can provide initial and rapid
   risk. Disaster risk analysis was born out of
                                                                       estimates of human, physical, and economic loss
   the financial and insurance sector’s need to
   quantify the risk of comparatively rare high-                       in an event’s immediate aftermath. Moreover, risk

   impact natural hazard events. As governments                        information for resilient reconstruction needs
   increasingly seek to manage their sovereign                         to be available before an event occurs, since
   financial risk or support programs that manage                      after the event there is rarely time to collect the
   individual financial risks (e.g., micro-insurance                   information needed to inform resilient design
   or household earthquake insurance), developing                      and land-use plans.




                                                                                                                                                                  21
22
                                                             It is important to emphasize that exposure and
     	A Framework for
                                                             vulnerability, not just hazard level, drive the scale
     Quantifying and                                         and impacts of any disaster (figure O-2). Rapid
                                                             and/or unplanned urbanization—characterized by
     Understanding Risk                                      dense populations living in poorly constructed
     In its most simple form, disaster risk is a function    housing—sets the stage for significant losses in
     of three components—hazard, exposure, and               lives and property when it occurs in areas at risk
     vulnerability (figure O-1).                             of flooding, earthquake, or other hazards. Indeed,
                                                             evidence now points to urbanization—the unplanned
     •	 Hazard refers to the likelihood and intensity of     and unchecked swelling of cities and megacities—as
        a potentially destructive natural phenomenon,        among the most important drivers of disaster risk
        such as ground shaking induced by an earthquake      (GFDRR 2012). Fortunately, a catastrophic disaster
        or wind speed associated with a tropical cyclone.    is not the inevitable consequence of a hazard event,
                                                             and much can be done to reduce the exposure
     •	 Exposure refers to the location, attributes, and
                                                             and vulnerability of populations living in areas
        value of assets that are important to the various
                                                             where natural hazards occur, whether frequently
        communities, such as people, buildings, factories,
                                                             or infrequently.
        farmland, and infrastructure, and that are
        exposed to the hazard.                               The two strongest tropical cyclones ever to strike
                                                             India constitute an instructive example of what can
     •	 Vulnerability is the reaction of the assets when
                                                             be achieved through understanding and managing
        exposed to the spatially variable forces produced
                                                             risk. In 1999, the Odisha cyclone made landfall and
        by a hazard event. For example, a building’s
                                                             resulted in 10,000 fatalities.2 Fourteen years later,
        vulnerability to earthquake increases with the
                                                             Cyclone Phailin struck nearby and resulted in 45
        intensity of ground shaking and decreases with
                                                             fatalities.3 This dramatic reduction in loss of life
        improved conformity to seismic design standards.
                                                             highlights the extensive efforts made by the state of
        Similarly, socioeconomic conditions can make
                                                             Odisha in disaster management and preparedness.
        responding to a hazard event easier or more
                                                             A similar example is offered by New Zealand
        difficult.
                                                             and Japan, where efforts by governments over
     Of course, within this simple framework a multitude     decades massively reduced potential losses from
     of possible approaches to risk assessment and risk      the Christchurch and Great East Japan (Tohoku)
     modelling is possible.                                  earthquake events in 2011.
1                                                                                              2    Increased Exposure
                                                                                                    and Vulnerability


                    Exposure                    Vulnerability                                                       Exposure                Vulnerability
                                    RISK                                                                                       RISK
                                                                       Comparing Risk

                                                                       1         2
                                  Hazard
                                                                                                                               Hazard

                                                                       3         4

3   Increased Exposure,
    Vulnerability, and Hazard
                                                                                               4    Reduced Exposure
                                                                                                    and Vulnerability



                  Exposure                       Vulnerability                                                    Exposure                      Vulnerability
                                    RISK                                                                                       RISK

                                                                                                                               Hazard
                                   Hazard




                                                                 components—as well as operational and institutional
	Advances in Disaster                                                                                                          Figure O—2 
                                                                 progress and challenges associated with new                   Risk as a function of
Risk Assessment and Key                                          modes of addressing risk such as multi-stakeholder            hazard, exposure,
                                                                 collaboration, communication, and open data                   and vulnerability.
Remaining Challenges
                                                                 and models.
                                                                                                                               Note: Triangle 1 shows equal
Though important challenges remain in assessing                                                                                contributions to the risk
                                                                   Hazard. A wide range of data is required for
risk, since 2005 significant progress has been made                                                                            equation. Triangle 2 shows
                                                                 ///       ///




                                                                 understanding the potential extent and intensity              a rapid increase in exposure
on each critical element of the risk assessment
                                                                 of one or more natural hazards. In the last decade,           and vulnerability, leading to
process. More hazard data and models are available;
                                                                 there has been substantial progress toward creating           increased risk (as in rapidly
tools and models for identifying, analyzing, and                                                                               urbanizing cities). Triangle
                                                                 and providing open access to many global and
managing risk have grown in number and utility; and                                                                            3 shows increased hazard,
                                                                 national data sets critical to understanding hazard.
risk data and tools are increasingly being made freely                                                                         exposure, and vulnerability,
                                                                 Moreover, significant advances have been made                 leading to increased risk (as
available to users as part of a larger global trend
                                                                 in generation of so-called synthetic catalogs of              in a rapidly growing coastal
toward open data. More generally, and in contrast
                                                                 hazard events, which are used to ensure that the              city where the effects
to 2005, today there is a deeper understanding—on                                                                              of climate change are
                                                                 full range of hazard events is captured and the
the part of governments as well as development                                                                                 increasingly felt). Triangle 4
                                                                 likelihood of different events assigned. Significant          shows controlled exposure
institutions such as the World Bank—that risk must
                                                                 challenges in acquiring and using hazard data                 and vulnerability (such as
be managed on an ongoing basis,4 and that DRM
                                                                 remain, however. Consensus is emerging on the                 through proactive DRM),
requires many partners working cooperatively and                                                                               leading to lower overall risk.
                                                                 urgent need, particularly in developing countries
sharing information.
                                                                 and high-risk coastal areas, for digital elevation data
This section summarizes technical advances                       at the appropriate level (that is, better than the 90m
and challenges associated with the fundamental                   resolution that is currently available). Similarly, lack
elements of risk—hazard, exposure, vulnerability,                of historical hydrometeorological data in digital
and the modelling that integrates these                          format poses significant challenges in quantifying




                                                                                                                                                 23
24
     current and future hydrometeorological risk in            and to catalyze community mapping of buildings
     low- to middle-income countries. There is also            and infrastructure. (For more on the development
     evidence of emerging attempts to integrate climate        and use of GeoNodes, see box 3-1 and section 3-1.)
     change scenarios into risk modelling; however, this       Moreover, satellite imagery is increasingly becoming
     adds significant additional uncertainty into the          available for use in assessing and understanding
     modelled results.                                         risk. Meteorological data collected using satellite
                                                               imagery, for example, are increasingly being used
       Exposure. The growing momentum in efforts
                                                               to determine flood and drought risks at global and
     ///         ///




     to develop exposure data has given rise to
                                                               national scales. In addition, release of satellite
     new approaches to data collection at various
                                                               imagery to the crowd is increasingly being used
     scales, from global to individual-building level.
                                                               to map building footprints, roads, and other
     The greater availability of global data sets on
                                                               characteristics of the built environment or disaster-
     population, building types, satellite imagery,
                                                               impacted area—often by mappers thousands of
     and so on is providing significant opportunity
                                                               kilometers away. However, all these efforts need
     to model global exposure at higher and higher
                                                               to achieve scale and sustainability to ensure that
     resolutions. At national and subnational levels,
                                                               exposure data are available to explain the impacts of
     data and information from government ministries
                                                               disasters and climate change at different scales.
     (such as statistics authorities, transportation and
     infrastructure departments, and education and               Vulnerability. Both structural (i.e., physical)
                                                               ///              ///




     health departments) are increasingly being liberated      vulnerability and socioeconomic vulnerability are
     and merged in order to understand community,              relevant to risk assessment. Concerning structural
     city, and national exposure. At city and community        vulnerability, local engineers are increasingly
     levels, the growing popularity of volunteer               dedicating themselves to understanding the
     geospatial initiatives (e.g., OpenStreetMap, or           vulnerability of their local building stock (which
     OSM—see box 1-2) is seen by authorities as a way          varies significantly from country to country and
     to engage communities, particularly youth, in the         within countries) to different natural hazards.
     collection of data that will help everyone to plan and    Engineers in the Philippines and Indonesia, for
     manage disaster risk. The Community Mapping for           instance, are now developing vulnerability functions
     Resilience program in Indonesia6 is a prime example       relevant to their respective national building stocks.
     of a government-led volunteer geospatial initiative:      However, opportunities continue to be lost in
     in a little over a year, more than 160,000 individual     the collection of damage and loss data following
     buildings were mapped into OSM.                           disaster events—data and information critical to
                                                               understanding future risks. In addition, efforts to
     Underpinning these efforts has been the rapid rise of
                                                               quantify socioeconomic vulnerability and poverty
     the open data movement, which aims to make data
                                                               remain limited, and information of this kind is rarely
     technically open.7 The Global Facility for Disaster
                                                               integrated into risk assessments.
     Reduction and Recovery and World Bank launched
     the Open Data for Resilience Initiative in 2011 to          Risk modelling. The last decade has seen a
                                                               ///                    ///




     foster and catalyze the open data movement for            revolution in open access hazard and risk modelling
     climate and disaster resilience. Under this initiative,   software packages. Users from beginner to expert
     web-based geospatial platforms (GeoNodes) in              can now choose from a range of tools to address a
     more than 20 countries have been used to open             range of problems. The packages vary in complexity
     more than 1,000 geospatial data sets to the public        from OpenQuake, which is designed for highly
advanced users, to multi-hazard risk platforms such       are evident in recent successful efforts in countries
as CAPRA, to tools that enable nonspecialists to          such as Jordan (see section 3-10), the Philippines
interact with data sets produced by both experts and      (sections 3-1 and 3-4), Indonesia (section 3-4),
volunteers, such as InaSAFE (described in detail in       and Bangladesh (section 3-2 and box 2-13), where
section 3-22). All these advances and innovations
              8
                                                          agencies responsible for each element of risk
create a need for better standards and transparency,      assessment worked together with decision makers
which would enable replicating risk results by other      in finance, planning, and emergency management.
actors, reporting on modelling assumptions and            Moreover, a number of global collaborative
uncertainty, and so forth.                                efforts have been formed to bring together
                                                          practitioners from public, private, academic, and
Another area of increased research and innovation
has been global and regional risk modelling               nongovernmental organizations; an example is

activities, designed to provide insight into global and   the Understanding Risk global community of

regional trends in disaster risk. For example, global     practice (see box 2-11). What the case studies
flood risk models developed in recent years can           make clear in aggregate is that there is no singular
quickly provide estimations of potential losses—in        "correct" formula for building multi-institutional
monetary or human terms—from flood events with            collaborations around risk assessment; effective
different return periods. With these advances comes       approaches are context specific, build on existing
a need for clear communication of the limitations         institutional mandates, and center on the specific
of global analysis, in terms of scale, data, and          DRM problem being addressed.
assumptions (e.g., global and regional flood models
                                                            Risk communication. The delivery of a risk
rarely integrate information on flood protection).
                                                          ///                     ///




                                                          assessment is now widely recognized as a first
While the experts developing these models
                                                          step. The completion of the risk assessment
clearly understand their limitations, especially at
                                                          marks the beginning of a longer process of broadly
subnational levels, those using the information
produced by these models may understand their             communicating risk information to all relevant

limitations less well.                                    stakeholders—in a way that is meaningful to them
                                                          and fit for their purposes. There is no one right way
It is well recognized that risk is not static and that    to communicate risk; instead practitioners need to
it can change very rapidly as a result of evolving        draw on a toolbox of approaches, ranging from Excel
hazard, exposure, and vulnerability (recall figure        spreadsheets, maps, and simple interactive tools,
O-2). Decision makers therefore need to engage            to graphical representation of hazard and risk, to
today on the risk they face tomorrow. Fortunately,
                                                          clear action-orientated messages from authoritative
significant new methodologies and data sets
                                                          and respected voices explaining what citizens,
are being developed that will increasingly make
                                                          communities, and countries can do to reduce risk.
modelling future risks possible.
                                                          Much progress has been made in communicating
  Multi-institutional collaboration. Risk
///                                    ///
                                                          risk—the Padang Build Back Better campaign
assessment is inherently multi-institutional,             described in section 3-21 demonstrates this fact, as
and no single agency can be solely responsible            does the growing use of new interactive geospatial
for generating, communicating, and using risk             tools such as GeoNode and InaSAFE—but this is an
information. The opportunities for collaboration          area that needs substantial additional investment in
and dialogue among multi-institutional stakeholders       practical and considered research.




                                                                                                                  25
CHAPTER


  5
                                                             limited uptake of this information. Experience
Recommendations for
                                                             shows that successful projects often partner risk
Future Risk Assessments.                                     specialists with country counterparts to design,
                                                             implement, and communicate the results of
The recommendations we offer here draw on
                                                             the risk assessment. Now that citizens have the
submissions to this publication and on discussions
                                                             ability to map entire cities, it is also important to
with both users and developers of risk information.
                                                             recognize that the data they generate are more
For users of risk information—DRM practitioners,
                                                             likely to be used when the authorities are also
government officials, donors, and nongovernmental
                                                             engaged in this process.
organizations considering investing in risk
assessment—our key recommendations are meant               3.	 Cultivate and promote the generation
                                                             ///




to ensure that such investment promotes more                 and use of open data. Experience gained in
                                                                                        ///




resilient development and communities. For those             the last decade strongly speaks to the need to
undertaking risk analyses, we see an opportunity to          encourage the creation and use of open data.
promote greater transparency and accountability.             The analysis of natural hazards and their risks
We stress, however, that the best outcomes are               is a highly resource- and data-intensive process,
likely to be achieved when those investing in risk           whereby the return on expended resources
information and those carrying out the risk analysis         (time and money) can be maximized if the data
work in concert and share a common understanding             are created once and used often, and if they are
of the undertaking.                                          iteratively improved. Current approaches to
                                                             developing open exposure data on the location,
1.	 Clearly define the purpose of the risk
   ///




                                                             type, and value of assets continue to be improved,
   assessment before analysis starts. Risk    ///




                                                             and volunteered geospatial efforts and remote
   assessments initiated without first defining a            sensing products offer new opportunities to
   question and an end-user often become scientific          collect and update fundamental data. That said,
   and engineering exercises that upon completion            despite the progress made, some fundamental
   must find a use case. Moreover, a risk assessment         data gaps prohibit meaningful and accurate
   that is not properly targeted may not be fit for its      assessments of disaster and climate risks—for
   intended purpose or may be over-engineered and/           example, we lack global digital elevation data sets
   or over-resourced. Where risk assessments have            available at resolutions appropriate for analyzing
   been commissioned in response to a clear and              the potential inundation from flood, storm surge,
   specific request for information, they have tended        sea-level rise, tsunami, and so on.
   to be effective in reducing fiscal or physical risk.
                                                           4.	 Make better communication of risk
                                                             ///




2.	 Promote and enable ownership of the
   ///




                                                             information an urgent priority. Clear ///




   risk assessment process and efforts to                    communication throughout the risk assessment
   mitigate risk. Ownership is critical for ensuring
                   ///




                                                             process—from initiation of the assessment to
   that knowledge created through a risk assessment          delivery of results and the development of plans
   is authoritative and therefore acted upon. It is          in response—is critical for successfully mitigating
   certainly possible for risk specialists to generate       disaster risk.
   risk analysis without ever engaging with local
   authorities; but regardless of the sophistication or      A case study featured in section 3-21—"Build Back
   accuracy of their analysis, there will likely be very     Better: Where Knowledge Is Not Enough"—is a




                                                                                                                     27
28
     must-read for all risk assessment practitioners      information has to do with the type of
     and disaster risk managers. An exceptionally         information communicated, and to whom.
     planned and implemented "Build Back Better"          Metrics like average annual loss and probable
     campaign led by the government of Indonesia          maximum loss, for example, are of interest and
     in the aftermath of the 2009 Padang earthquake       relevant to the financial sector, but they are poor
     demonstrated conclusively that well-targeted         metrics for communicating with almost all other
     education and communication of risk                  decision makers involved in DRM. Far preferable
     information can increase awareness of natural        are interactive tools that enable people to answer
     hazards and their potential impacts. Analysis also   "what if?" questions robustly and simply ("What
     showed, however, that progress from increased        if an earthquake/cyclone/other natural hazard
     awareness to action can be very difficult to         hit my community—How many buildings would
     achieve, even in a community that has witnessed      collapse or be damaged?"). InaSAFE, a recently
     at first hand the devastation of an earthquake.      developed tool, meets this need and is now being
     To put risk knowledge into practice and build        used extensively at national and subnational
     more resilient homes, people must be offered         levels in Indonesia. That said, there is still
     the correct combination of timely information,       immense opportunity to develop a bigger toolbox
     technical training, community supervision,           of interactive, highly graphical visualization
     and financial and nonfinancial incentives and        tools, which would enable all decision makers,
     disincentives.                                       from individuals to national governments, to
     A second point about communicating risk              meaningfully interact with risk information.
5.	 Foster multidisciplinary, multi-institutional,
  ///
                                                            leads to better land-use planning, better response
  and multi-sectoral collaboration at all                   capacity, greater risk awareness, and increased
  levels, from international to community.          ///
                                                            ability to set priorities for mitigation actions.
  To generate a usable risk assessment product,             Particular caution should be taken with risks in
  technical experts and decision makers must                food security and the agricultural sector, and
  consult with one another and reach agreement              we recommend that these risks be considered
  on the risk information that is required by               alongside flood and drought analysis.
  the relevant development program, and more
                                                          7.	 Keep abreast of evolving risk. Risk
  broadly on the purpose and process of the risk
                                                            ///                                  ///




                                                            assessments need to account for temporal
  assessment. The actual development of risk
                                                            and spatial changes in hazard, exposure, and
  information is clearly a multidisciplinary effort
                                                            vulnerability, particularly in rapidly urbanizing
  that takes place through collaborations ranging
                                                            areas or where climate change impacts will be
  from international efforts to multi-institutional
                                                            felt the most. A risk assessment that provides
  arrangements at national and subnational levels.
                                                            an estimation of evolving or future risk is a way
  There are many efforts currently under way that
                                                            to engage stakeholders in carrying out actions
  speak to the success of this approach. However,
                                                            now in order to avoid or mitigate the risk that
  success has been comparatively limited in
                                                            is accumulating in their city or country. For
  merging community-level understanding of risk
                                                            example, risk analysis offers an opportunity to
  with a national or subnational understanding
                                                            quantify the decrease in future risk that arises
  of risk. This is a missed opportunity wherein
                                                            from better enforcement of building codes, and
  a common understanding of the risks and
                                                            hence to demonstrate the benefit of spending
  necessary steps to reduce these risks could
                                                            additional funds on building code enforcement.
  trigger greater action.

6.	 Consider the broader risk context. Rarely do
  ///                                     ///
                                                            Because risk is likely to evolve under climate
  countries, communities, or citizens face potential        change—according to the Intergovernmental
  risks from only one hazard, or even from natural          Panel on Climate Change, "a changing climate
  hazards alone. Our complex environments                   leads to changes in the frequency, intensity,
  and social structures are such that multiple or           spatial extent, duration, and timing of extreme
  connected risks—from financial hazards, multiple          weather and climate events" (IPCC 2012, 7)—
  or cascading natural hazards, and anthropogenic           there is increasing interest in understanding
  hazards—are the norm. Just as multi-peril risk            climate change’s impacts and calculating losses
  calculations are required for many financial              under future adverse climate events. Using the
  applications, territorial planning should draw            modelling techniques and approaches developed
  on information from assessments of multiple               to model disaster risk, experts have demonstrated
  hazards (flood, landslide, and earthquake, for            the potential to determine future loss under
  example) in order to reduce risk. We know that            climate change. However, since the fundamental
  failure to consider the full hazard environment           data sets that enable the risks of today to be
  can result in maladaptation (heavy concrete               quantified are the same as those required to
  structures with a ground-level soft story for             determine the impacts of adverse events in
  parking can protect against cyclone wind, for             the future, it is critical for both the disaster
  example, but can be deadly in an earthquake),             and climate change communities to continue
  whereas adopting a multi-hazard risk approach             investing in fundamental data and innovation.




                                                                                                                 29
30
     8.	 Understand, quantify, and communicate
       ///                                                     10.	 Encourage innovations in open source
                                                                  ///




       the uncertainties and limitations of risk                  software. In the last 5 to 10 years, immense
                                                                             ///




       information. Once risk information is produced,
                      ///
                                                                  progress has been made in creating new open
       all users must be aware of and knowledgeable               source hazard and risk modelling software. More
       about its limitations and uncertainties, which can         than 80 freely available software packages, many
       arise from uncertainties in the exposure data,             of which are open source, are now available
       in knowledge of the hazard, and in knowledge               for flood, tsunami, cyclone (wind and surge),
       of fragility and vulnerability functions. Failure          and earthquake, with at least 30 of these in
       to consider these can lead to flawed decision              widespread use. Significant progress has also
       making and inadvertently increase risk. A risk             been made in improving open source geospatial

       model can produce a very precise result—it may             tools, such as QGIS and GeoNode, which are
                                                                  lowering the financial barriers to understanding
       show, for example, that a 1-in-100-year flood will
                                                                  risks at national and subnational levels. Yet all
       affect 388,123 people—but in reality the accuracy
                                                                  this innovation has created challenges around
       of the model and input data may provide only an
                                                                  assessing "fitness-for-purpose," interoperability,
       order of magnitude estimate. Similarly, sharply
                                                                  transparency, and standards. These need to be
       delineated flood zones on a hazard map do not
                                                                  addressed in a way that continues to catalyze
       adequately reflect the uncertainty associated
                                                                  innovation and yet also better supports risk
       with the estimate and could lead to decisions
                                                                  model users.
       such as locating critical facilities just outside the
       "flood line," where the actual risk is the same as
       if the facility was located inside the flood zone.
                                                               	Recommendations
       It is incumbent upon specialists producing risk
       information to clearly and simply communicate           toward the Next Hyogo
       uncertainties and limitations.
                                                               Framework for Action
     9.	 Ensure that risk information is credible
                                                               Looking ahead to the next phase of the HFA, we
       ///




       and transparent. Risk information must be
                                                               would encourage international policy makers to
                            ///




       scientifically and technically rigorous, open for
                                                               consider the above recommendations, which are
       review, and honest regarding its limitations and
                                                               based on the case studies and analytical work this
       uncertainties, which may arise from uncertainties
                                                               publication reports on. Future HFA indicators
       in the exposure data, in knowledge of the hazard,
                                                               centered on risk information should articulate the
       and in knowledge of fragility and vulnerability         need for targeted, robust, authoritative, trusted,
       functions. The best way to demonstrate                  open, understandable, and usable risk information—
       credibility is to have transparent data, models,        descriptors which were universally mentioned
       and results open for review by independent,             by contributors to this publication. Future HFA
       technically competent individuals. Risk modelling       indicators should also stress the importance
       has become very advanced, yet also more                 of producing risk information that is driven by
       accessible, and therefore anyone can feasibly           the needs of end-users and the information and
       run a risk model—but without the appropriate            evidence gaps—whether at national, subnational
       scientific and engineering training and judgment,       or community levels—as well as the need for
       the results may be fundamentally incorrect and          appropriate communication of risk information for
       may mislead decision makers.                            different stakeholders.
Endnotes
    1 The Global Assessment Report, whose preparation is
<sup>   </sup>
                                                                                               more to be done to systematically integrate an assessment
overseen by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk                                        of risks into the design and implementation of World Bank-
Reduction, is released every two years. Like previous                                          financed projects (9).”
reports, the 2015 edition addresses progress and
                                                                                                   5 Liberated data are those that were at one time
challenges in achieving each of the Hyogo Framework
                                                                                               <sup>            </sup>




                                                                                               inaccessible due to format, policies, systems, etc., but are
for Action objectives. The Global Facility for Disaster
                                                                                               now being made available for use, either as discoverable
Reduction and Recovery led the development of the
                                                                                               and usable data sets or (in many cases) as technically open
analysis on “Priority Action 2: Identify, assess and monitor
                                                                                               data sets.
disaster risks.”
                                                                                                   6 This program began in 2011 through a partnership led
    2 The 1999 Odisha cyclone, Cyclone 05B, was the first
                                                                                               <sup>                 </sup>




                                                                                               by the Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction,
<sup>            </sup>




storm to be categorized by the India Meteorological
                                                                                               Indonesia’s National Disaster Management Agency (Badan
Department (IMD) as a super cyclonic storm. The 10-minute
                                                                                               Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana), and the Humanitarian
sustained wind was derived using a factor of ~0.85 to
                                                                                               OpenStreetMap Team, with support from the GFDRR and
convert from 1-minute to 10-minute sustained winds.                                            the World Bank.

    3 According to IMD (2013), Cyclone Phailin’s winds at
<sup>             </sup>




                                                                                                   7 Technically open generally means that data can be found
                                                                                               <sup>   </sup>




landfall were ~215km/hr. IMD uses 3-minute sustained                                           on the Internet at a permanent address and are available
winds as an average. A factor of ~0.9 was used to convert                                      in structured, nonproprietary formats via download or an
from 3-minute to 10-minute sustained winds.                                                    application programming interface (API).

    4 According to GFDRR (2012), a recent report by the World
<sup>                     </sup>




                                                                                                   8 OpenQuake was developed under the Global Earthquake
                                                                                               <sup>                     </sup>




Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group finds “a clear shift                                       Model Foundation; for more information see http://www.
toward risk reduction in Bank-supported investment                                             globalquakemodel.org/. For more information about
projects since 2006,” though it also notes that “there is                                      CAPRA, see the program’s website at www.ecapra.org.




References
GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and                                              UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2013.
                                   Recovery). 2012. “Managing Disaster Risks for a Resilient
                                                                                                                                  “A Comparative Review of Country-level and Regional
                                   Future: A Strategy for the Global Facility for Disaster
                                                                                                                                  Disaster Loss and Damage Databases.Bureau for Crisis
                                   Reduction and Recovery 2013—2015.” https://www.gfdrr.
                                                                                                                                  Prevention and Recovery, UNDP. http://www.undp.org/
                                   org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/publication/GFDRR_Strategy_
                                                                                                                                  content/undp/en/home/librarypage/crisis-prevention-
                                   Endorsed_2012.pdf.
                                                                                                                                  and-recovery/loss-and-damage-database/.
———. 2014. Open Data for Resilience Initiative Field Guide.
                                   Washington, DC: World Bank.                                 World Bank. 2012. The Sendai Report: Managing Disaster
                                                                                                                                  Risks for a Resilient Future. Washington, DC: World Bank.
IMD (India Meteorological Department). 2013. Very Severe                                                                          https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/publication/
                                   Cyclonic Storm, PHAILIN over the Bay of Bengal (08-14                                          Sendai_Report_051012_0.pdf.
                                   October 2013): A Report. New Dehli: Cyclone Warning
                                   Division, India Meteorological Department. http://www.      World Bank and GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster
                                   imd.gov.in/section/nhac/dynamic/phailin.pdf.                                                   Reduction and Recovery). 2013. Building Resilience:
                                                                                                                                  Integrating Climate and Disaster Risk into Development—
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2012.
                                   Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to                                          The World Bank Group Experience. Washington, DC:

                                   Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A special report                                            World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/
                                   of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental                                            Worldbank/document/SDN/Full_Report_Building_
                                   Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge and New York:                                               Resilience_Integrating_Climate_Disaster_Risk_
                                   Cambridge University Press.                                                                    Development.pdf.




                                                                                                                                                                                              31
32
     ﻿
                                                                                                              CHAPTER


                                                                                                              01
U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




INTRODUCTION

Earthquakes, droughts, floods and storms               Experience has shown that a disaster risk
are natural hazards, but unnatural disasters           assessment does not represent the conclusion
are deaths and damages that result from                of a process, but instead provides a foundation
human acts of omission and commission.                 for a long-term engagement focused on the
Every disaster is unique, but each exposes             communication and use of the risk information.
actions—by individuals and governments at              Proactive responses to new risk information
different levels—that, had they been different,        include retrofitting buildings to withstand the
would have resulted in fewer deaths and less           assessed seismic risk, developing new land-use
damage.                                                plans, designing financial protection measures, and
                                                       equipping and training emergency responders.
—World Bank and United Nations, Natural
Hazards, UnNatural Disasters                           In the context of rapidly growing disaster losses
                                                       and high-profile catastrophic disasters, it is often
A disaster-related risk assessment provides an         difficult to imagine reducing the impact from
opportunity before a disaster event to determine       hazard events. However, societies have successfully
the likely deaths, damages, and losses (direct         overcome similar challenges in the past. For
and indirect) that will result, and to highlight       centuries, urban fires were a global concern for
which actions will be most effective in reducing       the public, private, and finance sectors, as well as
the impacts on individuals, communities, and           for the communities directly affected. Urban fires
governments. This ability to model disaster loss and   devastated Rome in 64 CE, London in 1666, Moscow
to provide robust analysis on the costs and benefits   in 1812, Chicago in 1871, and Boston in 1872; the
of risk preparedness, reduction, and avoidance has     1906 San Francisco fire destroyed nearly 95 percent
made disaster risk assessments a powerful tool in      of the city, and the Tokyo fire of 1923 killed over
disaster risk management (DRM). As a result, the       40,000 people. Yet we do not see urban fires any
number of risk assessments being undertaken is         more, and this hazard has largely been consigned to
growing, innovation has flourished, and a vast array   history. The reasons— implementation of modern
of approaches, experiences, and lessons learned        building codes, land-use planning, establishment
now exists.                                            and expansion of emergency services, greater citizen




                                                                                                                    33
34
                                                                                                                 INTRODUCTION




 Box 01—1  How Risk Information Contributes to Mainstreaming
                                                                                    responsibility, and insurance regulations—are
 of DRM in World Bank Group Operations
                                                                                    essentially the same levers that we can apply to
 Recognizing that the risks from adverse natural events challenge its efforts       consigning natural disaster events to history.
 to end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity, the World Bank
 Group now has disaster and climate risk management at the core of its              We have already seen construction practices
 strategy. Moreover, under the IDA17 program of the International Development       evolving in response to cyclones and earthquakes,
 Association (the World Bank’s fund for the poorest countries), the World Bank      and some areas have strict urban and land-use plans
 Group has committed to incorporating climate and disaster risk considerations
                                                                                    designed to reduce loss from flood. California,
 in all new country partnership frameworks and will screen all International
                                                                                    for example, has implemented a series of building
 Development Association operations for climate and disaster risks. To carry
 out this strategy of mainstreaming disaster and climate risk management into       code changes in response to earthquake9—changes
 World Bank Group operations, an even greater investment and focus on risk          that today represent a reduction in risk. Recent
 identification will be required.                                                   earthquakes in Chile, New Zealand, and Japan
                                                                                    have dramatically demonstrated the influence of
 The World Bank’s investment in DRM is steadily rising. It grew from US$2
 billion in fiscal year 2010 to US$3.8 billion in fiscal year 2013, with the most   enforced building codes in reducing death, damage,
 substantial growth in Africa. The large share of this investment—83 percent—       and loss. These examples show that a society can
 supports ex ante DRM activities. The role of advisory and analytical services      reduce vulnerability and risk. But for these efforts
 to support better information on natural hazard risk is also growing; in the       to succeed, there must be robust and accessible
 last three years, 43 countries have been supported in efforts to improve their
                                                                                    information on hazard, exposure, and vulnerability,
 information about hazard exposure. To cite one example: the Global Facility
                                                                                    models that integrate this information and quantify
 for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) supported analytical work on
 seismic and flood risk in Manila, which has led the Philippine government to       risk, and the commitment and resources to prioritize
 endorse a US$9 billion flood reduction plan. This report offers further examples   actions needed to implement risk reduction.
 of efforts by the World Bank and GFDRR to implement risk assessment as the
 first step toward reducing risk through DRM.                                       The World Bank's approach to investment in DRM
                                                                                    through better risk information is summarized in
 Source: Development Committee 2014.
                                                                                    box 1-1.




                                                                                    About This Publication
                                                                                    	
                                                                                    This publication was developed to help identify
                                                                                    the progress made in risk assessment under the
                                                                                    10-year Hyogo Framework for Action and to capture
                                                                                    through use-case analysis the diverse efforts made
                                                                                    to improve our awareness and understanding of
                                                                                    risk. It is not a technical guide on how to undertake
                                                                                    a risk assessment and instead offers a narrative
                                                                                    to a nontechnical audience interested in how risk
                                                                                    information can lead to more resilient communities,
                                                                                    cities, and countries. The authors are aware that this
                                                                                    publication does not capture all the engagements
                                                                                    and projects on risk assessment across the globe or
                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                 01
all the innovations and advances that have taken
                                                          A Brief History of
                                                          	
place. However, it does provide both a snapshot
of use cases for those interested in application of       Risk Assessment
risk assessment and some recommendations for
                                                          Societies have been dealing with risk for thousands
the future.
                                                          of years. The earliest records related to practices
The report begins with an overview and is then            intended to minimize financial risk come from
divided in four parts.                                    shipping. For example, in the second millennium
                                                          BCE the Babylonians invented maritime loans
  Overview. This section summarizes the report's
                                                          that did not require repayment if the ship was lost
///           ///




key themes, observations, and recommendations
                                                          (Carter 1979). The origins of modern property
in order to prompt policy dialogue and discussions
                                                          insurance practices that are not associated with
among funders of risk assessment projects.
                                                          maritime ventures can be traced back nearly

1.	 Introduction. This section describes the history
      ///             ///
                                                          350 years, to the creation of the first fire mutual

      of risk assessment, the recent rise of open data    companies following the London fire of 1666.

      and open risk modelling, and the alignment of       Benjamin Franklin started the first U.S. mutual fire

      risk assessments to different DRM applications.     insurance company in 1792. The devastating fires
                                                          in U.S. cities during the 19th century bankrupted
2.	 Progress, Achievements, and Remaining
      ///




                                                          many insurance companies and fostered the use of
      Challenges in Risk Assessment. Based ///




                                                          objective assessments of risk using fire insurance
      on research and on submissions from and             maps, which displayed building footprints,
      discussions with experts, this section captures     construction materials, and location information.
      key achievements and progress in different
                                                          The modern approach to risk assessment—using
      aspects of risk assessment in the last decade—
                                                          complex models as well as extensive exposure and
      from availability of fundamental data sets, to
                                                          hazard data—came into being when computational
      modelling tools, to new platforms that facilitate
                                                          resources became more powerful and more
      collaboration. This section also articulates
                                                          common. But even before the advent of computers,
      remaining challenges that need focus over
                                                          insurers seeking to track exposure and avoid
      coming years.
                                                          unwanted concentrations of risk used pins on a map
3.	 Case Studies Highlighting Emerging                    to mark the location of underwritten properties.
      Best Practices. This section showcases risk         Thus tracking risk using data on exposure and
      assessment initiatives from around the world,       vulnerability is not a new practice.
      grouped according to their focus on one of the
                                                          The invention of computers and their adoption by
      following: data; modelling; risk assessment in
                                                          government and industry set the stage for coupling
      practice; institutionalization and communication
                                                          exposure and vulnerability data with hazard models
      of risk information; assessment of future risk.
                                                          to generate risk estimates. Perhaps the first modern
4.	 Recommendations. Based on
      ///                    ///
                                                          risk models were developed for managing flood
      recommendations received from developers and        risk and designing dams. The U.S. Army Corps of
      users of risk information and on emerging best      Engineers Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC)
      practices, this section offers 10 recommendations   was created in 1964 and released components of the
      for future investment in risk assessment.           first watershed models in 1966. The components




INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                       35
36
                                                                                             INTRODUCTION




     needed to be run separately because of memory            closer to those actually experienced by the insurance
     limitations in computers. The integrated version         industry. The difference between experience-based
     of the model, HEC-1 Flood Hydrograph Package,            and model-derived loss estimates was driven in
     was released in 1968. At that time, releasing the        part by dramatic increases in exposure along the
     integrated model components as a package was             coast and by the limited sample of hurricane events
     considered a major innovation that allowed linked,       in the historical record. Today, many insurers and
     related programs to be run without direct handling       reinsurers have in-house capacity to undertake their
     of intermediate results (HEC 1989).                      own probabilistic catastrophic modelling.

     Other risk assessment-related efforts were also          Emergency management agencies also began to
     taking place during the late 1960s and early 1970s.      adopt risk models for risk assessment in the 1990s.
     During this period, for example, C. Allin Cornell        In 1997 the Federal Emergency Management
     (1968) published the seminal methodology for             Agency (FEMA) released Hazus97, the first version
     seismic risk assessment; efforts at assessing            of Hazards US (Hazus), a geographic information
     hurricane risk for NASA's Apollo project were under      system (GIS)-based natural hazard loss estimation
     way (Jarvinen, Neumann, and Davis 1984); and             software package. The output from Hazus includes
     the catastrophe risk models for a range of natural       factors such as shelter needs related to emergency
     hazards were under development for use by insurers       management. The Hazus model has been adopted
     (Friedman 1972).                                         for use by emergency management organizations
                                                              outside the United States, in countries such as
     Risk modelling became more common as                     Singapore, Canada, Australia, and Pakistan.
     computational resources expanded. In 1981 the
     first catastrophe risk modelling company, EQE            During the first decade of the 21st century, there
                                                              was growing awareness that risk assessments could
     International, was founded. The company provided
                                                              help countries develop tools and strategies to reduce
     catastrophic risk management consulting, design,
                                                              disaster losses, and thus several efforts to develop
     and research services to commercial, utility, nuclear,
                                                              risk models were initiated. Governments have
     and other high-tech industries. The two other
                                                              increasingly started to use risk modelling to assess
     major catastrophe risk modelling firms, Applied
                                                              their exposure to natural events, and in particular to
     Insurance Research (AIR) and Risk Management
                                                              use probabilistic risk modelling techniques, which
     Solutions (RMS), were formed in 1987 and 1989,
                                                              manage uncertainty by providing a robust measure
     respectively. While catastrophe risk models
                                                              of risk and which allow for comparisons of risk.
     provided objective assessment of risk, until the early
     1990s much of the insurance industry still based         In 2004 New Zealand began to develop RiskScape,
     many business decisions on actuarial approaches          a regional multi-hazard risk model; Australia
     using historical data. The use of catastrophe risk       similarly began development of seismic, cyclone,
     models in the insurance industry grew dramatically       and tsunami risk models; and in 2007 a partnership
     after Hurricane Andrew struck Florida in 1992 and        of Central American governments and development
     insured losses turned out to be much greater than        institutions began work on CAPRA (Central
     those expected based on historical experience. Using     American Probabilistic Risk Assessment). Many of
     its hurricane risk model rather than an actuarial        these models were developed to be open source
     approach, AIR estimated insured losses that were         and have led to large developer communities. In
     much larger than any experienced in the past and         addition to these initially regional efforts, the
decade also saw efforts to develop global models.      a new global probabilistic model in 2011 (described
The Global Earthquake Model (GEM), for example,        in more detail in section 3-6).
was conceived in 2006; the GEM Foundation was
                                                       Today, there are more than 100 freely available risk
officially formed in March of 2009; and the first      models across the range of hazards. While many
official release of the GEM OpenQuake platform         of these remain the domain of the experienced
is slated for 2014 (for more on GEM, see section       scientist or engineer, and are poorly suited to city
3-6). The international development community          or government officials responsible for managing
also joined this effort, beginning in 2005 with        disaster risk, a growing number of more user-
collaboration under the ProVention Consortium          friendly models are becoming available, such as the

by the World Bank and Columbia University, along       InaSAFE tool developed through a collaboration
                                                       between the Indonesian and Australian governments
with a number of additional contributors, including
                                                       and GFDRR—World Bank (see section 3-22 for more
the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (Dilley et al.
                                                       detail). Researchers are also beginning to couple
2005). This collaboration in turn spurred related
                                                       probabilistic risk models with predictions of climate
efforts, such as the Global Risk Identification        change to account for future changes in hazard and
Programme (GRIP) of the United Nations                 risk (see for example sections 3-23 and 3-24). This
Development Programme, followed by the United          approach is likely to become the norm in future
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction's work on   assessments.




INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                               37
38
                                                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION




                                                                                                        to be carried out by resource-poor governments
                              The Rise of Open
                              	
                                                                                                        and communities.
                              Models and Data:
                                                                                                     •	 There is a global movement toward open data,
                              The Changing Risk                                                         which seeks to increase government transparency
                                                                                                        and accountability and to broaden participation
                              Assessment Paradigm                                                       in governance. This effort can be seen in the
                              Over the last five years, the field of risk assessment                    establishment of initiatives such as the Open
                              has been increasingly driven by open data and open                        Government Partnership, whose 63 member
                              source modelling. The reasons for this evolution                          governments have pledged accountability to their
                              are multifold:                                                            citizens. In addition, development institutions
                                                                                                        such as the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for
                              •	 Producing risk information requires a substantial
                                                                                                        International Development (USAID), and the
                                  investment in time, money, and effort, and
                                                                                                        African Development Bank view openness as a
                                  those commissioning it are no longer satisfied
                                                                                                        means to make the development process more
                                  with a published report as the sole end result.
                                                                                                        inclusive and transparent.
                                  The real value is increasingly seen in the data
                                  that make the risk analysis possible, and in the                   •	 Open data and open models promote a level of
                                  various hazard and risk maps and analysis that                        transparency in risk assessment that represents
                                  can be further manipulated and used in a variety                      an appealing change from the past, when
                                  of contexts.                                                          assumptions, data sets, and methodologies, along
                                                                                                        with the associated uncertainties, were invisible
                              •	 The rapid changes in urban environments, in
                                                                                                        to the end-user.
                                  populations, and in extreme weather events
                                  require that risk information be dynamic and                       •	 Driven originally by citizens frustrated by
                                  updated frequently. Access to open data and                           lack of access to fundamental maps in the
                                  modelling tools allows dynamic risk assessment                        United Kingdom, there is a surge in interest




 Box 01—2  OpenStreetMap

 OpenStreetMap, often called “the Wikipedia of maps,” is an online geospatial   The database hosts data on transport networks, buildings, amenities,
 database and a global community of over 1.5 million contributors, who are      and natural landscapes across the globe. Data collection ranges from
 engaged in building a free and open map of the world that anyone can
                                                                                local-level surveys with handheld GPS units and paper maps to tracing
 contribute to and that can be used in any tool or analysis.(A) OSM was
                                                                                satellite imagery.
 established in 2004 in the United Kingdom in reaction to restrictions around
 the use and/or availability of geospatial data across the world.
                                                                                The repeated discussion of OSM throughout the case studies in this

 OSM is a confederation of organizations and technologies. OpenSteetMap.        publication attests to the value of this innovative approach and its ability to

 org is a database with over 2.2 billion map “nodes” hosted by University       improve our understanding of risk from natural hazards and climate change.
 College London, Imperial College London, Bytemark Hosting, and other
 partners. The OpenStreetMap Foundation is a UK charitable organization         (A) OSM is open data, licensed under the Open Data Commons Open
 that oversees the state of the map. The Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team        Database License (ODbL); see http://www.openstreetmap.org/copyright for
 (HOT) is a U.S. nonprofit corporation that applies the “principles of open     more information on copyright and license.
 source and open data sharing for humanitarian response and economic
 development.”(B) HOT provides support to emergency operations and              (B) See the HOT website at http://hot.openstreetmap.org/.
 training for the collection of mapping data in communities at risk.
Box 01—3  Community Mapping in Indonesia

Open data initiatives, combined with bottom-up approaches such                   The initiative’s main goal is to use OpenStreetMap to collect building-
as citizen mapping initiatives, can be an effective way to build large           level exposure data for risk assessment applications. OpenStreetMap

exposure databases.                                                              offers several important features: open source tools for online or offline
                                                                                 mapping, a platform for uploading and hosting data with free and open
The Community Mapping for Resilience program in Indonesia is                     access, and an active global community of users.

an example of a large-scale exposure data collection system. The
                                                                                 In a little over a year, more than 160,000 individual buildings were
program began in 2011 through a partnership led by the Australia-
                                                                                 mapped and new partners—including five of Indonesia’s largest
Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction, Indonesia’s National Disaster
                                                                                 universities, local government agencies, international development
Management Agency (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana), and                   partners such as Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), with support from the                 Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ), and civil society organizations—were
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery and the World Bank.          trained and are using the platform.




   in community or participatory mapping that                            cost-effective solution to an otherwise expensive
   has now become a global revolution led by the                         challenge of data collection. An example of this
   OpenStreetMap community (box 1-2).                                    approach is highlighted in box 1-3.

In addition, as demand grows for risk information                        To be considered open, models and data should be
at resolutions appropriate for community and city                        both legally and technically open (see figure 1-1). As
decision making, the need to collect exposure data                       development and use of open tools grows, the need
at these resolutions has also grown. Crowdsourcing                       to clarify and standardize the meaning of "open" will
is increasingly being viewed by governments and                          become more pressing. Box 1-4 describes how one
communities as a solution that enables bottom-up                         initiative, the Global Earthquake Model, resolved
participation in the understanding of risk and a                         differences of opinion about "open."




 Data is Open If                                Legally Open                                    Technically Open                               Figure 01—1 
                                                                                                                                               What makes data
 “anyone is free to use,                        It is important to place                        The data needs to be made                      “open.”
 resuse, and redistribute it                    a license on open data.                         available, in bulk, in
                                                                                                                                               Source: GFDRR 2014.
 subject only, at most,                                                                         a machine-readable format.
                                                The World Bank’s own data
 to requirement to attribute                                                                                                                   Note: The quoted material in
                                                policy is licensed under:
 and/or share-alike.”                                                                           category    category     category              the first box is from http://

                                                                                                value       value        value                 opendefinition.org/.

                                                           ODC-BY                               value       value        value
                                                           Open Data Commons                    value       value        value
                                                           Attribution License
                                                                                                value       value        value




INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                39
Aligning and Targeting
	                                                      Box 01—4  Defining “Open”

Risk Assessments                                       The members of the Global Earthquake Model, a public-private partnership,
                                                       share an interest in credible, accessible risk information that is widely used
                                                       and understood. Although the principle of “open” data was central to GEM’s
Risk assessment as applied to DRM can easily
                                                       mission and self-understanding, over the course of GEM’s first six years
be framed around the formula risk = hazard X
                                                       members differed widely on what “open” meant and implied.
exposure X vulnerability.10 Under this single
formula, however, there is considerable variation      These differences became obvious and somewhat contentious when concrete
                                                       licensing policies were proposed for the data and software developed under
in the types of and purposes for risk assessment. In
                                                       GEM: public sector participants typically viewed “open” to imply “free of
the DRM community, risk assessments are generally
                                                       charge,” while private sector participants, who sought an ongoing business
undertaken for one (or more) of five reasons:          advantage from their sponsorship of GEM, did not want GEM data and
                                                       software to be made available free of charge to their competitors. In their view,
1.	 Risk identification. Understanding,
                                                       “open” did not necessarily entail “free.”
   communicating, and raising awareness of
   disaster risk                                       GEM’s governing board convened a task group to study this issue further
                                                       and make a recommendation to the board. The task group, made up of
2.	 Risk reduction. Informing policies, investments,   seven members representing both the public and private sector, proposed a

   and structural and nonstructural measures           compromise: data and model licenses would be embargoed for 18 months.
                                                       Under this arrangement, GEM initially releases any given version of a GEM data
   intended to reduce risk
                                                       set or model with a license restricting commercial use for 18 months A;

3.	 Preparedness. Informing early warning              after this period the same product is rereleased under a license without
                                                       commercial restriction.
   systems and emergency measures and supporting
   preparedness and contingency planning at            (A) The license type is CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 (Creative Commons Attribution–
   various levels                                      Noncommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported). See http://creativecommons.org/
                                                       licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/.
4.	 Financial protection. Developing financial
                                                       Source: Helen Crowley, Nicole Keller, Sahar Safaie, and Kate Stillwell
   applications to manage and/or transfer risk.
                                                       (GEM Foundation).

5.	 Resilient reconstruction. Informing early and
   rapid estimates of damage and providing critical
   information for reconstruction

Determining what constitutes a suitable risk
assessment product depends not only on the
purpose of the assessment, but on a number
of other factors as well: which decision makers
and stakeholders are involved, how the results
will be used, the scale and resolution at which
the assessment will be carried out, the data
requirements for the assessment, the complexity
of the analysis, and the resources available. Table
1-1 lists a range of assessment products for various
purposes, each with different attributes.




INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                        41
42
                                                                                                                                                         INTRODUCTION




                            Experience has shown that when a risk assessment                                    based assessment involves local stakeholders—
                            is well targeted to a purpose and end-user, it has a                                communities and local government—and can
                            greater chance of success—that is, the information                                  be used in building community preparedness,
                            it generates is more likely to be used for decision                                 supporting contingency planning, and identifying
                            making. It is therefore critical that there be                                      vulnerable assets. On the other hand, it cannot be
                            consensus on a risk assessment's objective, that it be                              used in developing financial applications and will
                            designed to meet the project's basic requirements                                   seldom be used in planning significant investments
                            and standards, and that it not exceed available                                     in risk reduction, or in carrying out land-use
                            resources (money, personnel, time).
                                                                                                                planning. In contrast, a catastrophic risk assessment

                            To understand how various factors influence risk                                    for financial planning involves a different set of
                            assessment design, consider two different risk                                      stakeholders—ministries of finance, international
                            assessment products, one a community-based                                          and domestic financial markets, modelling
                            assessment that aims to engage communities in                                       companies, and insurance and reinsurance
                            disaster risk reduction, to communicate risk, and                                   companies—and is carried out on a larger (national
                            to promote local action (second row of table 1-1),                                  to multi-country) scale using high-quality, high-
                            and the other a catastrophic risk assessment for                                    resolution data. This type of analysis is rarely used
                            financial planning (bottom row). The community-                                     for local DRM or community preparedness.11




Table 01—1 
                                      Product                         Purpose                         Scale                  Data Requirements                      Cost
Sample Risk
Assessment Products           Qualitative national risk     For advocacy and initiation of
                                                                                                                              Low: Requires global,
                                                                                                     National               regional, and/or national                $
and Their Attributes                   profile                     DRM dialogue
                                                                                                                                    data sets


Source: World Bank and
                                                              To engage communities,
GFDRR 2013.                  Community-based disaster
                                                               communicate risk, and             Community level
                                                                                                                             Low: Typically based on
                                                                                                                                                                     $
                                 risk assessment                                                                            historical disaster events
                                                                promote local action
Note: $ = <$100,000;
$$ = 100,000 to $500,000;
                                                            For advocacy and initiation of                                  Low-moderate: Requires
                              Quantitative national risk
$$$ = >$500,000                                                DRM dialogue based on                 National                global, regional, and/or                $$
                                       profile
                                                              quantitative assessment                                           national data sets

                                                            To inform design of building-
                                                                                                                            Moderate-high: Requires
                            Asset-level risk assessments,        level/asset-level risk
                                                                                                                          high-resolution local data for
                             including cost-benefit and        reduction activities and   Building / infrastructure level                                            $$
                                                                                                                          large spatial areas with clear
                                engineering analysis         promote avoidance of new
                                                                                                                                   articulation
                                                                          risk

                            Macro-level risk assessment                                                                    Moderate-high: Requires
                                                          To inform urban/regional risk
                            for risk reduction, including                                    Urban, regional, national    moderate to high resolution               $$$
                                                               reduction measures
                                cost-benefit analysis                                                                      across large spatial areas

                                                            To inform preparedness and
                            Risk identification to identify
                                                              risk reduction, based on                                     Moderate-high: Requires           $$-$$$ (broad range
                             critical infrastructure and
                                                             understanding of potential      Urban, regional, national      asset-level information        depending on geographic
                               establish early warning
                                                            damage at the regional/local                                   across large spatial areas              scope)
                                        systems
                                                                        level

                                                            For financial and fiscal
                                                                                                                              High: Requires high-
                            Catastrophic risk assessment assessment of disasters and
                                                                                             National to multi-country    resolution, high-quality data             $$$
                                for financial planning   to catalyze catastrophe risk
                                                                                                                                 of uncertainty
                                                          insurance market growth
                                                                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                                                   01
	Endnotes
    9 See State of California Seismic Safety Commission
<sup>   </sup>                                                                             11 However, data in this type of assessment can sometimes
                                                                                       <sup>   </sup>




(2000).                                                                                serve as the foundation for local applications, as was
                                                                                       the experience with the Pacific Catastrophic Risk and
    10 Alternately, risk can be expressed as a function: risk =
<sup>            </sup>




                                                                                       Financing Initiative (see section 3-9).
f(hazard, exposure, vulnerability).




References
Carter, R. L. 1979. Reinsurance. Brentford, Middlesex,                                 HEC (Hydrologic Engineering Center). 1989.
                          UK: Kluwer Publishing Ltd. and Mercantile & General                           “Hydrologic Engineering Center—A Quarter Century,
                          Reinsurance Co. Ltd.                                                          1964—1989.” http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/
                                                                                                        publications/AdministrativeDocument/HEC_A_
Cornell, C. A. 1968. “Engineering Seismic Risk Analysis.”                                               QuarterCentury_1964-1989.pdf.
                          Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 58 (5):
                          1583—1606.                                                   Jarvinen, B. R., C. J. Neumann, and M. A. S. Davis. 1984. “A
                                                                                                        Tropical Cyclone Data Tape for the North Atlantic Basin,
Development Committee (Joint Ministerial Committee of                                                   1886—1983: Contents, Limitations, and Uses.” NOAA
                          the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund on                           Technical Memorandum. NWS NHC 22. http://www.nhc.
                          the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries).                      noaa.gov/pdf/NWS-NHC-1988-22.pdf.
                          2014. “Progress Report on Mainstreaming Disaster
                          Risk Management in World Bank Group Operations.”             State of California Seismic Safety Commision. 2000. “The
                          March 25.                                                                     History of the California Seismic Safety Commission:
                                                                                                        Living Where the Earth Shakes, 1975—2000.” http://
Dilley, M., R. S. Chen, U. Deichmann, A. Lerner-Lam, M.                                                 www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_HISTORY.pdf.
                          Arnold, J. Agwe, P. Buys, O. Kjekstad, B. Lyon, and G.
                          Yetman. 2005. Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global            World Bank and GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster
                          Risk Analysis. Washington, DC: International Bank for                         Reduction and Recovery). 2013. Building Resilience:
                          Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and                                 Integrating Climate and Disaster Risk into Development—
                          Columbia University.                                                          The World Bank Group Experience. Washington, DC:
                                                                                                        World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/
Friedman, D. G. 1972. “Insurance and the Natural Hazards.”                                              Worldbank/document/SDN/Full_Report_Building_
                          ASTIN Bulletin International Actuarial Association 7 (1):                     Resilience_Integrating_Climate_Disaster_Risk_
                          4—58.                                                                         Development.pdf.

GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and                                      World Bank and United Nations. 2010. Natural Hazards,
                          Recovery). 2014. Open Data for Resilience Initiative Field                    UnNatural Disasters: The Economics of Effective
                          Guide. Washington, DC: World Bank.                                            Prevention. Washington, DC: World Bank.




INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                                                                         43
44
             ﻿




     IMAGE
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               02
U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




Progress, Achievements,
& Remaining Challenges in
RISK ASSESSMENT

R   isk assessments require hazard, exposure, and
    vulnerability data at the appropriate scale as
well as models with the appropriate resolution to
                                                         triggered by a primary hazard event—for example,
                                                         fire or tsunami after earthquake.

                                                         These are not simple decisions. Since it is a
address the problem of interest. They also require a
                                                         rare country or community that is affected by
considered approach to building multidisciplinary,
                                                         only a single hazard, assessments that consider
multi-institutional platforms and nontraditional         the full range of hazard events often achieve
partnerships around the technical analysis. In this      greater traction; on the other hand, the level of
section, we discuss these aspects by reviewing           investment for considering all hazards may be too
promising innovations in risk assessment over the        great, or momentum following a disaster event
last decade and highlighting some of the greatest        may be driving interest in single hazard. Adding
remaining challenges.                                    the complexity of secondary hazards will further
                                                         increase the resource and data requirements and
                                                         may significantly broaden the institutions involved

	Hazard Assessment                                       in a risk assessment. For example, considerations
                                                         of fire after an earthquake require additional data
Essential steps required to quantify risk are the        sets, as well as engagement with fire authorities,
identification of the relevant hazard(s) and the         energy, and water companies. These challenges are
collection of hazard-related data. Although these        discussed further in box 2-1.
steps usually occur at the start of a risk assessment,
                                                         Once the hazards of interest are defined, the
they are often not easy or straightforward. They         next step often involves acquiring a variety of
often involve deciding whether to undertake a single     hazard-related data. The most fundamental data
hazard or multi-hazard assessment of the primary         define historical events, in particular their date,
hazards and then deciding whether to consider            geographical location and extent, and maximum
secondary (or cascading) hazards that may be             intensity. Historical events are often used in




                                                                                                                     45
46
 Box 02—1  Multi-Peril Risk Assessment: An Overview                                  deterministic analyses that assess the impact of
                                                                                     past events with current exposure. Historical event
 In spite of growing interest in and use of multi-risk assessment approaches,
                                                                                     information is also used to estimate the probability
 devising an integrated multi-risk assessment scheme remains a major
 challenge. It implies adopting a quite different perspective from that of a
                                                                                     of a hazard occurring at a location with a specific
 classical single-risk analysis. A multi-risk analysis does not merely consider      intensity.
 more than one type of risk. It deals with the various spatial and temporal
 interactions that may arise between risks (European Commission 2010). For           An event set comprises a suite of stochastic, or
 example, cascading or domino effects may include cases in which one event           computationally generated, synthetic hazard events
 directly triggers another (such as the 2011 Great East Japan earthquake, where      with statistical characteristics consistent with the
 the earthquake triggered a tsunami, and the ensuing tsunami resulted in             historical record. Such event sets can typically
 catastrophic failures at the Fukushima nuclear facility). Cascading or domino
                                                                                     include thousands or tens of thousands of potential
 effects may also include cases in which the occurrence of one event modifies
                                                                                     events and are intended to define the full range of
 the likelihood of another (such as drought and wildfires) and/or increases
 the vulnerability of an area to later events. There are also situations where       potential events for a hazard. Event sets are used
 more than one event may occur at around the same time, without any actual           with other information to quantify probabilities of
 physical link (e.g., an earthquake just after a windstorm).                         loss and risk from a hazard.

 Another example of cascading effects from a hazard is combustion of a               Additional information is used to define the spatial
 building by fire caused by an explosion of gas released from a pipeline
                                                                                     distribution of the forces (e.g., the wind field from
 ruptured by an earthquake. This scenario occurred following the 1994
                                                                                     a tropical cyclone or the ground motion from an
 Northridge earthquake, when approximately 110 earthquake-related fires
 were reported within 24 hours of the earthquake (Scawthorn 1997). A slightly
                                                                                     earthquake) associated with a hazard event. Such
 different scenario occurred following the 1995 Kobe earthquake, when a              information is often incomplete or unavailable and
 similar number of fires ignited. Damage to structures from fire caused by the       in most cases must be derived from a very limited
 Northridge earthquake was well contained; however, nearly 5,500 buildings           set of observations. Typically, a combination of
 were lost to fire caused by the Kobe earthquake.
                                                                                     observational data and theory is used to define the
 The results provided by a full multi-risk approach would need to include a          spatial and temporal characteristics of an event.
 harmonized quantitative assessment of the different risks and the effects of        A collection of the spatial, intensity, and temporal
 the possible interactions. Thus, while a multi-risk assessment may make it          characteristics for events in an event set is termed a
 possible to establish a hierarchy of risks, it can also be used to identify areas   hazard catalog.
 where efforts to mitigate one hazard may conflict with, or create synergies
 with, the response of the system to a second type of hazard, or where planned       Hazard catalogs and event sets can be used with
 adaptation and mitigation activities may potentially increase or decrease the
                                                                                     risk models in a deterministic or probabilistic
 risk from other hazards. An example of this potential risk is the challenge of
                                                                                     manner. Deterministic risk models are used to
 building for cyclone wind and earthquake—wherein the strongest concrete
 building may decrease vulnerability in a cyclone, but create additional
                                                                                     assess the impact of specific events on exposure.
 vulnerability in an earthquake (as happened in Haiti in 2010).                      Typical scenarios for a deterministic analysis include
                                                                                     renditions of past historical events, worst-case
 Source: Anna Scolobig, Alexander Garcia-Aristizabal, Nadejda Komendantova,
                                                                                     scenarios, or possible events at different return
 Anthony Patt, Angela Di Ruocco, Paolo Gasparini, Daniel Monfort, Charlotte
 Vinchon, Mendy Bengoubou-Valerius, Roger Mrzyglocki, and Kevin Fleming,             periods.12 For example, a deterministic risk (or
 “From Multi-Risk Assessment to Multi-Risk Governance: Recommendations               impact) analysis will provide a robust estimation of
 for Future Directions,” input paper prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment
                                                                                     the potential building damage, mortality/morbidity,
 Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at www.preventionweb.net/gar .
                                                                                     and economic loss from a single hazard scenario.
                                                                                     Risk models are used in a probabilistic sense when
                                                                                     an event set contains a sufficient number of events
                                                                                     for the estimate of the risk to converge at the longest
                                                                                     return period, or the smallest probability, of interest.
  Box 02—2  Assessing Damage and Loss Caused by Drought: Example of a Deterministic Assessment

  Most studies that evaluate drought damage look at past drought events on an         other large-scale natural disasters, such as floods, yet little is known about how
  ex post basis. They use self-reports or media accounts, or compare production       best to reduce its impact.

  for drought and non-drought years (Martin-Ortega and Markandya 2009).
                                                                                      Deficiencies in current approaches to assessing damage and loss caused by
  These ex post approaches may fail to determine susceptibility to drought,
                                                                                      drought could be ameliorated using the following:
  due to predefined relations between certain drought hazard and resistance
  parameters and expected damage. Moreover, they also fail to deal with the           •	 Ex ante evaluation methods. Properly designed, these will help to address
  dynamics of drought risk and damage over time. Specific problems with these            the projected increase in frequency and intensity of droughts, make it
  ex post approaches include potential bias from self-reports and media accounts         possible to learn about changes in drought damage over time, and facilitate

  of damage, and significant uncertainty in comparisons between drought and              evaluating and prioritizing mitigation strategies for drought damage.

  non-drought agricultural production. Additionally, these comparisons fail to
                                                                                      •	 More sophisticated drought damage models that are based on assessments
  account for factors other than drought that influence production. They do not
                                                                                         of losses to economic flows. These models account for indirect losses of
  distinguish between direct drought effects that damage crops and indirect              sector-specific added value, wage losses, or relocation expenses and could
  effects spreading through the economy.                                                 significantly improve current cost assessments.

  A further problem with current drought damage models is that they are not           •	 Models that capture the effect of drought mitigation measures. Existing
  designed to account for drought mitigation measures. This means that the               databases on drought-induced soil subsidence and its effect on different
  damage-reducing effects of drought mitigation measures are largely unknown, a          building types could provide a basis for this future work.
  situation that makes choosing among the different mitigation measures difficult.
                                                                                       Source: Heidi Kreibich and Philip Bubeck, “Natural Hazards: Direct Costs and
  This lack of information about mitigation strategies is especially problematic in
                                                                                      Losses Due to the Disruption of Production Processes,” input paper prepared
  the case of drought-related soil subsidence. Existing studies suggest that soil     for the 2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at
  subsidence (which can severely damage buildings) can be as destructive as           www.preventionweb.net/gar.




                       The Small Sample Size of Hazard Records
                                                                                                                                           Figure 02—1 
                                                                                                                   SAMPLE SIZE
                                                                                                                                           Hypothetical drought
                                                                                                                                           index showing
                                                                                                                                           periods of extreme
DROUGHT INDEX




                                                                                                                                           dryness (above the
                                                                                                                                           dotted red line) and
                                                                                                                                           periods of extreme
                                                                                                                                           wetness (below the
                                                                                                                                           dotted blue line); the
                                                                                                                                           historical record does
                                                                                                                                           not capture extreme
                                                                                                                                           dry and wet periods
                                                                                                                                           experienced prior to
                1300         1400             1500            1600             1700          1800           1900            2000
                                                                                                                                           its start in 1900.
                                                                   YEAR

                                                  Extreme Dryness                Extreme Wetness




  PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                                           47
48
                                                         PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




                              In other words, a probabilistic risk model contains                Figure 2-1 illustrates this challenge. If the sample
                              a compilation of all possible “impact scenarios” for               size (1900 and after) is the historical record, then
                              a specific hazard and geographical area. Note that                 it would appear that extreme flood and drought are
                              hazard catalogs are generally associated with rapid                not a concern. Similarly, if we consider the period
                              onset hazards. Risk assessments for slow onset                     1800–1900, flood would be seen as a risk, but not
                              hazards, such as drought, are typically undertaken                 drought. Herein lies the challenge of determining
                              using deterministic approaches. (Additional issues                 the return period for rare and extreme hazard
                              associated with modelling drought risk and impacts                 events. In the case of hydrometeorological cycles,
                              are discussed in box 2-2. For a cost-benefit approach              determining the return period is difficult; for
                              to risk that deals with the effects of drought on                  geophysical hazards such as volcanic eruptions and
                              livestock, see box 2-3).                                           large earthquakes, which may occur every 1,000,
                                                                                                 10,000, or 100,000 years, it is incredibly complex.
                              Convergence of results is a concern when using a
                              risk model probabilistically. As a simple example,                 A variety of hazard-dependent data are required
                              consider a simulation of 100 years of hazard events.               to generate a hazard catalog. Knowledge of the
                              This simulation is too short to determine the 100-                 distribution of soil types, for example, is required to
                              year return period. A random sample of 100 years of                model the spatial variation of ground acceleration
                              events could easily omit events, or include multiple               (shaking) from an earthquake; values for surface
                              instances of the same event, that on average                       roughness are needed to define the distribution of
                              would occur once every 100 years and therefore                     wind speed from a tropical cyclone; and a digital
                              dramatically affect determination of return period.                elevation model (DEM) is needed to determine




     Box 02—3  A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Livestock Protection in Disaster Risk Management

     Animal-related income streams are critical to underlying causes of           To assess the number of animals reached and the total cost of WSPA's
     risk and provide economic and social well-being in the world’s poorest       intervention, WSPA post-intervention response reports were used. The
     and most vulnerable regions. Protecting livestock is crucial because         potential income derived from animals treated was considered the

     it protects the livelihoods of livestock producers and guarantees food       benefit of the intervention. For the sake of this preliminary analysis, it
                                                                                  was assumed that half of the animals treated would have died had they
     security for millions of people.
                                                                                  not received treatment.
     To learn more about the role of livestock protection in disaster risk
                                                                                  The intervention is estimated to have generated $2.74 of benefits in
     management (DRM), the World Society for the Protection of Animals
                                                                                  the form of avoided losses for every $1.00 spent. If the time period for
     (WSPA) commissioned Economists at Large Pty Ltd to conduct a cost-
                                                                                  potential income generated by the livestock is extended to three years
     benefit analysis of a WSPA intervention in the Mwingi District in Kenya.
                                                                                  and the cumulative effect of secured livelihoods is taken into account,
     The intervention began in 2011, in response to long-lasting drought          the benefit-cost ratio increases to $6.69 in benefits for every $1.00 spent.
     conditions, and involved treating livestock brought to WSPA’s Mwingi         Based on the research described here, WSPA is developing a framework
     operation to increase the likelihood that the animals would survive until    for estimating the impacts on communities and households of losing
     the next rainy season.                                                       livestock in a disaster.

     The analysis focused on the household income impacts to owners of            Source: Nicole Fassina, World Society for the Protection of Animals,

     livestock who brought their animals for treatment. Beyond this, the          "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Livestock Protection in Disaster Risk
                                                                                  Management," input paper prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment
     analysis sought both to understand the economic impact of livestock
                                                                                  Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at www.preventionweb.
     operations on local and regional economies and to create an applicable
                                                                                  net/gar; based on Economists at Large, Cost-benefit Analysis of WSPA’s
     and scalable risk reduction model that would assess vulnerabilities and      Mwingi Intervention in Kenya (Melbourne: World Society of the Protection
     return on investment strategies within livestock-dependent communities.      of Animals, 2013).
                                                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                                    02
flood depth. Fortunately, some data can be common                           data may be usable to different degrees—for
to multiple perils. For example, topography as                              example, data may not be digitized, may lack
defined by a DEM is required for modelling floods,                          necessary metadata, or may require substantial
tsunamis, sea-level-rise inundation, landslide                              improvement before use. A compilation of publicly
susceptibility, storm surges, and detection of                              available hazard-related data with global coverage
earthquake fault lines.                                                     is given in table 2-1. Some of these data sets, such
                                                                            as the records for the location and intensity of
Hazard data can be open, proprietary, or (if they                           earthquakes and tropical cyclones, provide global
have yet to be collected) unavailable. Even available                       coverage and are considered authoritative records



               Data                                  Use                                                     Source                               Table 02—1 
                                                                                                                                                  Examples of Globally
                                 De ine date, intensity, and location o
  Earthquake events                                                                http://www.globalcmt.org
                                 earthquakes                                                                                                      Available Hazard-
                                                                                                                                                  related Data
  Earthquake events              Earthquake date, location, and intensity          http://www.ncedc.org/anss/
                                                                                                                                                  (A) Best-track data are

                                 Assess distance rom known aults and de ine                                                                       defined as “a subjectively-
  Quaternary ault maps                                                             http://earthquake.usgs.gov/hazards/q aults/download.php
                                  ault motion                                                                                                     smoothed representation of
                                                                                                                                                  a tropical cyclone's location
  Attenuation relationships      Calculate propagation o seismic waves             http://www.opensha.org/glossary-attenuationRelation            and intensity over its
                                                                                                                                                  lifetime.” National Hurricane

  30m shear velocity (Vs30)      Determine seismic wave attenuation                http://earthquake.usgs.gov/hazards/apps/vs30/                  Center, “Glossary of NHC
                                                                                                                                                  Terms,” http://www.nhc.

  Topography—digital elevation   De ine elevation and slope or loods,
                                                                                                                                                  noaa.gov/aboutgloss.shtml.
                                                                                   http://eros.usgs.gov/elevation-products
  data (~90m resolution)         tsunamis, landslides, etc.


  Tropical cyclone best-track    Determine location and intensity o tropical
                                                                                   http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/ibtracs/
  data(A)                        cyclones


                                 Assign roughness or calculating winds rom
  Land cover                                                                       http://due.esrin.esa.int/globcover/ US: http://www.mrlc.gov/
                                 gradient-level winds


                                 De ine behavior o waves rom storm surge
  Bathymetry                                                                       http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/inundation/tsunami/
                                 and tsunamis


                                 Develop event sets or tornadoes and hail
  Tornado and hail paths                                                           http://www.spc.noaa.gov/wcm/#data
                                 rom severe convective storms

                                 Catalog o all known historical (and in some
  Volcanic eruptions             cases geological) eruptions with indicative       http://www.volcano.si.edu/search_eruption.c m#
                                 impacts (where known)


  Tsunami events and run-ups     Tsunami hazard                                    http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/hazard/tsu_db.shtml



  Flood events since 1985        Flood hazard                                      http:// loodobservatory.colorado.edu/Archives/index.html



  Fire events 1997–2011          Wild ire hazard                                   http://due.esrin.esa.int/w a/



                                 Reconstruct atmospheric winds, precipitation,     http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/data/gridded/data.ncep.reanal
  Atmospheric reanalysis data
                                 temperature, etc.                                 ysis.html




                                                                                                                                                                  49
  Hurricane satellite data
                                 Homogeneous estimates o hurricane intensity       http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/hursat/
  (HURSAT)




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
50
                               PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




     that compile the best available data.13 Other            develop global flood models, which will use a global
     global data sets may not be of optimal quality for       flood catalog; one model, GLOFRIS (GLObal Flood
     risk assessment. For example, openly available           Risk with IMAGE Scenarios), is already in use (see
     topographic data are not optimal for modelling           section 3-23 for a more detailed discussion).
     hydrometeorological hazards because of their
                                                              A critical requirement acknowledged by all experts
     relatively coarse resolution. Poor resolution of
                                                              working in hazard modelling is the need for a high-
     elevation data has a significant impact on flood risk,
                                                              resolution, open DEM. Currently, the 90m Shuttle
     since small changes in elevation can involve huge
                                                              Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) is the only
     changes in the predicted inundation area in many
                                                              global open DEM, with 30m resolution available
     relatively flat floodplains and coastlines.
                                                              in some countries. Satellite-based Interferometric
     The spatial characteristics of an event are usually      Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) appears to be one
     defined by combining theoretical and empirical           promising approach for generating these data on a
     knowledge with other observational hazard-related        global scale; one satellite currently using InSAR is
     data because of the sparseness of the relevant           the TerraSAR/Tandem-X of DLR (German Aerospace
     observations. For example, quantifying the wind          Center) and Astrium Geo-Information Services. A
     field for a tropical cyclone as it travels inland        growing alternative to a satellite-based collection
     highlights the difficulty of estimating the spatial      of elevation data is the use of airplanes and/or
     distribution of a hazard. Wind speed and pressure        helicopters to derive high-resolution surface data
     measurements from observing stations can be used         on a smaller scale via LiDAR14 or airborne InSAR.

     to estimate two parameters, a cyclone’s maximum          Both of these “active” methods, while expensive,

     wind and the radius of maximum wind. It is often         are capable of generating very accurate and high-
                                                              resolution surface and terrain elevations. Collection
     impossible to obtain high-quality measurements,
                                                              of LiDAR data is growing across the globe; however,
     however: the number of observational platforms is
                                                              the cost, time, and technical processing aspects of
     limited, existing observation stations are not sited
                                                              this approach prohibit its widespread accessibility.
     optimally, power may fail during the cyclone, and
     anemometers may be damaged by flying debris.             There are two types of DEMs: a digital surface
     Surface pressure measurements of the cyclone are         elevation model and a digital terrain model. A digital
     easier to collect, and the minimum central pressure      surface elevation model provides surface elevations
     has a large influence on maximum wind speeds, but        that describe the elevations of features such as
     these surface pressures must be converted to surface     buildings and treetops. A digital terrain model
     wind speeds for risk modelling purposes, and this        provides elevations of the bare ground surface and
     is where the theoretical and empirical knowledge is      neglects objects such as buildings and trees. The
     critical.                                                impact of the different models on hazard and risk
                                                              assessments can be significant—see box 2-4—but
     Most hazard event sets and catalogs are developed
                                                              the combination of these different DEMs offers
     region by region. Exceptions include the global
                                                              opportunities for better characterizing the built
     earthquake event set generated by the Global
                                                              environment.15
     Earthquake Model (GEM), and the tsunami, volcanic
     eruption, cyclone, and drought hazard event sets         To assess risk from multiple meteorological hazards
     developed as part of the global risk model under         on a global scale, one should consider the hazards’
     the leadership of the UN Office for Disaster Risk        spatial and temporal correlations and how they vary
     Reduction. There are also a number of efforts to         as a function of climate. For example, the probability
                                                                                                                                               CHAPTER

Box 02—4  The Importance of Accurate Elevation Data for Understanding Tsunami Hazard

Tsunami inundation models provide fundamental information about coastal
                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                      2. SRTM and ASTER (D) data sets, although freely available with near global
areas that may be inundated in the event of a tsunami. This information               coverage, should not be used for modelling onshore tsunami hazard, since
has relevance for disaster management activities, including evacuation                the results can be dangerously misleading.
planning, impact and risk assessment, and coastal engineering. A basic
input to tsunami inundation models is a digital elevation model—that is, a            This study makes clear that accurate elevation models are crucial for
model of the shape of the onshore environment. Onshore DEMs vary widely               understanding tsunami hazard. Investing in high-quality, accessible elevation
in resolution, accuracy, availability, and cost. Griffin et al. (2012) assessed       data in tsunami-prone areas will underpin better risk reduction planning at
how the accuracy and resolution of DEMs translate into uncertainties in               the local level.
estimates of tsunami inundation zones. The results showed that simply using
the “best available” elevation data, such as the freely available global SRTM         (A) The observation data are from Tsuji et al. (1995).

elevation model, without considering data accuracy can lead to dangerously
                                                                                      (B) See E. Rodriguez, C. S. Morris, J. E. Belz, E. C. Chapin, J. M. Martin, W.
misleading results.
                                                                                      Daffer, and S. Hensley, “An Assessment of the SRTM Topographic Products,”
The top part of the figure shows tsunami inundation models for the                    Jet-Propulsion Laboratory D-31639. http://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/SRTM_
1992 tsunami in Flores, Indonesia (Griffin et al. 2012). For each model all           D31639.pdf.




                                                                                                                                                  Depth (m)




                INUNDATION LIMIT



                                                                                                                                                  Elevation (m)




Modelled inundation for the 1992 tsunami in Flores, Indonesia (top) and underlying elevation data used in the model (bottom).
Source: Griffin et al. 2012.
Note: Top images show inundation estimates from the 1992 tsunami in Flores, Indonesia, with arrow pointing to black line showing the observed inundation limit.
Bottom images show elevation data for LiDAR (left), airborne InSAR (middle), and SRTM (right).


parameters are the same except for the elevation data, shown in the bottom            (C) However, further testing of tsunami inundation sensitivity to
of the figure. Inundation model results are overlain with field observations          underlying DEM may be required in other coastal environments
of the actual inundation.(A) LiDAR and airborne InSAR give inundation area            with different geomorphology before this inference becomes a
extents that are comparable with historical data. However, results obtained           widespread recommendation.
using the SRTM data set, with lower vertical accuracy, (B) show negligible
tsunami inundation.                                                                   (D) ASTER elevation data also significantly underestimate the wet area. See
                                                                                      Griffin et al. (2012) for the full analysis.
Two main inferences can be drawn from the results:
                                                                                      Source: Jonathan Griffin (Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction,
1. .The most accurate and expensive data are not always needed, depending             Geoscience Australia); Hamzah Latief (Bandung Institute of Technology); Sven
on the purpose. Airborne InSAR, which is an order of magnitude cheaper to             Harig (Alfred Wegener Institute); Widjo Kongko (Agency for Assessment and
acquire than LiDAR, may be suitable for tsunami evacuation planning. (C)              Application of Technology, Indonesia); Nick Horspool (Geoscience Australia).




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                                                51
52
                               PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




     of tropical cyclone landfall varies as a function of    the Pacific region. Regardless of the uncertainties
     the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) along the       associated with quantifying future changes in
     Queensland coast of Australia, the U.S. coastline,      meteorological hazards, sea level is certain to
     and in the northwest Pacific. Generally, warm El        rise in response to melting of continental ice
     Niño years are associated with a reduced rate of        caps and thermal expansion of seawater. Higher
     landfall, and cool La Niña years are associated with    sea levels will exacerbate coastal flooding from
     a higher rate of landfall (Flay and Nott 2007; Elsner   storm surge, intense precipitation events, and
     and Jagger 2006; Wu, Chang, and Leung 2004).            tsunami inundation.
     There are also possible cross-peril correlations. In
                                                             Climate change and sea-level rise are not the only
     many areas, for example, flood risk and drought risk
                                                             future threats for coastal regions. Many coastal
     are strongly correlated with ENSO.
                                                             regions suffer from severe subsidence. In some
     The response of meteorological hazards to natural       locations the increase in subsidence is much larger
     climate variability highlights the possibility that     than the sea-level rise. For example, in Jakarta
     the risk from these hazards will respond to future      the subsidence is currently over 10cm per year.
     changes in climate. It is difficult to specify with     According to Brinkman and Hartman (2008), Jakarta
     certainty how hazard occurrence and intensity will      is heading toward a disaster with the juxtaposition
     change by region, and this is an area of significant    of the high sea tides and the subsidence rate. Up to
     research and modelling. A case study described in
                              16
                                                             4 million people and approximately 25 percent of
     section 3-24 highlights the changing risk associated    the city will be affected by inundation from the sea
     with future changes in tropical cyclone activity in     within the next 15 years if action is not taken.
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                   02
                                                          geospatially linked inventories that include public
	Exposure 17
                                                          infrastructures are rare and not publicly available in
Exposure modelling has a critical role to play in         most developing countries, where exposure model
risk assessment. Empirical studies suggest that the       development is most needed for risk assessments.
greatest influence on output loss estimates from risk     At the global scale, efforts to generate globally
models derives from exposure data, as opposed to          consistent exposure data sets in terms of quality
either hazard or vulnerability data (see for example      and resolution have increased. Experience has
Bal et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2004; Spence et al. 2003;    shown that development of exposure data sets
Lavakare and Mawk 2008).                                  requires innovative, efficient methodologies
                                                          for describing, collecting, validating, and
The process of exposure modelling identifies the
                                                          communicating data, while also accounting for the
elements at risk in areas that could potentially be
                                                          inherent spatiotemporal dynamics associated with
affected by natural hazard events (UNISDR 2009;
                                                          exposure—that is, the dynamics by which exposure
Ehrlich and Tenerelli 2013; van Westen 2012). In
                                                          evolves over time as a result of (unplanned)
other words, if a hazard occurs in an area with
                                                          urbanization, demographic changes, modifications
no exposure, there is no risk. This is the case, for
                                                          in building practices, and other factors.
example, with an earthquake in an unpopulated area
of Alaska.                                                The information used to develop exposure data sets
                                                          can be derived from various sources and methods.
Exposure modelling techniques have been developed
                                                          At a local level, common data sources are council
at various scales, from global to local. Significantly,
                                                          and local government agencies, household surveys,
global-scale and local-scale modelling use different
                                                          aerial photos, and individual architectural/structural
methodologies: the former tends to take a top-
                                                          drawings. At a regional level and above, state-based
down approach, with work being carried out by
                                                          agencies, statistical offices, census data, investment
governments or large institutions, whereas the
                                                          and business listings, employment figures, and
latter works from the bottom up by methods such
                                                          existing geographic information system (GIS) data
as crowdsourcing and in situ surveys. At least four
                                                          are common sources of exposure information. At
homogeneous inventory regions—urban residential,
                                                          the coarsest level of resolution, national statistical
urban nonresidential, rural residential, and rural
                                                          agencies, census data, global databases, and remote
nonresidential—are usually defined to capture the
                                                          sensing are used for developing exposure data.
differences in occupancy and construction. Data
sources also vary by resolution.                          Commercial risk models have developed the so-
                                                          called industry exposure databases for regions
At the local scale, high-resolution exposure
                                                          where risk models are offered. These exposure data
data have been developed on an ad hoc basis, in
                                                          can include detailed information on construction as
areas where risk modelling has been carried out.
                                                          well as estimates of the value of the contents within
Crowdsourcing has become a common and valuable
                                                          a structure. The resolution of the exposure data is
tool for collecting detailed bottom-up data, but this
                                                          typically at the postal code level with varying levels
approach has limits, both in the type of data it can
                                                          of occupancy types. However, these data are almost
collect and in the quality of those data. In addition
                                                          always proprietary.
to being used to develop exposure data at a local
scale, crowdsourcing has also been used to validate       The classification (taxonomy and ontology) used to
global-scale data. At the national scale, complete        generate these exposure data varies from data set




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                         53
54
                                                        PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




                             to data set; this variation is problematic for efforts              Wald, and Porter 2010a). In addition, three global
                             to merge independently developed data sets. Nor                     exposure databases are slated for publication in
                             is there a commonly agreed upon taxonomy that                       2014, the global risk model by UNISDR (De Bono
                             accounts for features such as construction attributes               2013; see section 3-7), the GED4GEM by the Global
                             and asset valuation across different hazards.                       Earthquake Model (Dell’Acqua, Gamba, and Jaiswal
                                                                                                 2012; see section 3-6), and the World Bank exposure
                             In recent years, several data sets with global                      database, which will be completely open and
                             coverage have made the first step in overcoming                     suitable for multi-hazard analyses (Gunasekera et al.
                             these obstacles. The first such global exposure data                2014).18 Many of these newer exposure models take
                             set was developed in 2010 for PAGER (Prompt                         advantage of aspects of building typology taxonomy
                             Assessment of Global Earthquakes for Response),                     originally compiled in the PAGER database. Several
                             a global near-real-time earthquake loss estimation                  examples of global exposure data sets are given in
                             system, by the U.S. Geological Survey (Jaiswal,                     box 2-5.




     Box 02—5  Global Exposure Data Sets

       Global human exposure. Global models of human exposure mostly
     ///                       ///




                                                                                   suitable mainly for earthquake and cyclone probabilistic risk modelling.
     describe population data either on a regular grid or in specific settlement   It employs building type classifications for different size categories of
     coordinates or geographical boundaries. A widely used product is              settlements as developed by the World Agency of Planetary Monitoring
     the Gridded Population of the World (GPWv3), a gridded data set that          and Earthquake Risk Reduction (Wyss et al. 2013). The goal of the
     provides a spatially disaggregated population layer constructed from          GED4GEM (Dell’Acqua, Gamba, and Jaiswal 2012) is to create an open
     national or subnational input units of varying resolutions.(A) The native     homogenized database of the global building stock and population
     grid cell resolution is 2.5 arc-minutes. Population estimates are provided    distribution, with spatial, structural, and occupancy-related information
     for the years 1990, 1995, and 2000, and are projected to 2005, 2010,          at different scales, as input to the GEM risk platform OpenQuake.(C) Its
     and 2015. Other global human exposure models include commercially             building type classifications follow the GEM taxonomy, which is designed
     available LandScan (Bhaduri et al. 2007) and the open WorldPop. These         primarily for earthquake vulnerability assessments, and its multi-scale
     models are based on the integration of several information sources,           database structure contains information on buildings and populations
     including census and remote sensing, and are affected by a significant        from the country scale down to the per-building scale. The initial version
     range of uncertainties (Potere et al. 2009; Mondal and Tatem 2012).           of GED4GEM, planned for late 2014 release, will contain aggregate
                                                                                   information on population, built area, and reconstruction costs of
       Characterization of global built-up area. The Global Human Settlement
                                                                                   residential and nonresidential buildings at 1km resolution. Detailed data
     ///                                        ///




     Layer (GHSL) is developed and maintained by the Joint Research Centre
                                                                                   sets on single buildings will be integrated for a selected number of areas
     of the European Commission. GHSL integrates several available sources
                                                                                   and will increase over time.
     about human settlements with information extracted from multispectral
     satellite images. The underlying automatic image information extraction       (A) See the Gridded Population of the World website at http://sedac.
     work flow makes use of multi-resolution (0.5m–10m), multi-platform,           ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v3.
     multi-sensor (pan, multispectral), and multi-temporal satellite image data
     (Pesaresi and Halkia 2012). The Global Urban Footprint is being developed     (B) For PAGER, see Wald et al. (2008) and the website at http://
     by the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and is based on the analysis of          earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/pager/; for GED13, see De Bono (2013);
     Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) and optical satellite data. The project        for GED4GEM, see http://www.nexus.globalquakemodel.org/ged4gem/
     intends to cover the extent of the large urbanized areas of megacities for    posts.
     four time slices: 1975, 1990, 2000, and 2010 (Taubenböck et al. 2012).
                                                                                   (C) For OpenQuake, see http://www.globalquakemodel.org/openquake/
       Global description of building stock. Several global exposure databases
     ///                                  ///
                                                                                   about/.
     include physical exposure information; examples include PAGER, the
                                                                                   Source: Massimiliano Pittore, Marc Wieland, and Kevin Fleming, “From
     Global Exposure Database for the 2013 Global Assessment Report on
                                                                                   Remote Sensing to Crowdsourcing: Perspectives of a Global, Dynamic
     Disaster Risk Reduction (GED-13), and the Global Exposure Database for
                                                                                   Exposure Model for Georisk Assessment,” input paper prepared for the
     GEM (GED4GEM).(B) Using the CAPRA platform (Cardona et al. 2012), GED-        2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at
     13 aims to create an open global building and population inventory            www.preventionweb.net/gar.
                                                                                                                           CHAPTER


                                                                                                                           02
  Categories of information included in
///
                                                             of the risk analysis, and consequently into the
exposure models. There are several categories of
                               ///
                                                             loss estimates. The uncertainties and associated
assets that need to be included in a comprehensive           limitations in the final risk assessment then
exposure model (table 2-2). The broad variety of             need to be communicated to the end-users of
categories illustrates the necessity of combining            this information.
efforts from different disciplines, such as
geographical science, statistics, engineering,                 Information required for the modelling of
                                                             ///




mathematics, economics, remote sensing, and socio-           physical damage. On a national scale, reliable
                                                                                      ///




demographics.                                                data on physical exposure are less available than
                                                             population data. Information is often missing or
It is clear that as more data are integrated, modelled,
                                                             incomplete, and few governments have developed
and jointly analyzed, uncertainties propagate in the
                                                             national exposure databases of buildings and
model and in the subsequent results. A choice needs
                                                             infrastructure that are open and can be used to
to be made about whether slightly more-detailed
                                                             understand the impacts of multiple hazards (Turkey,
data will improve a model or merely add to the noise
                                                             Australia, the United States, and New Zealand are
and confusion. The impossibility of eliminating
uncertainty in hazard and vulnerability modelling is         exceptions). Thus it is not surprising that most

widely recognized. After all, every model constitutes        exposure data sets at the national scale or above
a simplified approximation of reality. Depending on          use the spatial distribution of population as a proxy
geospatial data characteristics (including resolution        for developing exposure estimates. This is a rapidly
aspects) and integration factors, uncertainty may            evolving area, however, and more governments
increase. It is therefore essential for uncertainties        are seeing the widespread value of developing
to be conceptually integrated into the framework             exposure information.


                              ASSET CATEGORIES                                     DESCRIPTION                           Table 02—2 
                                                                                                                         Categories of a
      Population                                          Demographic characteristics                                    Comprehensive
                                                          Various occupancy types such as residential, commercial,
                                                                                                                         Exposure Model
                                                          public, administrative, industrial classes. Also includes
      Property (buildings, etc.)                                                                                         Source: Adapted from
                                                          various different structural building types such as exterior
                                                                                                                         GFDRR (2011).
                                                          wall and roof types.


      Agriculture                                         Crop and land-use characteristics



      Transportation                                      Road, rail, air, and other transport-related networks


                                                          Sports stadiums, marketplaces, churches/temples/mosques,
      Large loss facilities
                                                          schools and other high population density infrastructure

                                                          Hospital and health care facilities, public buildings,
      Critical/high-risk loss facilities                  telecommunications, airports, energy systems, bridges and
                                                          other facilities critical to the recovery of a disaster
                                                          Oil, gas, and water supply pipelines/distribution systems,
      Other lifelines—utilities, pipelines                nuclear and chemical power plants, wastewater, and
                                                          electricity systems




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                         55
56
                                PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




     The basic information needed to model the response        exposure can be a key factor in determining the
     of a structure to a hazard event includes its location,   impact of rapid onset events such as earthquakes,
     occupancy, construction type, length or density           landslides, or tsunamis. Models of building
     (for road and railway), and replacement value.            occupancy that consider daily patterns have been
     The response of a structure to a hazard event can         proposed (Coburn and Spence 2002; Coburn,
     be more realistically simulated using additional          Spence, and Pomonis 1992), but collecting the
     structural information such as its square footage,        necessary data to update such models can be
     shape, height, age, roof type, irregularities, and        very time- and resource-intensive. A promising
     material and mechanical properties, as well as            alternative approach takes advantage of cellular
     building codes applicable to it. For hydrological         phone data provided by telephone companies
     hazards, additional details useful for vulnerability      (Wesolowski et al. 2013; Lu et al. 2013).
     assessments include information on the height
     above ground of the first occupied floor, distance          Exposure data collection approaches—full
                                                               ///




     from water channels, and the presence of                  enumeration, sampling, or disaggregation
     basements. Knowledge of the replacement value             using proxy data. In general terms, top-down
                                                                                    ///




     makes it possible to estimate the direct loss             and bottom-up approaches are used to collect
     associated with an event.                                 exposure data. Approaches that use bottom-up
                                                               methods commonly employ direct observation,
       Modelling economic losses. Valuation data
     ///                              ///




                                                               which relies on two principle strategies: full
     are critical for quantitatively assessing economic        enumeration or sampling. With the full enumeration
     loss from disasters. The reinsurance industry uses        approach, each exposed asset in the study area is
     claims and other economic data sets to calibrate          detected and defined. This approach can be very
     its exposure models. However, this information
                                                               accurate and detailed but also requires a greater
     is often proprietary and limited to insured risks.
                                                               expenditure of time and other resources. Census
     Obtaining comprehensive loss data for uninsured
                                                               data are commonly used to fully enumerate human
     property is much more difficult. Proxy data such as
                                                               populations, though this approach is best suited to
     socioeconomic surveys, labor statistics by economic
                                                               developed countries, which are likely to have slow or
     sector, floor area per employee by type of activity,
                                                               moderate population growth and up-to-date census
     etc. are used to determine nonresidential building
                                                               data. Volunteered geographic information (VGI),
     stock values. Accounting for a structure’s contents
                                                               another approach to full enumeration, derives data
     becomes particularly significant when modelling
                                                               from the joint efforts of many individuals who
     nonresidential occupancy classes.
                                                               voluntarily collect and submit data. VGI may be
       Incorporating the temporal variation in
     ///
                                                               either structured or unstructured—the latter applies
     human exposure. Other important factors related
                          ///
                                                               to unsystematic, non-authoritative initiatives such
     to exposure data are population and demography            as OpenStreetMap (see box 1-2), which rely on
     characteristics that highlight the movement of            participants’ interest and motivation. The structured
     population through the course of a day. Consider,         approach also involves volunteers but has an
     for example, the swelling of populations in major         authoritative component that directs volunteers’
     metropolitan areas during the work day, or the            efforts toward certain tasks (Chapman 2012), such
     varying population characteristics of areas of            as a government-led participatory mapping program
     cultural or religious value depending on the day and/     to collect exposure data for risk assessment (see
     or time of the year. Temporal variability in human        section 3-3).
Box 02—6  Indirect Characterization of Exposure

  Population: A global distribution of population data, in terms of counts or
///             ///
                                                                                  mostly characterized by artificial structures, including roads and

density per unit area, is considered the primary source of information for        buildings. Built-up areas are often described by binary masks that
exposure assessment. For instance, the GAR13 exposure database uses               clearly outline the boundary of settlements. This can be considered an
the commercial global LandScan population database to obtain a spatial            intermediate description of exposure, where the characterization of the
distribution of buildings’ structural types (de Bono 2013). Analogously,          built-up environment is improved with respect to a simple population
the GED4GEM database exploits population data to disaggregate                     layer. Built-up masks can be reliably obtained by processing different
exposure estimation (Dell’Acqua, Gamba, and Jaiswal 2012). In both cases          remote-sensing data, thus effectively addressing global-scale mapping.
the knowledge of the percentage of population living in each building             Examples of global built-up area products include the Global Rural-Urban
type, or the estimated average dwelling occupancy, is used to link the            Mapping Project (GRUMPv1),(A) the Global Human Settlement Layer
population to the physical exposure. Global population models also allow          (Pesaresi and Halkia 2012), and the Global Urban Footprint (GUF) (Esch et
use of empirical vulnerability functions, where direct estimates of loss          al. 2010).
are obtained directly in terms of population exposed, and the main loss
                                                                                  (A) See the GRUMP website at http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/
metrics account for fatalities (Jaiswal and Wald 2010). Many global models
                                                                                  collection/grump-v1.
use human exposure as a basic ingredient to define a more refined
“hazard-specific exposure” (Dilley 2005; Peduzzi et al. 2009; Allen et al.
                                                                                  Source: Massimiliano Pittore, Marc Wieland, and Kevin Fleming, “From
2009).                                                                            Remote Sensing to Crowdsourcing: Perspectives of a Global, Dynamic
                                                                                  Exposure Model for Georisk Assessment,” input paper prepared for the
  Built-up areas: A further step with respect to population distribution is
///                   ///




                                                                                  2015 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at
the spatial delineation of built-up areas, that is, impervious surfaces           www.preventionweb.net/gar.




      With a sampling approach, summary statistics                        sampling approach where high-resolution imagery
      for a large area are estimated based on smaller                     (manual or automatic extraction of features) or
      subset areas. Increasingly, census methodologies                    direct observation is used to fully enumerate assets
      are turning to sampling and statistical modelling                   (buildings, roads, bridges) and their geometric
      rather than full enumeration because they provide                   characterization (footprint, shape, height) within
      more up-to-date and more accurate information                       each of the sampling areas that represent the
      with less effort than traditional methods. A rolling                common density pattern classified during the
      census approach—in which only small areas are                       first step. Alternatively, if time and resources
      fully enumerated and other, highly populous areas                   permit, optical satellite or aerial images can be
      are continuously sampled at the rate of around                      used to extract all of the footprints for buildings
      10 percent a year—makes it possible to update                       in an exhaustive manner. To provide a complete
      data annually instead of every 5 to 10 years (UN                    description of the exposure, however, the footprints
      Statistical Division 2008).                                         should be combined with in situ direct observations
                                                                          or other data sets (such as national statistics
      Remote sensing is on occasion used in
                                                                          information) that provide additional data that
      conjunction with these sampling methodologies
                                                                          cannot be captured from above (e.g., construction
      (Adams and Huyck 2006; Müller, Reiter, and
                                                                          features or building use).
      Weiland 2011; Geiß and Taubenböck 2013). For
      instance, urban areas can be classified according to                In recent years, digital in situ data capturing systems
      their density using satellite images, followed by a                 have started to emerge, which allow the user to




      PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                                              57
58
 Box 02—7  How Study Scale Drives Exposure Data                                        collect and generate exposure information using
 Collection Methods                                                                    handheld direct observation tools in combination

 Assessing how a community will be affected by natural hazards requires a
                                                                                       with other disaggregation or extrapolation
 fundamental understanding of the elements at risk. The type of data needed            methodologies (FEMA 2002). An example includes
 for a hazard impact assessment depends on the nature of the problem that is
                                                                                       the open source suite of tools developed under GEM
 being addressed and is independent of the location or scale of the problem. In
 direct contrast to this, for projects with limited resources (e.g., time, funding),
                                                                                       called Inventory Data Capture Tools (IDCT). IDCT
 the methods used for data collection depend on the scale of the study.                takes information generated from the analysis of
                                                                                       satellite images to characterize built-up areas and
 If the goal of a natural hazard impact assessment is to understand whether
 a particular feature will be affected by a certain level of hazard, then it will be   combines it with sampled direct field observations
 enough to simply know the location of that feature, and whether the location          on individual buildings using handheld devices
 lies in a zone of potential hazard. For example, landowners who want to know
                                                                                       or paper survey forms. This information is then
 whether their land is likely to be inundated by a flood need only locate their
 land within published flood hazard information. This example demonstrates             integrated through the use of mapping schemes to
 scale independence: if the entire population sought this information, it would        generate exposure information.
 still be necessary to know only the location of land relative to zones of hazard.

                                                                                       Indirect, top-down disaggregation approaches
 In contrast, if the aim of a study is to understand the potential economic
 losses and casualties that could result from a natural hazard, then it is             use exposure proxies to develop exposure data
 necessary to understand more than just the location of a feature. For the             sets when direct observation alone is not feasible.
 quantitative estimates required by this more comprehensive risk assessment,
                                                                                       Information on the spatial distribution of
 understanding the type of construction materials, the age of construction, and
 the number of people within a building is necessary. Note that while additional       population and built-up areas allows the exposure
 information is required in this example, the information is still independent         to be disaggregated into finer resolutions. Some
 of the scale of the study: whether data are for a single household or every
                                                                                       examples of this approach are described in box 2-6.
 household in a megacity, assessing the possible economic losses from
 flooding requires information about the number of stories in a building and its
                                                                                         Multi-source integration. The growing variety
 construction type and age.
                                                                                       ///                          ///




                                                                                       of possible exposure information sources requires
 The same example that demonstrates scale independence for the type of
                                                                                       the flexible integration of existing information
 data collected demonstrates scale dependence for data collection methods.
 For the individual landowner/household, firsthand observation is the most             from different acquisition techniques, scales, and
 effective method for collecting relevant data, regardless of whether they are         accuracies, so that no available information is
 for a simplistic “wet/not wet” assessment or a quantified estimate of risk to
                                                                                       discarded. An example for a probabilistic integration
 inform an insurance policy. However, undertaking either of these types of
 assessments through firsthand individual data capture at a megacity, national,        approach is given in Pittore and Wieland (2013).
 or regional scale is impractical and likely impossible.                               This method is based on Bayesian networks and
 Source: A. T. Jones, K. Van Putten, M. Jakab (Geoscience Australia); M. L.            allows for the sound treatment of uncertainties
 Bautista, B. C. Bautista, I. C. Narag (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and
                                                                                       and for the seamless merging of different data
 Seismology); A. Wibowo (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana); K.
 Chapman (Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team).                                            sources, including legacy data, expert judgment, and
                                                                                       inferences based on data mining.

                                                                                       There are clearly many approaches to collecting
                                                                                       exposure data; however, for best results the decision
                                                                                       on the approach must be aligned with the scale and
                                                                                       purpose of the risk assessment (see box 2-7).
                         Damages to
                          structures


                                             60%                     Unreinforced rubble stone masonry construction




                                              10%                   Reinforced concrete block construction

                                                   0

                                                           low                      high                 extreme


                                                                      Hazard intensity
                                                             (magnitude of wind, flood, earthquake, etc.)




                                                                 estimates for contents, business interruption, and
Vulnerability and Loss
	                                                                                                                          Figure 02—2 
                                                                 outlying structures tend to be just a simple function     The relationship
Vulnerability is typically described in terms of                 of loss to the main structure. Fatality estimates tend    between hazard
damage and/or loss. Damage and loss to a structure               to be based on knowledge of local population and          intensity and damage
are assessed using functions that relate hazard                  empirical relationships based on structural damage        to structures
intensity to damage; see figure 2-2 for an illustration.         or hazard characteristics. For example, PAGER             A hazard of the same
Various adjectives are used to describe the functions,           estimates fatality rates based on ground-shaking          intensity results in
including “fragility,” “damage,” and “vulnerability.”            intensity and a region-specific fatality rate (Jaiswal    significantly different
Engineers use fragility functions to quantify damage             and Wald 2010). A somewhat similar approach is            damage to a reinforced
and vulnerability functions to quantify loss caused                                                                        concrete block construction
                                                                 used for floods, where the fatality rate is a function
by a hazard. However, it is not uncommon to use                                                                            building than to an
                                                                 of flood depth (Boyd et al. 2010).                        unreinforced rubble stone
the term vulnerability function when discussing
                                                                                                                           masonry construction
damage. Damage is often quantified using a damage                Generally, functions are defined using mean values        building.
ratio where 0 is equivalent to no damage and 1 is                and a coefficient of variation (CV) for a range of
equivalent to complete destruction. Multiplying                  hazard intensities (three-second gust wind speed
value by the damage ratio gives an estimate of direct            at 5km/hr intervals, peak ground acceleration at
loss.                                                            intervals of 0.1g, flood depth at 50cm intervals, etc.)
                                                                 The CV tends to decrease with more information.
The resolution of loss estimates will vary by model.
For a global- or regional-scale model, the losses may            For example, a relatively precise (small CV)

resolve only total direct loss, whereas detailed site-           estimate of damage would be expected if one had
specific models may estimate loss to a structure, its            a vulnerability function that accounted for the
contents, and outlying buildings and include time-               structural details of a building designed and built
dependent losses such as business interruption.                  to withstand the expected hazard intensities.
Site-specific fragility and vulnerability functions can          The damage estimate would have considerable
account for differences in structural characteristics,           uncertainty (large CV) if the structure were part
such as roof covering and how it is attached. Loss               of aggregate occupancy data. An alternative to a




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                            59
60
 Box 02—8  The Uses of Loss Inventories                                            function that provides a mean and a CV is to use a
                                                                                   damage probability matrix.
 The terms “loss” and “damage” are often used interchangeably in reference to
 the adverse impacts of disasters on society, economies, and the environment.
                                                                                   Methods of assessing damage vary greatly depending
 In the context of disaster loss inventories, losses are quantifiable measures
                                                                                   upon the type of exposure under consideration
 expressed in either monetary terms (e.g., market value, replacement value)
 or counts such as number of fatalities and injuries. Damage is a generic term
                                                                                   (e.g., people, buildings, livestock), the resolution
 without quantitative characteristics, which does not mean that damage cannot      of the exposure information (e.g., site specific or
 be measured and expressed as a loss. The damage to a roof, for instance, can      aggregate data at postal code resolution or lower),
 be translated into monetary terms (the cost of repairs), which in turn can be     and the details available for a given resolution
 included in loss inventories.
                                                                                   (e.g., whether just occupancy is known or detailed
 Loss inventories are tools of accountability and transparency for DRM.            structural information is available). In addition, the
 Despite their shortcomings (such as quality issues), they provide a process       choice of whether to use a mean value or a sampled
 for documenting a country’s disaster losses. Loss inventories establish an
                                                                                   value for damage depends on the details of a risk
 historical baseline for monitoring the level of impact on a community or
                                                                                   analysis. A sampled value is generated using the
 country. They make it possible to quantify the impact of individual hazards
 so that communities can focus disaster risk reduction efforts on frequently       mean and CV from the vulnerability function at the
 occurring hazards rather than the last disaster. Inventories allow governments    requisite hazard intensity. Other factors that can be
 to allocate resources by community or by hazard—that is, to prioritize areas of   incorporated into damage and loss estimates include
 heightened risk (hot spots) or to focus on a particular hazard.                   when the structure was built, given that building
 Loss information can also be harnessed for, and integrated into, risk             practices and codes have changed over time, and the
 assessments as part of efforts to promote community resilience. Loss and          timing of an event, given that the use of a structure
 hazard profiles can inform land-use planning, zoning, and development             varies over the course of a day.
 decisions; local ordinances on building codes and housing density; taxation
 and budget decisions; and policy setting at local to national levels. A sound     Often losses are adjusted for a variety of additional
 understanding of the drivers and causes of losses, as well as their societal,     factors, such as having to replace a structure if
 environmental, and economic implications, enables communities to manage
                                                                                   damage exceeds a certain threshold; accounting
 hazards and disasters proactively rather than reactively.
                                                                                   for business interruption costs for commercial or
 Where loss inventories are consistently updated, the expanded historical          industrial properties or additional living expenses
 record provides the basis for temporal studies and trend analysis of losses.
                                                                                   for residential properties; incorporating the effects
 High-quality loss data of good temporal and spatial resolutions can be coupled
                                                                                   of demand surge on large or sequential disasters;
 with ancillary data like DRM expenditures or demographic information.
 Combining these data makes it possible to evaluate the effectiveness of
                                                                                   and including damage to a structure’s contents. A
 policies and to determine whether DRM expenditures are making a difference        good overview of loss calculations is provided in
 in loss trends, whether DRM efforts are effective, whether the mere presence      section 3-18.
 of more people is driving the rise in losses, and whether climate change is
 affecting losses.                                                                 Losses can be estimated ex ante and ex post.
                                                                                   Modelled losses often differ from observed losses
 Source: Text is from Melanie Gall, Christopher T. Emrich, and Susan L. Cutter,
 “Who Needs Loss Data,” input paper prepared for the 2015 Global Assessment        for a variety of reasons. One reason is that modelled
 Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, available at www.preventionweb.net/gar.        losses represent only losses that are captured by the
                                                                                   model, and these losses depend upon the quality (in
                                                                                   terms of resolution and detail) of the exposure data.
                                                                                   Another reason is that loss inventories are typically
                                                                                   collected in an ad hoc manner. Better records of
                                                                                   disaster losses would provide a range of benefits
                                                                                   (see box 2-8).
Box 02—9  Incorporating Disaster Resilience into Cultural Heritage Buildings in Bhutan

Cultural heritage sites in Bhutan are considered “living” heritage sites because       several programs and trainings have been conducted to proactively address
they continue to play an active role in the daily lives of the society. In addition    disaster resilience in cultural heritage sites, and good construction guidelines
to their architectural, aesthetic, historical, and archaeological significance,        have been formulated by the national government to help prevent or minimize
most of the cultural heritage sites in Bhutan have deep spiritual and cultural         damage to cultural heritage sites during disaster events. A study of indigenous
significance. In Bhutan, sites are deemed to be part of the country’s cultural
                                                                                       construction practices, begun after the 2009 earthquake, has been ongoing,
heritage based on their use as religious and communal centers as well as
                                                                                       and hundreds of carpenters and masons in the affected districts have been
their antiquity.
                                                                                       trained in safe construction practices to facilitate reconstruction of the damaged

Disasters have physically affected Bhutan’s cultural heritage sites and have also      cultural heritage buildings and rural houses.
disrupted centuries-old communal and social traditions. The great vulnerability
of Bhutan’s unique cultural heritage sites can be seen in the effect of events         One positive and surprising outcome of this training program was the discovery

over the last 20 years, starting in 1994, when the Punakha Dzong (a huge               that most of the local carpenters and masons already had the knowledge and
structure built as a fortress in the 17th century) was severely damaged by a           skills needed for traditional—and more disaster-resilient—construction, though
glacial lake outburst flood, and continuing to 2009 and 2011, when earthquakes         this knowledge had deteriorated over time as the traditional construction
damaged over 200 cultural heritages sites and thousands of rural dwellings.            practices grew less popular and as the rapid completion of buildings was
                                                                                       made a priority. It also appeared that in the interest of saving time and
It was estimated that the physical loss of the structures—mainly lhakhangs
                                                                                       money, compromises were being made in the quality of materials as well as
(temples) and dzongs (fortresses)—was US$13.5 million for the 2009 earthquake
                                                                                       construction techniques, leaving structures even more vulnerable to disasters.
and US$6.96 million for the 2011 earthquake. These are large losses for a small
                                                                                       The safe construction training program has highlighted the importance
developing country. The actual loss, however, is much larger, since it goes
beyond the loss of the physical structures and includes the loss of interior           of safety for both homeowners and builders during the post-earthquake

assets known as nangtens (paintings, sculptures, carvings, etc.). In many cases,       reconstruction phase.
these were one of a kind and irreplaceable. Moreover, the loss to spiritual values
                                                                                       The government of Bhutan faces some clear challenges as it seeks to improve
and traditions brought about by such disasters cannot be estimated in terms of
monetary value.                                                                        the understanding of disaster management and the resilience of cultural
                                                                                       heritage sites, with access to appropriate technical skills and financial resources
Bhutan has a variety of programs and policies in place designed to protect its         to monitor and sustain the program posing the greatest challenge.
cultural heritage, but these have tended to be reactive rather than proactive.
There are signs that this reactive approach is beginning to change, however            Source: Dechen Tshering (World Bank).




The historical record of loss mainly represents direct                  intangible losses are associated with assets that are
tangible losses produced by an event. Examples of                       difficult to value. Examples include the loss of a
direct tangible loss include damage to public and                       life, damage to ecosystem services, and damage to
private infrastructure, commercial and industrial                       sites related to cultural heritage. (Box 2-9 describes
facilities, dwellings, and the contents of a structure.                 efforts to increase the resilience of heritage sites in
The cost of business interruption and the expense of                    Bhutan.) A full consideration of all direct, indirect,
housing a structure’s inhabitants while a dwelling is                   and intangible losses would produce much higher
repaired or replaced are considered indirect losses.                    loss estimates than the more easily quantified and
Indirect losses generally arise from disruptions                        commonly seen records of direct loss.
in the flow of goods and services, though such
disruptions can produce positive as well as negative                    It can be difficult to anticipate and quantify the
impacts. An example of a positive impact would be                       potential for indirect losses despite their size. The
the increased demand for construction material. In                      2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in Japan and
contrast to tangible losses that are relatively easy                    flooding in Thailand offer an example of the global
to value, such as damage to structures or contents,                     indirect impacts from local events. The Japanese




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                                              61
62
                             PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




     tsunami was much more spectacular and had              2012b). The reason Thailand’s flooding had such
     dramatic news coverage; however, the Thailand          a dramatic impact on the global economy is that
     floods caused much more damage to industrial           industrial parks outside of Bangkok were a critical
     supply chains on a global basis.
                                                            node in the global supply chain for the production
     The 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami slowed          of automobiles and electronics (Haraguchi and Lall
     the Japanese and global economies. For the full        2013).
     year of 2011 the gross domestic product (GDP) of
     Japan was 0.7 percent lower than in 2010 (Trésor-      As box 2-8 suggests, collecting and analyzing
     Economics 2012). The largest quarterly decline         damage and loss data from previous disasters
     (1.8 percent) occurred in the first quarter when       provides valuable insight into the understanding
     the earthquake and tsunami struck. There was a         of physical, social, and economic vulnerability.
     rebound in the third quarter followed by a decline     Collecting information post-disaster can build
     in the fourth quarter that was associated with
                                                            damage scenarios to inform planning processes,
     the Thailand floods. On a global basis there was
                                                            assess the physical and financial impact of disasters,
     negligible impact on full-year GDP because of a
     rebound in the second half of 2011. In addition,       develop preparedness measures, and facilitate

     spending on public sector reconstruction resulted in   dialogue for risk management. A number of global
     a positive impact in 2012.                             and national disaster loss systems, some open and
                                                            some proprietary, record the losses associated
     In contrast to the Japanese disaster, the 2011
                                                            with disasters; these are listed in table 2-3. For
     flooding in Thailand was estimated to have reduced
     global production by 2.5 percent (UNISDR 2012)         more detailed information, see the United Nations
     and reduced Thailand’s GDP growth rate from 4.0        Development Programme survey of loss databases
     percent to an expected 2.9 percent (World Bank         (UNDP 2013).
                                                                                                                           CHAPTER


                                                                                                                            02
         DATABASE NAME                              DESCRIPTION                              DIRECT LINK
                                                      Regional                                                            Table 02—3 
                                                http://www.gripweb.org/                                                   Sources of Disaster
Andean Information System for Disaster   gripweb/?q=countries-risk-information/                                           Loss Data
                                                                                         http://www.siapad.net/
    Prevention and Relief (SIAPAD)          databases-information-systems/
                                          andean-information-system-disaster
                                                                                      See countries at http://www.
             DesInventar                      http://www.desinventar.org/
                                                                                      desinventar.org/en/database
                                                                                      CMC Nikolay Grigoryan (nik@
  Armenia Emergency Management                        Stand alone
                                                                                             emergency.am)
                                                                                   http://www.emknowledge.gov.au/
     Australia Disasters Database
                                                                                          disaster-information/
                                                http://www.gripweb.org/
                                         gripweb/?q=countries-risk-information/
 Disaster Incidence Database (DIDB) of
                                            databases-information-systems/            http://www.dmic.org.bd/didb
             Bangladesh
                                           disaster-incidence-database-didb-
                                                      bangladesh
                                           http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
     Canadian Disaster Database                                                       http://cdd.publicsafety.gc.ca/
                                         rsrcs/cndn-dsstr-dtbs/index-eng.aspx

                                             http://www.cdema.org/index.
 Caribbean Disaster Events Database      php?option=com_content&view=arti-
                                                 cle&id=110&Itemid=88

                                         http://calamidatph.ndrrmc.gov.ph/dm/
              Calamidat
                                                         web/
                                         http://webra.cas.sc.edu/hvri/products/    http://webra.cas.sc.edu/hvriapps/
               Sheldus
                                                     sheldus.aspx                  sheldus_web/sheldus_login.aspx
   US Billion Dollar Weather/Climate       http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/      http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/
              Disasters                                overview                                  events
                                                http://www.gripweb.org/
                                         gripweb/?q=countries-risk-information/
   Damage and Needs Assessment                                                    http://www.ccfsc.gov.vn/KW6F2B34/
                                            databases-information-systems/
      system (DANA) of Vietnam                                                          Disaster-Database.aspx
                                           damage-and-needs-assessment-
                                                     system-dana

                                                       Global
                                           http://www.glidenumber.net/glide/       http://www.glidenumber.net/glide/
                GLIDE
                                                    public/about.jsp                    public/search/search.jsp
               EM-DAT                         http://www.emdat.be/about             http://www.emdat.be/database
                                           https://www.munichre.com/touch/            https://www.munichre.com/
           NatCatSERVICE                   naturalhazards/en/natcatservice/          touch/portal/en/service/login.
                                                      default.aspx                     aspx?cookiequery=firstcall
                Sigma                       http://www.swissre.com/sigma/           http://www.swissre.com/sigma/
                                         http://catastropheinsight.aonbenfield.   http://thoughtleadership.aonbenfield.
             Aon Benfield
                                                com/Pages/Home.aspx                               com




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                        63
64
                              PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




                                                              user interfaces (GUIs) to ease of installation, to
     Hazard and Risk
     	
                                                              user support and frequent updates, to capacity
     Assessment Tools 19                                      for customization. It also highlights some of the
                                                              challenges that a user of a modelling tool might
     Since 2005, the number of nonproprietary hazard
                                                              face, from difficulty with installation to poor
     and risk modelling tools has grown rapidly as part
                                                              documentation and many other factors. It is
     of the global movement to understand and manage
     risk. These tools allow users to calculate risk and      important to note that many modelling tools are

     better understand, prepare for, and mitigate the         frequently updated, so the challenges presented in
     likely impact of potential disasters.                    this analysis may have been overcome with a recent
                                                              software update.
     Given the plethora of tools available and the variety
     of reasons for seeking to assess risk, users may         The evaluation of software packages included the
     find it challenging to choose the appropriate tool       following steps:
     for addressing the hazard, exposure, and/or risk
                                                              1.	 Evaluation criteria were developed for open
     question under consideration and is aligned with
                                                                 access software packages based on Daniell (2009)
     their modelling and computational experience.
     Some attempts have been made to evaluate the                and through consultations.

     many modelling tools that are available to users
                                                              2.	 A preliminary review of available open source
     at no cost, but these efforts did not include in-
                                                                 packages worldwide in the four peril types was
     depth review or testing. Thus the evidence base to
                                                                 undertaken. More than 80 software packages
     differentiate tools for different purposes and end
                                                                 were downloaded and initial checks made
     uses has been lacking.
                                                                 concerning availability, source code, active or
     To address this gap and meet the need for                   inactive status, and so on.
     a systematic review of tools against a set of
                                                              3.	 An initial multi-criteria analysis was undertaken
     established criteria, the Global Facility for Disaster
     Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and World Bank               in order to select the packages to review in depth

     undertook testing and evaluation of free hazard and         for each peril.
     risk modelling software using a consistent approach.
                                                              4.	 The 31 selected packages were installed and
     The review considered over 80 open access
                                                                 tested using tutorials, data sets, and examples
     noncommerical software packages. A preliminary
                                                                 in order to create outputs. This step included
     analysis based on whether the 80 models were
                                                                 noting advantages and disadvantages of these
     currently supported was used to select a subset
                                                                 software packages, and then filling out a
     of eight earthquake models, four cyclone models,
                                                                 detailed final set of about 180 criteria under 11
     eleven flood models, and eight storm surge/tsunami
     models for more detailed analysis. The detailed             key classification themes (open source, GUI,

     analysis evaluated the models on the basis of over          software documentation, technology, exposure
     100 criteria, and the results provide a synopsis of         component, vulnerability, hazard, risk, post-event
     key open access natural hazard risk modelling tools         analysis, scenario planning, and output).
     available worldwide.
                                                              A sample page of the review (for MAEvis/mHARP) is
     This analysis highlights the strengths of different      shown in figure 2-3. The review of every package is
     modelling tools, from sophisticated graphical            available in Daniell et al. (2014).
                                                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                                     02
    SOFTWARE NAME                     PERIL                 LICENSE               CURRENT VERSION                   OPEN SOURCE                 OPERATING SYSTEM
           MAEviz                   Earthquake              Single User                V3.1.1 Build12                    Yes, svn                   Win, Mac, Linux


Preferred Specific Information

                                                                 SOFTWARE MODULES
       CODING LANGUAGE                                                                                                      MANUAL                GUI              HELP
                                                                  (see below for more info)
       Java using Eclipse RCP                     Many risk modules – NCSA GIS, Eclipse RCP, MAEviz.                            Yes               Yes               Yes


Goal of the Software
Another Hazus-based application, MAEviz (Mid-America Earthquakes                           system uses a combination of Sakai (an open source web portal), NEESgrid (a
Visualization) was developed to perform seismic risk assessment in the middle              framework of tools to allow researchers to collaborate), and SAM (Scientific
U.S. states. At first glance, it seems specialized; however, its huge potential            Annotation Middleware) in order to allow users to add their own hazard data. It
can be seen in the flowchart of analysis procedures (48 and counting) and                  is easily extendable; the European Union (EU) project SYNER-G, for example, has
its complete Hazus system, including detailed algorithms. The visually driven              added a large fragility function manager to it, in addition to other tools.



File Types Used

      HAZARD               VULNERABILITY                   EXPOSURE                                             KEY HAZARD METRICS
                                                                               Spectral ordinates are used in terms of PGA and Sa. This is calculated using GMPEs and
       .txt, .csv                  .xml                      *.shp
                                                                                                 source-site distance, source geometry, and seismicity.



                                                             Description of Software Risk Outputs

                                                             Damage estimates include options for multiple mitigation strategies, testing of scientific and engineering
                                                             principles, and estimating the earthquake hazard impact on lifelines and social or economic systems (based
                                                             on Hazus and extra analysis).


                                                             The outputs are economic losses (direct, indirect, downtime, business interruption), social losses (social
                                                             vulnerability, fatalities, injuries, homeless), and management options. A detailed list of the modules is
                                                             shown in the appendix. Simple reports and data views are given. The software creates all scenario output
                                                             (disaggregated or not).

An overview of the MAEviz options (McLaren
et al. 2008)


Advantages and Disadvantages                                                               Recommendations for Improvements
                                                                                           for Greater Utility
• It is completely open source and features inbuilt GIS; the software is well
 formatted with the GIS user interfaces.                                                   mHARP will give this fantastic software an additional use. It should be
• Is easily the best software for scenario risk assessment and decision support            integrated with Deltares or other risk software, given the common structure.
 (mitigation, benefit-cost).                                                               It has already been integrated in HAZturk and SYNER-G. A combination with
                                                                                           EQRM for probabilistic modelling would be useful. An InaSAFE-style command
• It has an outstanding array of modules that provide end analysis such as
                                                                                           system could simplify the software even further for the most basic users, but it
 shelter needs or business interruption.
                                                                                           is currently fairly user-friendly.
• There is a developer and community, and the function codes are easy to read
 and improve.

• Basic users find it easy to use; the large array of infrastructure types can be
 used for hazard and loss.

• Combining detailed hazard, detailed vulnerability, and management and risk
 modelling, the software is easily extendable.

• It is currently tuned only for deterministic analysis.




Figure 02—3  Sample software package review.

Source: Daniell et al. 2014.
PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                                                  65
66
                                                                      PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




                                         The information generated with this assessment can               purposes. Users at all levels should understand the
                                         aid users in selecting suitable software packages.               sensitivity of models to changes in inputs and would
                                         It is highly recommended that users test as many                 probably benefit from training, as box 2-10 suggests.
                                         packages as possible in order to make an informed                (For case studies that demonstrate the importance
                                         decision about which software is right for their                 of training, see sections 3-9 and 3-12).




Box 02—10  Training in Use of Risk Models: The GEM Perspective


While specific risk modelling software packages may be more or less                   The Global Earthquake Model has developed a variety of approaches to
appropriate depending on the experience level of the end-user, users at any           training users in its tools. It holds workshops targeted to users at the same

level may benefit from training. It is important for users of hazard and risk         level of experience and education, and it hosts professionals at the GEM
                                                                                      secretariat for hands-on training that may last for weeks or months. For
models to understand the sensitivity of the models they are using and to be
                                                                                      local experts in developing countries, GEM has found that “learning by
aware of the large impact on assessment results that changes in the input
                                                                                      doing” has been the most effective way to gain necessary skills and to
parameters can have. The figure shows that the OpenQuake engine may
                                                                                      develop needed capacity. Offering training of this type requires a few years
produce two different hazard maps for Japan depending on the user-defined             of ongoing engagement and is possible only through strong partnerships
modelling decisions (in this case related to the probability of a Tohoku-like         at both the institutional and individual levels. Through its Earthquake Model
event occurring in the next 50 years).                                                for the Middle East (EMME) project, for example, GEM offered local technical
                                                                                      experts their first exposure to probabilistic earthquake modelling. Although
Training could be most beneficial in governments of developing countries,             hazard and risk assessments might initially develop more slowly under the
where capacity in conducting seismic hazard and risk assessment, using                “learning by doing” approach, the newly built local capacity for maintaining,

probabilistic modelling, and understanding results tends to be especially low         understanding, and advising governments is invaluable.

and sporadic. But even governments in developed countries need access to              Source: Helen Crowley, Nicole Keller, Sahar Safaie, and Kate Stillwell
technical advice, including the expertise of their own specialists.                   (GEM Foundation).
                                                                                                                                           CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                           02



Box 02—11  The Understanding Risk Community

Understanding Risk (UR) is an open and global community of experts                   As a result of the 2012 UR Forum, participatory mapping projects have been
and practitioners in the field of disaster risk assessment. UR community
                                                                                     implemented in Nepal and Malawi, and open geospatial data platforms have
members include representatives of government agencies, the private sector,
                                                                                     been launched in the Horn of Africa, Haiti, and Sri Lanka. The 2012 forum also
multilateral organizations, nongovernmental organizations, community-
                                                                                     lead to the first national UR event, held in Brazil in November 2012. This event
based organizations, research institutions, and academia. Every two years,
                                                                                     brought together Brazilian experts and practitioners to discuss the challenges
the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery convenes the UR
                                                                                     the country faces in understanding its disaster risk and to raise the profile of
Forum—a five-day event designed to showcase best practices and the
                                                                                     the topic nationally. In May 2014, Haiti will hold a national UR Forum to bring
latest technical know-how in disaster risk assessment. The forums provide
                                                                                     together nontraditional partners and tackle the challenge of economic, social,
organizations with the opportunity to highlight new activities and initiatives,
                                                                                     and environmental vulnerability in the country.
build new partnerships, and foster advances in the field.

                                                                                     The next global UR Forum, in London between June 30 and July 4, 2014,
The first UR Forum, held in Washington, DC, in June 2010, was attended by
500 practitioners representing 41 countries. The goal of the forum was to            takes “Producing Actionable Information” as its theme; it will focus on how to

showcase progress in the field of disaster risk assessment and to promote            translate and communicate scientific information into actionable decisions

the sharing of ideas and the exchange of knowledge through a series of               on the ground. UR 2014 will continue to foster the growth of partnerships
technical sessions led by experts. During the forum, the GEM held its annual         and spur the advances in risk assessment needed for achieving sustainable
outreach meeting, and Random Hacks of Kindness (RHoK)—a group that                   development and building resilience.
brings together software programmers to develop applications for DRM
challenges—organized its first global hackathon.(A) Based on the success of          The UR Forums are clearly meeting a need. Participants report that the mix

the forum, the UR series was launched.                                               of backgrounds, interests, and types of expertise they encounter, along with
                                                                                     the opportunity to share ideas and information, stimulate their thinking and
UR 2012, held in Cape Town from July 2 to July 6, was attended by 500 risk           promote creative solutions to problems. Discussions taking place at the
assessment experts from more than 86 countries. The forum showcased new              forums are being shared beyond the UR community by means of a post-
tools for decision makers, strengthened regional and global partnerships, and        conference publication (Understanding Risk: Best Practices in Disaster Risk
built technical capacity in the Africa region through a series of training events.
                                                                                     Assessment). The UR community website (www.understandrisk.org) also
UR 2012 was also a testimony to the tremendous progress in understanding
                                                                                     serves as a platform for incubating innovation and forging partnerships in the
risk since 2010: crowdsourcing, a new topic in 2010, by 2012 was being
                                                                                     disaster risk assessment field. Membership in the community has grown from
mainstreamed and used to support risk assessment for financial applications
                                                                                     about 1,000 in 2010 to more than 3,000 in 2014.
intended to make governments, businesses, and households more financially
resilient to risk. A consensus about the need for data that are more open also       (A) RHoK is a partnership of Google, Microsoft, Yahoo, the National
emerged, with many initiatives demonstrating that the trend toward open              Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the World Bank. See the
data would be broadly beneficial. The forum also highlighted new tools and
                                                                                     website at http://www.rhok.org/.
methodologies for building resilience, and in particular called attention to the
extent to which these tools are now available to nonspecialists.                     Source: Emma Phillips (GFDRR).




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                                        67
68
                              PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




                                                              The Global Earthquake Model suggests some
     Creating Platforms and
     	
                                                              of the benefits that arise when developing and
     Partnerships to Enable                                   applying knowledge is treated as a cooperative
                                                              endeavor.20 GEM was created specifically as a
     the Development of                                       public-private partnership because its founders
     Risk Assessments                                         judged that structure to be optimal for its purposes.
                                                              They recognized that risk holders reside in both
     The move to collect, analyze, and produce risk           sectors; that advocacy, models, and information are
     information for current and future climates is           necessary for mitigating earthquake risk; that the
     gaining momentum among various actors at                 project could achieve its goals only by combining
     various levels, from the individual to the global.       funds from both sectors; and that the involvement
     One consequence of this trend is a growing need          of both sectors would lend the project credibility
     for all actors involved with risk to cooperate,          and momentum. GEM’s formal partners include
     communicate, and form partnerships across                13 private companies, 15 public organizations

     geographic, institutional, and disciplinary              representing nations, and 9 international

     boundaries. Fortunately, much progress has been          organizations. Various other associate participants
                                                              and organizational members of international
     made in this regard.
                                                              consortia also deliver global projects.
     The recognition that cooperation and partnership
                                                              One notable aspect of GEM as a public-private
     are crucial for building resiliency motivated the
                                                              partnership is its success in unifying diverse
     formation in 2010 of the Understanding Risk
                                                              perspectives under a common interest. The
     community, whose more than 3,000 members span
                                                              partnership works because both sectors seek
     the globe and include experts and practitioners
                                                              the same outcome: credible, accessible risk
     across many professions and disciplines (see box
                                                              information that is widely used and understood.
     2-11 for more detail). Information sharing is critical   At the same time, the two sectors have somewhat
     to this community, which meets every two years to        different focuses. Private sector partners generally
     discuss best practices and promising innovations         seek to reduce future financial losses (through
     in disaster risk assessment and to give members an       strict building codes and through open data that
     opportunity to build and strengthen partnerships         ensure common expectations of loss); to create
     and spur further innovations.                            new markets for insurance products (requiring
worldwide intercomparable loss data and accessible      Box 02—12  Willis Research Network
risk information); and to build customer demand         The Willis Research Network was launched in 2006 to better integrate
(through increased engagement among trusted             science, insurance, and resilience.(A) Starting with a partnership of seven UK
                                                        universities, the network has now grown to include more than 50 international
local experts and increased understanding of risk
                                                        research institutions, making the Willis Research Network one of the world’s
by the public). Public sector partners, including       largest collaborations between science and the financial sector.

nongovernmental organizations, seek to reduce           The network’s research program is organized across four pillars: economic
future casualties, economic loss, and disruptions       capital and enterprise risk management; natural hazard and risk; man-made
                                                        liability risks; and core technologies and methods. A focus on accurately
(through DRM and land-use policies and retrofitting
                                                        quantifying natural hazard risk is a priority for Willis Re and the insurance
of public buildings); to implement policy (requiring    sector as a whole, given that the solvency capital of most non-life insurance
                                                        companies is strongly influenced by their exposure to natural catastrophe risk.
broad awareness of risk and hence accessible data);
to base decisions on scientifically defensible hazard   Research supported by the network has resulted in hundreds of peer-reviewed
                                                        academic articles; it has also led to improved insurance sector models,
and risk estimates; and to reduce the need for
                                                        methodologies, and transactions that enable the financial market to better
post-disaster aid (requiring free, open information     understand and cover risk. Moreover, by openly sharing research findings,
                                                        the network has made it possible for other private and public institutions to
to support markets for financial risk transfer
                                                        improve their efforts to identify, evaluate, and manage disaster risk.
mechanisms and lower losses as a result of risk
                                                        The Willis Research Network’s principles and practices—its clear articulation
reduction).
                                                        of critical research requirements, its protection of academic and scientific
                                                        independence, and its recognition of the time frames consistent with academic
The perspectives and positions of the two sectors       achievement—explain its ability to catalyze improvements in risk assessment,
do not differ as widely as GEM’s founders initially     and exemplify the strengths of academic and private sector partnerships.

anticipated. In practice, differences in perspective    (A) The network was formed to support the academic and analysis focus of

varied within each sector as much as or more than       Willis Group Holdings.

they did across sectors.                                Source: Willis Research Network website (www.willisresearchnetwork.com),
                                                        ©Willis Group Holdings. Used with permission; further permission required for
                                                        reuse.
Yet another collaboration that aims to build better
risk information is the Willis Research Network,
which links more than 50 international research
institutions to the expertise of the financial and
insurance sector in order to support scientists’
quantification of natural hazard risk. More detail on
the network is in box 2-12. For an account of another
kind of collaboration—one in which scientists,
engineers, and developers of building codes
collaborated with officials in planning, governance,
and public service to promote a more earthquake-
resilient city—see the account of participatory
earthquake risk assessment in Dhaka in box 2-13.




                                                                                                                                        69
70
                                                                   PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




Box 02—13  Participatory Earthquake Risk Assessment in Dhaka

While Bangladesh can rightfully claim major accomplishments in flood and             project and assessed the collective progress toward achieving project goals.
cyclone risk reduction, its urban earthquake risk has not been adequately            Participants in the project were assigned to one of three groups depending
considered. Bangladesh lies on the seismically active northeastern Indian plate,     on their job and type of expertise: a focus group, an advisory committee, or
which is subject to moderate- to large-magnitude earthquakes. The nearest            a scientific consortium. Focus group members included representatives from
major fault line is believed to run less than 60km from the capital city of Dhaka.   key national and local organizations involved in planning or in developing
Research suggests that an earthquake of up to magnitude 7.5 is possible in the       and implementing construction codes; therefore their role involved engaging
area. Earthquake risk in Bangladesh is increasing with rapid and uncontrolled        in data collection, analysis, and validation. The advisory committee is made
urbanization, particularly in and around Dhaka, which with 26,000 residents per      up of policy makers and decision makers from various government and

square kilometer is one of the world’s densest cities.(A)                            nongovernment institutions who provide overall guidance and oversight to
                                                                                     project participants. The scientific consortium is made up of local experts
There has been no major earthquake in living memory, which has frustrated            in earthquake engineering, geology and geophysics, land use and regional
efforts to build consensus around the need to invest in measures to increase         planning, DRM, law and business administration, environmental management,
urban resilience to earthquake. Moreover, the governance of cities in                and other closely related fields; collectively they provide guidance on
Bangladesh, particularly Dhaka, is very complex. Responsibility for urban            scientific and technical matters.
planning, governance, and public service provision is spread out across many
                                                                                     Next steps include the development of multiyear process that will develop
different agencies. Agencies’ roles are not clear and often overlap. Moreover,
                                                                                     several decision-making tools for mitigating the impact of earthquake
political affiliations can affect capacity to implement policy and govern the
                                                                                     hazards by reducing structural and nonstructural vulnerability. Diverse
city. Thus any initiative intended to address Dhaka’s vulnerability to earthquake
                                                                                     working groups will mobilize resources and implement the project; existing
required engagement with multiple stakeholders and a common understanding
                                                                                     earthquake hazard and vulnerability data will be compiled; a uniform
of risk.
                                                                                     data platform will be developed; and an information, education, and
A participatory earthquake risk assessment over the last two years in                communication program will be established. Building on this foundation, the
Bangladesh(B) has successfully built consensus on disaster risk across               project will produce (a) an earthquake hazard, vulnerability, and risk analysis;

agencies, institutions, and technical experts in their pursuit of earthquake         (b) an assessment of legal and institutional arrangements; and (c) a guide to

risk reduction and is now being leveraged to develop specif ic investments           incorporating earthquake risk management into land-use planning.

to enhance urban resilience. The program has increased the collective
                                                                                     (A) Data are for Dhaka City Corporation; if the entire Dhaka Metropolitan Area
understanding of risk, promoted collaboration in identifying major disincentives
                                                                                     is taken into account, Dhaka’s population density is 13,500 residents per
for resilient development, supported planning for prevention, and has
                                                                                     square kilometer (World Bank 2012a).
gradually shifted the country toward a more proactive approach to resilient
development.                                                                         (B) The assessment is called the Bangladesh Earthquake Risk Mitigation
                                                                                     Program and is a World Bank program supported by the GFDRR.
A successful aspect of this program involved ensuring that stakeholders
from over 40 different agencies working in Dhaka guided each step of the             Source: Swarna Kazi (World Bank).
                                                                                                                                      CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                      02
Endnotes                                                        References
    12 A 100-year event represents something with a
<sup>            </sup>
                                                                Adams, B., and C. Huyck. 2006. “Remote Sensing
                                                                  Technologies for Disaster Emergency Response: A
probability of occurrence equal to 0.01 per year. In general,
                                                                  Review.” In Acceptable Risk Processes: Lifelines and
an X-year event has a 1/X probability of occurrence per
                                                                  Natural Hazards, edited by Craig E. Taylor and Erik
year. The number of years represented by X is termed the          Vanmarcke. New York: ASCE Publications.
“X-year return period.”
                                                                Allen, T. I., D. J. Wald, P. S. Earle, K. D. Marano, A. J. Hotovec,
    13 Information on the moment tensors for all earthquakes
<sup>                                </sup>
                                                                   K. Lin, and M. G. Hearne. 2009. “An Atlas of ShakeMaps
globally with moment magnitudes greater than 5 can be              and Population Exposure Catalog for Earthquake Loss
                                                                   Modeling.” Bulletin of Earthquake Engineering 7: 701–18.
obtained through the Global Centroid-Moment-Tensor
(CMT) Project (http://www.globalcmt.org). Best-track            ATC (Applied Technology Council). 1985. ATC-13: Earthquake
information for tropical cyclones includes the location           Damage Evaluation Data for California. Washington, DC:
(latitude and longitude), central pressure, and maximum           ATC.
sustained wind at six-hour intervals for all tropical
                                                                Bal, Ihsan Engin, Julian J. Bommer, Peter J. Stafford,
cyclones. A collection of these data from a variety of
                                                                  Helen Crowley, and Rui Pinho. 2010. “The Influence of
sources can be obtained from the IBTrACS archive (http://         Geographical Resolution of Urban Exposure Data in an
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/ibtracs/).                                      Earthquake Loss Model for Istanbul.” Earthquake Spectra
                                                                  26 (3): 619–34.
    14 For more on LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging), see
<sup>                     </sup>




                                                                Bhaduri, B., E. Bright, P. Coleman, and M. L. Urban. 2007.
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
                                                                  “LandScan USA: A High-resolution Geospatial and
website at http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/lidar.html.
                                                                  Temporal Modeling Approach for Population Distribution
                                                                  and Dynamics.” GeoJournal 69: 103–17.
    15 For more information, see Geoscience Australia, “New
<sup>            </sup>




Building Assessment Tool Supports Better Risk Analyis,”         Boyd, E., M. Levitan, and I. van Heerden. 2010.
February 12, 2014, http://www.ga.gov.au/about-us/                 “Improvements in Flood Fatality Estimation Techniques
news-media/news-2014/new-building-assessment-tool-                Based on Flood Depths.” In Wind Storm and Storm
                                                                  Surge Mitigation, edited by Nasim Uddin, 126–39. ADCE
supports-better-risk-analysis.html.
                                                                  Libraries. doi:10.1061/9780784410813.ch11.

    16 For a more in-depth discussion of how climate extremes
<sup>                     </sup>




                                                                Brinkman, Jan Jaap, and Marco Hartman. 2008. “Jakarta
may change in the future, see IPCC (2012).                         Flood Hazard Mapping Framework.”World Bank.
                                                                   (unpublished). http://www.hkv.nl/documenten/Jakarta_
    17 The discussion of exposure here draws heavily on two
<sup>   </sup>




                                                                   Flood_Hazard_Mapping_Framework_MH.pdf.
GAR15 input papers, both available at www.preventionweb.
                                                                Cardona, O. D., M. G. Ordaz, E. Reinoso, L. E. Yamin, and A.
net/gar: Massimiliano Pittore, Marc Wieland, and Kevin
                                                                  H. Barbat. 2012. “CAPRA–Comprehensive Approach to
Fleming, “From Remote Sensing to Crowdsourcing:
                                                                  Probabilistic Risk Assessment: International Initiative
Perspectives of a Global, Dynamic Exposure Model for              for Risk Management Effectiveness.” Proceedings of
Georisk Assessment” and Rashmin Gunasekera, Christoph             the 15th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering.
Aubrecht, Oscar Ishizawa, and Sergio Freire, “Global              Lisbon, Portugal. http://www.iitk.ac.in/nicee/wcee/
Exposure Modelling: An End-User Perspective.”                     article/WCEE2012_0726.pdf.

                                                                Chapman, K. 2012. “Community Mapping for Exposure in
    18 Many global exposure models make use of commercial
                                                                  Indonesia.” Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team. http://
<sup>                      </sup>




available data sets such as LandScan (http://web.ornl.gov/        hot.openstreetmap.org/sites/default/files/CM4E-Indo-
sci/landscan/) and as a result the final exposure model           en.pdf.
may not be completely open.
                                                                Chen, Keping, John McAneney, Russell Blong, Roy Leigh,
    19 This section provides an overview of the results in
<sup>                 </sup>
                                                                  Laraine Hunter, and Christina Magill. 2004. “Defining
                                                                  Area at Risk and Its Effect in Catastrophe Loss
Daniell (2014).
                                                                  Estimation: A Dasymetric Mapping Approach.” Applied
                                                                  Geography 24 (2): 97–117.
    20 This account of GEM’s institutional structure was
<sup>                               </sup>




provided by Helen Crowley, Nicole Keller, Sahar Safaie, and     Coburn, A., and R. Spence. 2002. Earthquake Protection.
Kate Stillwell of GEM.                                            Chichester, UK: Wiley.




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                            71
72
                                  PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES




     Coburn A. W., R. J. S. Spence, and A. Pomonis. 1992. “Factors       Literature Review towards a Roadmap.” Natural Hazards
       Determining Human Casualty Levels in Earthquakes:                 68 (1): 1–42.
       Mortality Prediction in Building Collapse.” Proceedings
       of the First International Forum on Earthquake-Related          GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
       Casualties. Madrid, Spain.                                        Recovery). 2011. “World Bank Distance Learning Natural
                                                                         Disaster Risk Management Program.” World Bank and
     Daniell, James, Alanna Simpson, Rick Murnane, Annegien              GFDRR. https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/
       Tijssen, Ariel Nunez, Vivien Deparday Rashmin                     publication/WB_Risk_Analysis.pdf.
       Gunasekera, Abigail Baca, Oscar Ishizawa, and Andreas
       Schäfer. 2014. Review of Open Source and Open Access            Griffin, J. G., H. Latief, W. Kongko, S. Harig, N. Horspool,
       Software Packages Available to Quantify Risk from                  R. Hanung, A. Rojali, N. Maher, L. Fountain, A. Fuchs, J.
       Natural Hazards. Washington, DC: World Bank and                    Hossen, S. Upi, S. E. Dewanto, and P. R. Cummins. 2012.
       Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery.`              “An Evaluation of Onshore Digital Elevation Models for
                                                                          Tsunami Inundation Modelling.” American Geophysical
     Daniell, J. E. 2009. “Open Source Procedure for Assessment           Union Fall Meeting Abstracts. http://fallmeeting.
       of Loss Using Global Earthquake Modelling (OPAL                    agu.org/2012/files/2012/12/Griffin-et-al-AGU-2012-
       Project).” CEDIM Earthquake Loss Estimation Series,                NH21C-1598.pdf.
       Research Report No. 09-01. CEDIM. Karlsruhe, Germany.
                                                                       Gunasekera, R., O. A. Ishizawa, C. Aubrecht, G. Pita, A.
     De Bono, A. 2013. “The Global Exposure Database for GAR             Pomonis, K. Fane, S. Murray, and B. Blankespoor. 2014.
       2013.” Background paper prepared for the 2013 Global              “Developing an Adaptive Exposure Model to Support
       Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR,             the Generation of Country Disaster Risk Profiles.”
       Geneva. www.preventionweb.net/gar.                                Geophysical Research Abstracts 16: EGU2014-16168.

     Dell’Acqua, F., P. Gamba, and K. Jaiswal. 2012. “Spatial          Haraguchi, Masahiko, and Upmanu Lall. 2013. “Flood Risks
       Aspects of Building and Population Exposure Data                  and Impacts: Future Research Questions and Implication
       and Their Implications for Global Earthquake Exposure             to Private Investment Decision-Making for Supply Chain
       Modeling.” Natural Hazards 68: 1291–1309.                         Networks.” Background Paper prepared for the 2013
                                                                         Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction,
     Dilley, M. 2005. Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk
                                                                         UNISDR, Geneva.
        Analysis. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                                                                       IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2012.
     Ehrlich, D., and P. Tenerelli. 2013. “Optical Satellite Imagery
                                                                          Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to
       for Quantifying Spatio-temporal Dimension of Physical
                                                                          Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A special report
       Exposure in Disaster Risk Assessments.” Natural
                                                                          of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental
       Hazards 68 (3): 1271–89.
                                                                          Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge and New York:
     Elsner, J. B., and T. H. Jagger. 2006. “Prediction Models for        Cambridge University Press.
        Annual U.S. Hurricane Counts.” Journal of Climate 19:
                                                                       Jaiswal, K. S., and D. J. Wald. 2010a. “Development of a
        2935–52.
                                                                          Semi-empirical Loss Model within the USGS Prompt
     Esch, T., M. Thiel, A. Schenk, A. Roth, A. Müller, and S. Dech.      Assessment of Global Earthquakes for Response
       2010. “Delineation of Urban Footprints from TerraSAR-X             (PAGER) System.” Proceedings of 9th US and 10th
       Data by Analyzing Speckle Characteristics and Intensity            Canadian Conference on Earthquake Engineering:
       Information.” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and                  Reaching Beyond Borders. Ottawa, Canada.
       Remote Sensing 48: 900–916.
                                                                       Jaiswal, Kishor, and David Wald. 2010b. “An Empirical Model
     European Commission. 2010. “Risk Assessment and                      for Global Earthquake Fatality Estimation.” Earthquake
       Mapping Guidelines for Disaster Management.”                       Spectra 26 (4): 1017–37.
       Commission Staff Working Paper, SEC(2010) 1626 final,
       European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.                         Jaiswal, K. S., D. J. Wald, and K. A. Porter. 2010. “A Global
                                                                          Building Inventory for Earthquake Loss Estimation and
     FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2002.                    Risk Management.” Earthquake Spectra 26 (3): 731–48.
       Rapid Visual Screening of Buildings for Potential Seismic
       Hazards: A Handbook. FEMA 154. 2nd ed. https://www.             Lavakare, Ajay, and Kenna Mawk. 2008. “Exposure
       fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/15212.                    Data Quality.” In The Review: A Guide to Catastrophe
                                                                         Modelling, 12–14. London: Informa. http://static.rms.
     Flay, S., and J. Nott. 2007. “Effect of ENSO on Queensland          com/email/documents/liferisks/collateral/a-guide-to-
        Seasonal Landfalling Tropical Cyclone Activity.”                 catastrophe-modeling-the-review.pdf.
        International Journal of Climatology 27: 1327–34.
        doi:10.1002/joc.1447.                                          Lu, X., E. Wetter, N. Bharti, A. J. Tatem, and L. Bengtsson.
                                                                          2013. “Approaching the Limit of Predictability in Human
     Geiß, C., and H. Taubenböck. 2013. “Remote Sensing                   Mobility.” Nature Scientific Reports 3: Article no. 2923.
       Contributing to Assess Earthquake Risk: From a                     doi:10.1038/srep02923.
                                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                    02
Martin-Ortega, J., and A. Markandya. 2009. “The Costs           UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2013.
  of Drought: The Exceptional 2007–2008 Case of                   “A Comparative Review of Country-level and Regional
  Barcelona.” Basque Centre for Climate Change, Bilbao,           Disaster Loss and Damage Databases.” Bureau for Crisis
  Spain.                                                          Prevention and Recovery, UNDP. http://www.undp.org/
                                                                  content/undp/en/home/librarypage/crisis-prevention-
McLaren, T. 2008. “MAEVIZ.” Presentation at EclipseCON,           and-recovery/loss-and-damage-database/.
  Santa Clara, CA, March 17–20.
                                                                UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction).
Mondal, P., and A. J. Tatem. 2012. “Uncertainties in              2009. UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction.
  Measuring Populations Potentially Impacted by Sea               Geneva: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/
  Level Rise and Coastal Flooding.” PloS ONE. doi:10.1371/        files/7817_UNISDRTerminologyEnglish.pdf.
  journal.pone.0048191.
                                                                ———. 2012. “Towards a Post-2015 Framework for Disaster
Müller, A., J. Reiter, and U. Weiland. 2011. “Assessment of       Risk Reduction.” http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/
  Urban Vulnerability towards Floods Using an Indicator-          publications/25129.
  based Approach: A Case Study for Santiago de Chile.”
  Natural Hazards and Earth System Science 11: 2107–23.         UN (United Nations) Statistical Division. 2008. Principles
                                                                  and Recommendations for Population and Housing
Peduzzi, P., H. Dao, C. Herold, and F. Mouton. 2009.              Censuses. New York: United Nations Publications.
  “Assessing Global Exposure and Vulnerability towards
  Natural Hazards: The Disaster Risk Index.” Natural            Van Westen, C. J. 2012. “Remote Sensing and GIS for
  Hazards and Earth System Science 9: 1149–59.                    Natural Hazards Assessment and Disaster Risk
                                                                  Management.” In Application of Space Technology for
Pesaresi, M., and M. Halkia. 2012. Global Human Settlement        Disaster Risk Reduction: International Training Course
  Layer Urban Atlas Integration: Feasibility Report.              Lecture Notes, 307–75. Dehradun, India: Indian Institute
  Luxembourg: Joint Research Centre European Union.               of Remote Sensing and Centre for Space Science and
                                                                  Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific.
Pittore, M., and M. Wieland. 2013. “Toward a Rapid
   Probabilistic Seismic Vulnerability Assessment Using         Wald, D. J., P. S. Earle, T. I. Allen, K. Jaiswal, K. Porter, and
   Satellite and Ground-based Remote Sensing.” Natural            M. Hearne. 2008. “Development of the US Geological
   Hazards 68: 1–31.                                              Survey’s PAGER System (Prompt Assessment of Global
                                                                  Earthquakes for Response).” Proceedings of the 14th
Potere, D., A. Schneider, S. Angel, and D. Civco. 2009.           World Conference on Earthquake Engineering. Beijing,
  “Mapping Urban Areas on a Global Scale: Which of                China.
  the Eight Maps Now Available Is More Accurate?”
  International Journal of Remote Sensing 30: 6531–58.          Wesolowski, A., C. O. Buckee, D. K. Pindolia, N. Eagle, D.
                                                                  L. Smith, A. J. Garcia, and A. J. Tatem. 2013. “The Use
Scawthorn, C. 1997. “Fires Following the Northridge and           of Census Migration Data to Approximate Human
  Kobe Earthquakes.” In Thirteenth Meeting of the UJNR            Movement Patterns across Temporal Scales.” PLoS ONE.
  Panel on Fire Research and Safety, March 13-20, 1996,           doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052971.
  vol. 2, edited by K. A. Beall, 325–35. NISTIR 6030.
  National Institute of Standards and Technology.               World Bank. 2012a. Bangladesh: Towards Accelerated,
                                                                  Inclusive, and Sustainable Growth—Opportunities and
Spence, Robin, Julian Bommer, Domenico Del Re, Juliet             Challenges. Vol. 2. Washington, DC: Poverty Reduction
  Bird, Nuray Aydinog Lu, and Shigeko Tabuchi. 2003.              and Economic Management Sector Unit, South Asia
  “Comparing Loss Estimation with Observed Damage: A              Region, World Bank.
  Study of the 1999 Kocaeli Earthquake in Turkey.” Bulletin
  of Earthquake Engineering 1: 83–113.                          ———. 2012b. “Thai Flood 2011: Rapid Assessment for
                                                                  Resilient Recovery and Reconstruction Planning.” World
Taubenböck, H., T. Esch, A. Felbier, M. Wiesner, A. Roth, and     Bank, Washington, DC.
  S. Dech, S. 2012. “Monitoring Urbanization in Mega Cities
  from Space.” Remote Sensing of Environment 117: 162–76.       Wu, M. C., W. L. Chang, and W. M. Leung. 2004. “Impacts of
                                                                  El Niño–Southern Oscillation Events on Tropical Cyclone
Trésor-Economics. 2012. “The Impact of Japan’s Earthquake         Landfalling Activity in the Western North Pacific.” Journal
   on the Global Economy.” No. 100. April. http://www.            of Climate 17: 1419–28. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/1520-
   tresor.economie.gouv.fr/File/371985.                           0442(2004)017<1419:IOENOE>2.0.CO;2.

Tsuji, Y., H. Matsutomi, F. Imamura, M. Takeo, Y. Kawata, M.    Wyss, M., S. Tolis, P. Rosset, and F. Pacchiani. 2013.
   Matsuyama, T. Takahashi, and P. Harjadi. 1995. “Damage         “Approximate Model for Worldwide Building Stock in
   to Coastal Villages Due to the 1992 Flores Island              Three Size Categories of Settlements.” Background
   Earthquake Tsunami.” Pure and Applied Geophysics 144           paper prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report
   (3): 481–524.                                                  on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR, Geneva.




PROGRESS, ACHIEVEMENTS, & REMAINING CHALLENGES
                                                                                                                                          73
74
     ﻿
                                                                                                           CHAPTER


                                                                                                           03
U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




CASE STUDIES
Highlighting Emerging
Best Practices



D    emonstrated success is one of the best ways
     to illustrate the benefits associated with
risk assessment and show how emerging efforts
                                                    are roughly grouped into those focused on data;
                                                    those focused on modelling; those that describe
                                                    specific risk assessment projects; those that focus
can contribute to further success. This section     on participation, collaboration, and communication;
reviews a variety of case studies describing        and those that address the future of risk. Given
ongoing and emerging open efforts that support      that many case studies speak to some or all of these
risk assessments and successful examples of         aspects, however, there is a fair amount of overlap
completed risk assessments. The contributions       across categories.




Case Study Color Key
         Data for Risk
         Modelling Developments
         Risk Assessment Case Studies
         Participation, Collaboration, and Communication
         Future of Risk




                                                                                                                 75
76
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     3-1. Open Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI)
     	
     John Crowley, Vivien Deparday (GFDRR); Robert Soden, Abigail Baca,
     Ariel Nunez (World Bank)


     Risk assessments never start from a blank slate;        partnership of institutions that was launched by
     instead they build on existing data, analysis, and      the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
     historical experience. All too frequently, the data     Recovery (GFDRR) and the World Bank in 2010,
     sets that are required are incomplete, out-of-date,     and designed to make data available to those who
     and ill-suited to the analysis required. Moreover,      need information about disaster risks in order to
     data are often in forms that prevent them from          make decisions. OpenDRI offers governments and
     being shared widely, and they therefore remain
                                                             their partners a process for cataloging their existing
     latent and inaccessible (even across ministries and
                                                             stocks of data and placing certain types of data
     municipalities within the same country). Some
                                                             under open licenses that still enable ministries to
     are blocked by technologies that lock data into
                                                             retain stewardship. The initiative also offers an
     proprietary ecosystems. Most are stoppered by
     policies that prevent release beyond small groups or
     are simply fragmented into bureaucratic silos that
     require significant investment to assemble back into
     a whole picture.

     Yet even fusing these existing data stocks into
     a usable form is not enough, as the data need to
     capture a dynamic reality. Rapid urbanization,                                  CARIBBEAN GEONODES
     population growth, and increasingly climate change                              http://www.dominode.net/
     mean that the analysis of the potential impacts of                                      http://haitidata.org/
     natural hazards needs to updated more frequently                             http://geonode.data.gove.ag/
     and at higher resolutions than ever before. In a time                                http://sling.gosl.gov.lc/
     of economic hardship and unequal globalization,
     few governments possess the resources to collate
     existing data or collect new data, or to analyze data
                                                                                            COLUMBIA
     and communicate the results to decision makers
                                                                     http://geonode.columbiassh.org/
     able to implement projects that get ahead of the
     disaster cycle.

     Because individual governments may not currently                                                  BOLIVIA
     have the capacity to take on this work, however,                   http://geosinager.defensacivil.gob.bo/
     does not mean that it cannot be accomplished.
     The task of stewarding data about shared risks
     should be understood as a collective effort, one
     engaging governments, civil society, industry, and
     individuals. That understanding is behind the Open
     Data for Resilience Initiative (OpenDRI), a growing
                                                                                                                        CHAPTER


                                                                                                                         03
inexpensive method of engaging at-risk communities              practices in the service of more effective disaster
in the process of mapping about their changing                  risk management (DRM) and climate change
exposure to natural hazards. Finally, it offers a way           adaptation.
to build ecosystems of entrepreneurs, researchers,
and international institutions around data that a               OpenDRI projects offer a menu of approaches for

nation manages for itself.                                      building and using risk data and information:

The OpenDRI approach to managing risk data.                     •	 Collation and sharing of data and
Since 2010, the GFDRR has worked with the World                     information through open geospatial
Bank to implement OpenDRI in over 20 countries,                     catalogs. Here local partners are supported to
including Indonesia, Haiti, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and                   identify, prepare, and release existing hazard,
Malawi. The program is designed to build the                        exposure, and risk data via an online geospatial
necessary data for quantifying and mapping risk                     catalog. Recognizing a need to move away from
and for communicating the results to a wide range                   proprietary software platforms, GFDRR and
of decision makers at various levels, from national                 the World Bank have been active in leading and
to community. The OpenDRI team works with                           developing the open source platform GeoNode
governments to harness the value of open data                       (http://geonode.org/), which provides tools that



                                                                                                                       Figure 03—1 
                                                                                                                       Examples of locations
                                                                                                                       of GeoNodes
                                                                                                                       supported by
                                                                                                                       the World Bank
                                          KYRGYZSTAN                                                                   and GFDRR.
                                     http://geonode.caiag.kg/
                                                                                                                       Source: World Bank and
                                                                                                                       GFDRR.

                                                    PAKISTAN
                       HORN OF AFRICA               http://disasterinfo.gov.pk/
                     http://horn.rcmrd.org/



                                                SRI LANKA            TYPHOON YOLANDA
                                              http://riskinfo.lk/    http://yolandadata.org/
                MALAWI
http://www.masdap.mw/           MOZAMBIQUE
                                http://moz.adapt.org/

                                                                                            PACIFIC
                                                                              http://paris.sopac.org/




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                     77
78
 Box 03—1  Typhoon Yolanda GeoNode: An Example of the                                  allow users to upload, visualize, and share data as
 Collaborative Effort Possible under OpenDRI                                           well as simply produce maps. The platform also
                                                                                       enables clients to federate multiple GeoNodes so
 Super Typhoon Yolanda (international name Haiyan), with 305km/hr sustained
                                                                                       that each ministry can retain custody of the data
 winds and 6m storm surge, made landfall in Guiuan (central Philippines)
                                                                                       and choose which data sets are made available
 in November 2013 as one of the strongest cyclones on record. Yolanda
 subsequently made landfall on four more islands before heading back to sea
                                                                                       through open licenses. Figure 3-1 highlights
 and weakening into a tropical storm, eventually dissipating over China.               GeoNodes supported by GFDRR and the World
                                                                                       Bank. 
 Damage across the central Philippines was severe. UN agencies estimate that
 approximately 11 million people were displaced and over 6,200 killed. Entire       •	 Collection of exposure data with
 sections of cities were leveled by wind and water. Understanding the extent           participatory mapping. Participatory mapping,
 and magnitude of the damage was core to both the response effort and the              also known as crowdsourcing and volunteer
 planning for recovery and reconstruction.
                                                                                       geospatial information, provides a way for
 Working together, the geographic information system (GIS) team from the               countries and cities to create fundamental data
 American Red Cross’s International Department and the team from the GFDRR             on their infrastructure, including attributes
 Labs set up a GeoNode data catalog to collect all geospatial data that were           such as building vintage, construction materials,
 technically and legally open. Over the course of three weeks, the Yolanda             elevation, use, and number of stories—
 GeoNode team collected over 72 layers of geospatial data, including damage
                                                                                       information critical for quantifying risk. Here
 assessments performed by the EU Joint Research Centre, UNOSAT, the U.S.
                                                                                       support is provided to communities and
 National Geospatial Intelligence, and the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap team.
                                                                                       governments to build this asset database from
 The GeoNode also hosted hundreds of situation reports and PDFs from the
 Red Cross and United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
                                                                                       the bottom up, by (for example) collecting data
 Affairs (OCHA), many of which contained geospatial data. Importantly, the             through open platforms like OpenStreetMap
 GeoNode also collated data from collective efforts of the OSM community,              (OSM; described in box 1-2 above). Under this
 which made over 4.5 million edits from 1,600 mappers working from 82                  approach OpenDRI has sought to build the
 countries.                                                                            capacity of national OSM chapters and train them
                                                                                       to collect data about the exposure of the built
 A technical team—BoundlessGeo and LMN Solutions, working under the U.S.
 Army Corps of Engineers—developed a technique to extract footprints of                environment to natural hazards. OpenDRI has
 damaged buildings from these OSM data, placed them under version control              supported the collection of data on millions of
 in a tool called GeoGit, and made daily snapshots available. In the process, the      buildings during its programs.
 technical team prototyped new approaches to tracking the growing volumes
 of damage assessment data generated by the OSM community. This technique           •	 Catalyzing open data ecosystems. The
 will continue to be explored for future efforts.                                      development of a community around DRM data
                                                                                       is critical for fostering information sharing,
 The Yolanda GeoNode is an example of a GeoNode for a specific event.
                                                                                       providing training, and creating the network of
 This approach can be used to make specific subsets of data available to
                                                                                       decision makers who apply data to understanding
 a community that needs them to support the specialized use cases of
 response operations and recovery planning. Over the long term, the data in            their risks from natural hazards and climate
 event GeoNodes can be rolled back into national GeoNodes or databases,                change. This work includes establishing a
 allowing agencies to curate data for their general operations. This scenario          community of technologists and organizers
 recently played out with haitidata.org, which has been transferred to national        who build applications and tools using risk data
 government ownership.                                                                 at “hackathons”—such as the 2014 Code for
                                                                                       Resilience, which builds on previous Random
 Information hosted on GeoNode, in combination with hazard and exposure
 data produced in the last 10 years, including a high-resolution risk assessment       Hacks of Kindness activities.21 Moreover, there is
 for disaster risk and financing purposes produced in 2013, is now being used to       a realization that the OpenDRI program requires
 inform recovery and reconstruction in the Philippines.                                many actors all striving toward a collective vision
                                                                                       and goal, so efforts to engage with a wide range
 Additional information is available at Yolanda GeoNode, http://yolandadata.
 org; OpenStreetMap Yolanda, http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/; Typhoon_
 Haiyan, GeoGit Version Control for GeoData: http://geogit.org/.
      of public, private, and academic stakeholders         to make money (or gain other benefits) from it. (The
      to meet collective challenges—for example,            loss of revenue when data are shared is a concern
      improving access to appropriate-resolution            not only for governments, but also for the small GIS
      digital elevation models—are a fundamental part       consultancies that make a living selling their data to
      of this program.                                      local, provincial, and national government officials.)

•	 Creating tools for communication of risk. It             Risk assessment and the need for data about
      has long been recognized that the communication       potential disasters represent an easier entry point
      of risk results to different users is a significant   into discussions about open data than many other
      challenge in the global effort and one that has       thematic areas (such as budget accountability),
      received insufficient attention. Support to the       because there are often more champions where
      development of InaSAFE (described in section          disasters are concerned, and it is easier to appeal to
      3-22) is one example of efforts to overcome           stakeholders' altruism. This ongoing work is rarely
      this challenge.                                       easy or straightforward. Opening data for wider use
                                                            can raise fears, create uncertainty, and break power
Box 3-1 offers an example of the collaborative effort
                                                            structures that control data flows. For this reason,
possible under OpenDRI—specifically, the efforts
                                                            OpenDRI works to empower local champions and
mobilized in the aftermath of Typhoon Yolanda
                                                            help them build a community of leaders to advance
(Haiyan).
                                                            the principles of open data, which in turn contribute
  Challenges remain. Many governments have
///                       ///
                                                            to making societies more resilient. An OpenDRI
worked with partners to aggregate and centralize            field guide (GFDRR 2014), which captures the
some portion of the data that they generate through         experiences and lessons learned over four years of
comprehensive stock takings. However, these efforts         implementation and provides a practical guide for
have often failed or faltered, generally because            other partners, was launched in March 2014. Section
governments perceive that sharing data means                3-2 offers a case study of the local application of
giving up control over it and losing the opportunity        OpenDRI.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     79
80
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     3-2. Open Cities: Application of the Open Data for
     Resilience Initiative in South Asia and the Lessons
     Learned22
     Robert Soden, Nama Raj Budhathoki, Marc Forni (World Bank); Vivien Deparday
     (GFDRR)


     South Asia is one of the most rapidly urbanizing        exposed assets, which are expressed in monetary
     regions in the world. Growing populations,              terms. These data are insufficient for driving
     unplanned settlements, and unsafe building              specific investments to reduce disaster risk, because
     practices all increase disaster risk in the region.     individual assets are typically not accurately located,
     As urban populations and vulnerability grow,            described, and valued. By contrast, the Open Cities
     promoting urban growth that is resilient to natural     platform engages local expertise and stakeholders
     hazards and the impacts of climate change becomes       in identifying all building structures in a city and
     an ever-greater challenge.                              assigning vulnerability attributes to each. In this
                                                             way, a risk assessment that identifies particular
     The Open Cities project constitutes one effort
                                                             structures at risk can be completed. An assessment
     to meet this challenge. Launched by the World
                                                             with this degree of precision is able to identify
     Bank and the GFDRR in November 2012, it aims
                                                             structures based on importance and risk level, and
     to create open data ecosystems that will facilitate
                                                             can therefore guide plans to reduce disaster and
     data-driven urban planning and DRM in South
                                                             climate risk through physical investments.
     Asian cities and builds on the practices and tools
     developed under OpenDRI. Open Cities has                  Drawing upon experiences from Haiti and
                                                             ///




     brought together stakeholders from government,          Indonesia. Open Cities was inspired by two
                                                                         ///




     donor agencies, the private sector, universities, and   other projects involving community mapping,
     civil society groups to create usable information       the OpenStreetMap response to the 2010 Haiti
     through community mapping, build applications and       earthquake (described in section 3-3) and the
     tools to inform decision making, and develop the        Community Mapping for Exposure effort by the
     networks of trust and social capital necessary for      Australian and Indonesian governments (described
     these efforts to become sustainable. This process       below in section 3-4). Like these efforts, Open
     has been evolutionary, with opportunities for           Cities made use of the OSM platform to harness
     experimentation, learning, failure, and adaptation      the power of crowd and community to create
     incorporated into the project planning.                 accurate and up-to-date spatial data about the
                                                             location and characteristics of the built and natural
     Open Cities approaches risk assessment differently      environments.
     from catastrophic risk modelling firms, whose data
     are typically used by the insurance industry or for     Using lessons learned from these projects in Haiti
     specific portfolio analysis. Professional assessments   and Indonesia, Open Cities employs a scalable
     often involve computationally intensive modelling       approach to understanding urban challenges and
     analysis, but they also tend to rely on statistical     disaster risk in South Asian cities. Three cities were
     representations, proxies, or estimations of the         chosen for the initial work: Batticaloa, Sri Lanka;
                                                                                                                     CHAPTER


                                                                                                                     03
Dhaka, Bangladesh; and Kathmandu, Nepal. These             establish the close collaboration needed to carry
cities were chosen for their high levels of disaster       out the actual mapping. But they were also meant
risk, the presence of World Bank activities related        to ensure local understanding of and trust in the
to urban planning and disaster management that             mapping process and in the data produced, so as to
would benefit from access to better data, and              encourage local authorities to use the tools and data
the willingness of government counterparts to              for their own DRM and urban planning projects.
participate in, and help guide, the interventions.
Open Cities has sought to support the creation             A team of four technical experts (three recent GIS

of new data in each of these projects, but has             and IT graduates and one experienced GIS analyst)

also supported broader ecosystems of open data             was hired and trained in OSM techniques in order

production and use in the three cities. Leveraging         to supervise and support the overall mapping

data to improve urban planning and DRM decisions           process. Team members worked directly with the
requires not just high-quality information, but also       staff from local partners, including the Batticaloa
the requisite tools, skills, and willingness to commit     Municipal Council, the Batticaloa District, the
to a data-driven decision-making process. With             Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat, and the
this in mind, Open Cities also sought to develop           48 Grama Niladhari that make up the Manmunai
partnerships across government ministries, donor           North Divisional Secretariat. A small group began
agencies, universities, private sector technology          by tracing all building outlines into OSM using
groups, and civil society organizations to ensure          satellite imagery and then added landmarks, roads
broad acceptance of the data produced, facilitate          and road names, and points of interests using local
data usage, and align investments in risk reduction        paper maps provided by the divisional secretariat.
across projects and sectors. With the first phase of       This effort created a solid reference map for the
Open Cities complete in each of the projects, these        surveying work. The work was then split into two
partnerships will be critical for continuing the work      components: buildings were surveyed by 48 recent
and expanding into new cities in the region.               graduates hired to work on the Grama Niladhari
                                                           local planning and development, and surveyed data
  Case study: Batticaloa, Sri Lanka. Batticaloa, a
///                                      ///




                                                           were entered by government workers who were
major city in Sri Lanka’s Eastern Province severely        also responsible for fixing the maps and refining
affected by the Sri Lankan civil war and the 2004          the point of interests. Both groups were trained in
Indian Ocean tsunami, is located in a hazard-              OSM and surveying techniques by the Open Cities
prone area that has suffered near-annual droughts,         team, and all the staff involved in the data collection
floods, and cyclones. Some limited hazard maps
                                                           received a stipend for the extra work.
were available for the area, but no detailed digital
geographic data of the built environment were              Data on basic characteristics (number of floors,
available for use in risk studies or for informing         usage, and construction materials of walls and
potential infrastructure and risk mitigation projects.     roof) were collected for all 30,000 buildings in the
To fill this gap, Open Cities started a pilot project to   area. These data are now freely available in OSM
map the building stock, including critical assets of       and in the government geospatial data-sharing
the Manmunai North Divisional Secretariat, which           platform RiskInfo (www.riskinfo.lk) for easy use
covers an area of 68km and includes about 90,000
                        2                                  by many stakeholders. To publicize the benefits of
people around the town of Batticaloa. The work             these techniques at the national level and promote
began with a series of meetings with the Batticaloa        their adoption, high-level managers of the relevant
local authorities. In part, these were designed to         national agencies were briefed regularly and given




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                           81
82
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     final results when available. Two week-long training      to the public—directly into OSM. This allowed the
     courses, one dealing with OSM techniques and              mapping team to focus on field surveying, in which
     the other with use of data for decision making            basic characteristics, such as building height, usage,
     (specifically the combination of data with existing       construction materials, and age were collected
     hazard maps through GIS tools and the InaSAFE             through visual survey of each building. The team
     tool) were conducted at the national level with all       also mapped road characteristics (width and surface
     relevant national agencies. Discussions are ongoing       type) along with important water and sanitation
     with various ministries concerning the next phase         infrastructure. The data were added to OSM during
     of the project. There is a strong interest in scaling     times when conditions prohibited field surveys (e.g.,
     up the project to cover a greater geographic area         poor weather conditions). Two weeks of training at
     and in streamlining the use of the data in more DRM       the beginning of the project and a final two weeks of
     applications and sectors.                                 data entry and quality assessment at the end of the
                                                               project left two months in the middle for fieldwork.
       Case study: Dhaka, Bangladesh. Dhaka's Old
                                                               During this period, the team was able to finish
     ///                                    ///




     City is a crowded and complex area of immense
                                                               complete maps of the three wards.
     historical value and an important locus of social and
     economic activity. In consultation with Dhaka Water       In total, 8,500 buildings, 540 of which were deemed
     and Sanitation, seismic risk experts from Bangladesh      to have historical significance, were surveyed.
     University of Engineering and Technology (BUET),          Sections of roads measuring 43km and drainage
     and a local nongovernmental organization (NGO)            works measuring over 50km were also assessed. This
     working on heritage preservation and restoration          information is now available to the public through
     in Old Dhaka, the Dhaka Open Cities pilot sought          the OSM platform. Several training courses and
     to create detailed maps of three of the Old City's 15     presentations on OSM were also given to university
     wards. These maps would provide data useful for           students, government partners, and private sector
     planning evacuation routes, managing water and            technology companies during the project period
     sanitation infrastructure, and understanding the          in order to help the OSM community in Dhaka
     location and characteristics of heritage buildings. In    grow. The results of the pilot were presented to the
     partnership with BUET, which provided technical           government and other key stakeholders in December
     support and a working space, 20 engineering and           2013. Consultations are ongoing concerning the next
     planning undergraduates were hired as mappers and         phase of the project.
     were trained in a series of workshops over a three-
                                                                 Case study: Kathmandu, Nepal. Kathmandu,
     month period. A local nonprofit GIS consulting
                                                               ///                                   ///




                                                               the capital city of Nepal, has very high potential
     organization, CEGIS, was contracted with to provide
                                                               for significant loss of human life during a major
     management and quality control for the work. The
                                                               earthquake event.23 In November 2012, in
     Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT), a
                                                               partnership with the government of Nepal, the
     nonprofit specializing in the use of OpenStreetMap
                                                               World Bank and GFDRR launched a project to
     in development and humanitarian relief situations,
                                                               build seismic resilience in the Kathmandu Valley’s
     also provided training and technical oversight to
                                                               education and health infrastructure, in part by
     the project.
                                                               creating a disaster risk model to determine the
     The effort began by importing building footprint          relative vulnerability of the relevant buildings.
     data for the three wards—created by CEGIS as part         Once complete, the model will be used to prioritize
     of a different project but until that point unavailable   plans for retrofits of schools and health facilities
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                                                                  03
to improve structural integrity in the face of          made substantial contributions to the OSM project
earthquake. However, a critical input into this model   in Kathmandu, suggesting the opportunities for
is building-related exposure data.                      partnerships between development organizations.
                                                        A local NGO called the Kathmandu Living Labs,
World Bank staff and consultants began the year-
                                                        staffed by participants in the first phase of the Open
long project by assembling a team of mappers and
                                                        Cities project, has been created in order to continue
community mobilizers. The team was responsible
                                                        the work.
for a variety of tasks, from field surveying to
software development to training of community           Lessons learned and recommendations.
groups in OSM. The core team comprised six              Although the Open Cities project is ongoing, several
graduates of Kathmandu University who were              key lessons have already emerged that can be
recruited based on their prior contribution to          applied to other initiatives.
Nepal’s then-nascent OSM community. They were
                                                        1.	 Government ownership is important.
paid full-time salaries at rates commensurate with
                                                           ///                                             ///




the local salary structure for recent graduates in      Although many Open Cities partners and
technical disciplines. The project also recruited six   participants will be from civil society and the private
part-time interns from Kathmandu University and         sector, government counterparts in line ministries
11 volunteers from Tribhuvan University. Office         must be involved in projects’ development and
space for the team provided access to meeting           execution. Engaging governments early in the
rooms, reliable Internet service, and opportunities     planning process and ensuring close involvement
to interact with other technologists and                throughout is an essential component of a successful
entrepreneurs, some of whom later became active         Open Cities project. Governments are primary
in OpenStreetMap.                                       stakeholders for many DRM and urban planning
                                                        projects and provide necessary legitimacy to Open
Open Cities Kathmandu surveyed 2,256 schools
                                                        Cities work. In Kathmandu, the involvement of
and 350 health facilities in the Kathmandu Valley.
                                                        the Department of Education in the mapping work
In addition to collecting a comprehensive list of
                                                        will be critical for developing the department’s
structural data for health and school facilities, the
                                                        confidence in and use of the data to prioritize
team worked to create a comprehensive base map of
                                                        seismic retrofitting activities. An official letter in
the valley by digitizing building footprints, mapping
                                                        support of the project carried by mapping team
the road network, and collecting information on
                                                        members helped them gain the access to schools and
other major points of interest. The Open Cities team
                                                        health facilities that was needed for conducting their
also conducted significant outreach to universities,
technical communities, and government in order          assessments. In Sri Lanka, the project deliberately

to expand the OSM community. Over 2,300                 involved local authorities directly in the mapping

individuals participated in OSM trainings or            activities as a way to ensure government ownership

presentations during the first year of the project.     of the project and the use of the data in various

The data have been used in plans to retrofit            applications.

school and health facilities and in applications
                                                        2.	 Universities make good partners.
                                                           ///                                       ///




for transportation planning; moreover, the U.S.
Agency for International Development (USAID) has        Universities have been valuable allies during
incorporated the data into disaster preparedness        the first year of Open Cities work. Outreach to
planning exercises. The American Red Cross has also     university departments of engineering, geography,




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                        83
84
     computer science, and planning has provided
     projects with critical connections and support. In
     Dhaka and Kathmandu, university students have
     played an important role in mapping activities and
     software development. Students from technical
     departments tend to learn OSM quickly, and some
     students in Kathmandu fulfilled a requirement to
     complete internships or volunteer projects through
     participating in Open Cities. University faculty have
     also provided useful support. In Dhaka, professors
     from the BUET Civil Engineering Department
     and Planning Department contributed to the
     design of the mapping project. Professors in the
     Geomatics Department at Kathmandu University
     provided guidance to the project on quality control
     techniques for surveying, and they also incorporated
     OSM into their courses. Training future classes of
     university students will help the OSM community
     in Kathmandu continue to grow after the formal
     project period has ended.

     3.	 Access to imagery is critical.
        ///                              ///




     As the work of Haiti’s OSM community made
     clear, access to high-resolution satellite imagery      4.	 Data must be trustworthy and credible.
                                                                ///                                              ///




     is extremely useful for efficient mapping of
                                                             Data quality is a frequently raised issue in
     infrastructure. However, such imagery is often
                                                             community and volunteer mapping projects.
     prohibitively expensive or available only under
     licenses that prohibit digitization by the public.      Numerous measures were taken by the Open
     With this in mind, the U.S. State Department's          Cities project to ensure that partners and intended
     Humanitarian Information Unit launched an               users of the data would trust the data’s accuracy
     initiative in 2012 called Imagery to the Crowd,         and completeness. In Kathmandu, partner
     which makes high-resolution imagery owned by
                                                             organizations—including the National Society for
     the U.S. government accessible to humanitarian
                                                             Earthquake Technology, a respected NGO working
     organizations and the volunteer communities that
     support them. Open Cities Kathmandu partnered           on seismic resilience, and the Kathmandu University
     with USAID and Imagery to the Crowd to release          Geomatics Department—provided technical
     2012 satellite photography for the Kathmandu            guidance to the project as well as independent
     Valley and to organize volunteers in Nepal, the         quality assessments throughout the process to
     United Kingdom, Germany, and the United States
                                                             provide credibility. In Dhaka, key stakeholders,
     to digitize building footprints. The data created by
                                                             including BUET and representatives of government
     these volunteers have been incorporated into USAID
     disaster response planning, and they provided           and civil society, were consulted throughout the
     a solid foundation upon which the Nepali OSM            project, and many were given basic training in OSM
     community can continue to expand and improve.           in order to familiarize them with the platform.
                                                                                                              CHAPTER


                                                                                                              03




5.	 Sustained engagement is required
   ///
                                                       to contribute to cultural and policy shifts within
   for success. ///
                                                       technical groups and government that will prioritize
                                                       open data and broad participation in development
For these projects to be successful, sustained
                                                       challenges. When projects of this kind are planned,
engagement with local partners is necessary. Too
                                                       the parties involved must understand and commit to
often technology and data projects of this sort are
                                                       sustained investment in their success.
discrete and short-term endeavors. A workshop or
a weeklong training course is simply not enough        In its early phase, Open Cities has demonstrated
time to trigger the kinds of change that Open Cities
                                                       success in engaging nontraditional institutions and
hopes to support. Although OSM makes mapping
                                                       community groups in the process of creating high-
more accessible to nonspecialists, collecting and
                                                       resolution spatial data that can be used in support
interacting with geographic information remains a
                                                       of urban planning and resilience-building programs.
complex technical undertaking, one that requires
                                                       There is still work to be done to establish direct
more training and involves a longer learning
                                                       links between the OSM data set and target users
process than is often assumed. It also takes time
to build technical communities of OSM mappers          in and out of government, but the initial reception

and software developers who are familiar enough        has been positive, and there is strong interest from
with the platform to comfortably deploy it in their    a number of other development institutions in
own tools and applications—and creating these          learning from the early experience and in partnering
communities is an important part of sustaining         on future work. In the future, Open Cities will also
Open Cities projects. Finally, Open Cities seeks       seek to scale through expansion of the range of




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                    85
86
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     3-3. Preliminary Survey of Government Engagement with
     	
     Volunteered Geographic Information
     Muki Haklay (University College London), Sofia Basiouka (National Technical
     University of Athens), Vyron Antoniou (Hellenic Military Geographical Service),
     Robert Soden (GFDRR)


     When data and information are shared and part           •	 Designing strategies to encourage governments
     of open systems, they promote transparency and                to engage with VGI efforts is not straightforward,
     accountability, and ensure that a wide range of               and we are still learning from early experience
     actors can participate in the challenge of building           what opportunities exist and what methodologies
     resilience. Arguably, one of the greatest revolutions         work well.
     in this open data space has been the increasingly
                                                             The survey project focuses on cases that
     active involvement of local people in geospatial data
                                                             demonstrate a synergy between government and
     collection and maintenance—a process known as
                                                             citizens or civic society organizations. “Synergy”
     volunteered geographic information (VGI).
                                                             means a government authority’s clear use of
     A preliminary survey of government engagement           contributed information to make decisions and take
     with VGI was undertaken in order to strengthen          actions. Four case studies are highlighted: Canada’s
     governmental projects that incorporate voluntary        interaction with OSM, Haiti’s interaction with the
     and crowdsourced data collection and to provide         Humanitarian OSM Team, Indonesia’s experience
     information that can support wider adoption of VGI.     with community mapping, and the U.S. State
     The survey compiles and distributes lessons learned     Department’s interaction with HOT.
     and successful models from efforts by governments
                                                               Canada. In Canada, the main duty of National
                                                             ///         ///




     at different levels. The survey project began from
                                                             Mapping Agencies is to provide up-to-date
     the following premises:
                                                             topographical maps and a range of spatial products
     •	 Sources of VGI data such as OpenStreetMap are        to public and private sector. Likewise, the role

        growing increasingly important across a range of     of the Mapping Information Branch at Natural

        thematic areas and user communities.                 Resources Canada is to provide accurate geographic
                                                             information on landmass at the scale of 1:50,000.
     •	 Concerns about the quality, consistency, and         This task involves regularly covering an area of 10
        completeness of VGI data have been assessed by       million km2 divided into 13,200 map sheets.
        a range of studies and overall have been found
                                                             Taking into account the results of ongoing research
        not serious enough to prevent exploration of VGI
                                                             regarding VGI quality, Canadian authorities choose
        data as a valuable data source.
                                                             to cooperate with the OSM community to see if
     •	 For governments, interacting with VGI                and how the updating process could profit from the
        communities is different and potentially more        evolution of VGI. As Beaulieu, Begin, and Genest
        complex then interacting with typical sellers and    (2010) describe, the first step to this synergy was
        resellers of GIS data.                               made by the Centre for Topographic Information in
Sherbrooke, which released the digital topographic       and effort on areas with identified changes. Given     Figure 03—2 
map of Canada in the native .osm format. This            that the authoritative database had failed to update   Change detection
move enabled further integration of the Canadian         all the originally designed spatial entities, this     using OSM.
authoritative data into OSM and gave the OSM             contribution is valuable.
                                                                                                                Source: Beaulieu, Begin, and
community a chance to interact with—that is,                                                                    Genest 2010.
                                                         Engaging with OSM has also presented challenges.
complete, correct, or update—the authoritative data.
                                                         Among the issues that must be addressed are the        Note: Gray = OSM road
In addition, authorities are now able to regularly
                                                         imperfect compatibility of the two data sets (in       network; green = data
compare the OSM database with the original data                                                                 missing from OSM; red
                                                         terms of semantics and attribution), the virtual
to pinpoint the differences (figure 3-2). Those                                                                 = data missing from
                                                         nonexistence of metadata for OSM data, and the         authoritative data.
differences are treated as potential changes and are
                                                         differences in coverage (OSM is concentrated in
verified using the authoritative channel at the field.
                                                         urban areas compared to the uniform authoritative
Verified changes are propagated to the authoritative
                                                         coverage). All these differences stem from the
database.
                                                         differences in the two geographic information–
On the positive side, the titanic work of keeping the    generating processes—that is, the bottom-up
data sets up-to-date has been facilitated by the OSM     and looser OSM process versus the top-down
community. Leveraging the OSM crowdsourcing              authoritative process. Yet another issue involves
mechanism, the Canadian authorities have                 a conflict between license and use terms of OSM
developed a much-needed change-detection process,        and the intellectual property rights of Canadian
which helps the authorities concentrate resources        authorities.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                               87
88
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     The Canadian and OSM synergy rests mainly on two           available spatial data were poor in content and had
     pillars: the authorities’ recognition that they have       last been updated in the 1960s; moreover, the local
     been unable to keep the national data up-to-date,          mapping agency collapsed in the earthquake and
     and their willingness to acknowledge and trust the         many of the skilled employees were lost. An updated
     quality of the OSM data. Another factor contributing       map was urgently needed to enable distribution of
     to the synergy is that Canadian authorities are            supplies, attention to collapsed buildings, repair of
     well organized and equipped and therefore have a           damaged infrastructure, and provision of medical
     standard process regarding spatial data collection,        services.
     change detection, and spatial data quality control
     and quality assurance. They can easily handle the          The Haiti disaster response constitutes an example

     addition of OSM data in their processes, and the           of a successful project in which geographic
     results are visible, understandable, and tangible.         information was released from partners to the
     In other words, in this case, the context in which         crowd for enhancement and then returned back to
     authoritative and non-authoritative entities interact      government for activation—although government
     is an important influence on how easy it is to             was rather reluctant to involve volunteers. Historical
     integrate the two different spatial data sets.             maps, CIA maps, and high-resolution imagery in
                                                                Yahoo were used for tracing in OSM so that the
     The Canadian experience suggests several                   basic maps could be improved. Within 48 hours,
     important lessons:                                         new imagery from the World Bank, Google, and
                                                                others was also made available for tracing in OSM.
     •	 An authority’s recognition that it needs
                                                                According to HOT, within a month, 600 volunteers
           assistance to meet its target can trigger the turn
                                                                had added spatial information to OSM, and OSM
           to VGI.
                                                                was used as a default base map for the response to
     •	 VGI data sets can be used by authoritative and          the Haiti earthquake.
           governmental bodies to supplement or facilitate
                                                                Four factors explain the success of this project:
           their standard operational procedures.
                                                                the quick creation of the data, the low cost, the
     •	 Differences in structure and operation mean that        numerous contributions of volunteers from the
           updates to geographic information do not move        OSM community, and the public release of high-
           freely between the two systems.                      resolution satellite imagery. The first two factors
                                                                were summarized by the opinion that the United
     •	 Different terms of use and license options for the
                                                                Nations “would have taken tens of thousands of
           two data sets can create connectivity problems.
                                                                pounds and years to do what OpenStreetMap did
       Haiti. Haiti was dramatically affected by the 7.0
     ///      ///
                                                                in 3 weeks.”25 The third factor was the remote
     magnitude earthquake of January 12, 2010. Most             volunteers who acted quickly, coordinated their
     estimates of deaths range from 100,000 to 159,000,         efforts, and disseminated the appeal for help all
     with Haitian government reports of over 200,000            over the world. As Tim Waters puts it, “It is the first
     fatalities. More than 250,000 residents were injured       time where individuals from the comfort and safety
     and more than 30,000 buildings were collapsed or           of their own home can literally help other people
     severely damaged. The Haitian government and the           save lives in a disaster zone.”26 A final key factor
     numerous nongovernmental organizations seeking             in the success of the project was the willingness of
     to respond to the disaster lacked accurate and             partners to provide spatial data and imagery free of
     up-to-date maps to help guide their work. The only         license restrictions.
                                                                                                                CHAPTER


                                                                                                                03
Despite the project’s overall success, several           Wibowo, and Nurwadjedil 2013). The community
challenges should be highlighted. First, despite the     mapping component had clear leadership, specific
efforts of HOT and others, the Haitian national          guidelines in data manipulation, and great
mapping agency (CNIGS) was never fully involved in       coordination of the different contributors. The
the project. This represented a missed opportunity       crowd was motivated to participate (driven by
to establish a richer connection between the             a desire to improve disaster protection, win the
Haitian government and the OSM community.                mapping competition, or other reasons) and was
Second, the number of volunteers involved in the         supervised during the various stages of the process,
digitization and the speed with which it occurred        and the process of data collection and manipulation
caused coordination difficulties, which in turn led to   was well defined. A factor contributing to the
duplication of data and effort.                          project’s success was the evaluation of the data by
                                                         academics and project leaders.
Undeniably, what OpenStreetMap did in Haiti
changed both disaster response and perceptions           Some limitations of the project involve the quality
of VGI forever.27 Overall, the Haitian experience        of the results, which while acceptable overall and
suggests several important lessons:                      in some cases very good, was in some cases very
                                                         poor (Gadjah Mada University and HOT 2012).
•	 Crowdsourcing of mapping is a valuable ex post
                                                         There appeared to be many empty or wrong
      disaster response.
                                                         records concerning the structure of buildings.
•	 Volunteers from the OSM community and the             Some minor deficiencies were also noted during
      access to high-resolution imagery made the         the implementation, such as the use of time-
      project a success.                                 consuming technical methods (e.g., use of Excel
                                                         spreadsheets in data collection or manual methods
•	 Coordination among distributed volunteers
                                                         of data manipulation).
      involved in mapping is a challenge that needs to
      be addressed in order to ensure efficient use of   The Indonesian experience suggests several
      their time.                                        important lessons:

  Indonesia. The Indonesian community mapping
///            ///




                                                         •	 An ex post response can be focused on
of exposure project began in early 2011 and is             appropriate models and parameters and can
still active (for more details, see section 3-4). The      calculate the damages in case of a physical
project’s goal was to use OSM to collect previously        disaster by using crowdsourced spatial data sets.
unavailable data, including structural data, for
both urban and rural buildings and use the data          •	 Successful interaction between the VGI
in appropriate models to estimate the potential            community and Indonesian government officials,
damage from natural hazards. The combination               who evaluated the data used for scenario building
of these two components and the use of realistic           as reliable, led to the project’s being continued
data led to the development of the InaSAFE tool            and expanded past the initial phase.
(discussed in section 3-22).
                                                         •	 Risk managers and the local community can
The project was seen as successful from a human,           combine local wisdom with scientific knowledge
technical, and financial point of view. It has enabled     to produce realistic scenarios for numerous
local government to use spatial data to visualize          different physical disasters that may occur at the
where people are most in danger (Chapman,                  area of interest.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     89
90
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     •	 The success of the project was due in part to the     the digitization of basic infrastructure data into
           coordination of volunteers and full use of human   OSM in eight countries to support humanitarian
           resources and technical innovations.               response or disaster risk reduction.

     •	 The mixed quality of the attribute data is an issue   Following the Typhoon Haiyan disaster in the
           of concern.                                        Philippines in November 2013, Imagery to the Crowd
                                                              published images for Tacloban, Ormoc, Northern
       Imagery to the Crowd. As shown in Haiti,
                                                              Cebu, and Carles. This imagery supported a massive
     ///                         ///




     facilitating the access of volunteer communities to
                                                              volunteer effort of over 1,600 mappers from the
     high-quality aerial and satellite imagery can have
                                                              OSM community, coordinated by HOT, who
     dramatic results. Such imagery is often prohibitively
                                                              contributed nearly 5 million changes to the map—
     expensive, however, or available only under licenses
                                                              changes that provided detailed information on the
     that would prevent digitization by the public.
                                                              location and extents of pre-event infrastructure as
     With this in mind, the U.S. State Department’s
                                                              well as offering a preliminary damage assessment
     Humanitarian Information Unit launched a new
                                                              (see box 1-2 for more detail).
     initiative in 2012 called Imagery to the Crowd. This
     program makes high-resolution imagery, purchased         Technical and policy efforts are under way to
     by the United States from providers like Digital         increase the speed at which imagery can be released
     Globe, accessible to humanitarian organizations and      and to standardize and improve the process, but this
     the volunteer communities that support them. Since       new initiative has already achieved demonstrable
     its inception, Imagery to the Crowd has facilitated      results.
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                                                                  03
      3-4. Collection of Exposure Data to Underpin
      	
      Natural Hazard Risk Assessments in Indonesia and
      the Philippines

      A. T. Jones, K. Van Putten, M. Jakab (Geoscience Australia); M. L. Bautista, B.
      C. Bautista, I. C. Narag (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology);
      A. Wibowo (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana); K. Chapman
      (Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team)


Until recently, the scope and usefulness of risk         for Natural Disasters (CSCAND)—to promote
assessments in the Asia-Pacific region were limited      the goals of the Greater Metro Manila Area Risk
because the fundamental exposure data required           Assessment Project.29 The GMMA RAP was one of
were either missing or incompatible with the level       the first integrated multi-hazard probabilistic risk
of risk assessment required. But two projects in         assessments ever undertaken for a megacity and
the region, one in Metro Manila and the other in         included estimations of economic loss and potential
Indonesia, have each found a way to develop much-        casualties. The project was intended to provide
needed exposure data.                                    a better understanding of exposure databases,
                                                         including how to prepare them; to make exposure
In the Philippines, a state-of-the-art technological     information available for analyzing natural hazard
approach to collecting exposure data was used on an      risk and climate change impacts in the Greater
urban scale as part of the Greater Metro Manila Risk     Metro Manila Area; to improve assessments of
Assessment Project (GMMA RAP). This approach             the risk of and impacts from flood (in the Pasig-
incorporated data from high-resolution aerial            Marikina River basin) and from tropical cyclone
imagery (cm resolution) and airborne LiDAR (giving       severe wind; and to improve the understanding of
ground and building heights to mm accuracy) into         earthquake risk in the Greater Manila Metro Area.
GIS data sets to provide needed information about
individual buildings’ location and size; it then added   To achieve its goals, GMMA RAP needed to
further information about building construction          address the challenge of gathering data in a heavily
type, land-use classification, and residential           populated and highly complex urban environment.
population estimates. In Indonesia, a collaborative      Attempting to acquire, manage, and maintain
and cost-effective approach—crowdsourcing                exposure information for every significant feature
through OpenStreetMap—was used both to collect           (there are over 1.5 million buildings, for example)
exposure data (including information on building         was not practical given the limited available existing
type, building capacity, wall type, roof type, and       data and the three-year time frame of the project,
number of stories) and to create a methodology that      and given the dearth of risk analysis tools able to
could be replicated across the entire country.           handle very large volumes of exposure data.

Philippines. With the Office of Civil Defense
///            ///                                       The project team designed the GMMA RAP exposure
acting as a coordinating agency, Geoscience              database to make use of existing methods and
Australia has worked with a group of government          draw on lessons learned in preparing exposure
of Philippines technical agencies—known jointly as       data for an earlier project on earthquake risk.30 The
Collective Strengthening of Community Awareness          database was populated with a range of data from




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                        91
92
                                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                          other projects or already held by government of           Several additional data sets were derived from these
                          Philippines agencies, by Local Government Units,          LiDAR data, including a digital elevation model
                          and by other organizations, and these were then           and a digital surface model. Both these data sets
                          enhanced with additional data. To support the             were generated with a 1m horizontal resolution to
                          process of developing data and offer local expertise      optimize them for spatial analysis. Where the digital
                          and knowledge, a technical working group of               elevation model and digital surface model were
                                                                                    spatially coincident, the difference between their
                          specialists was established. Because acquiring and
                                                                                    elevation values was the height of features above the
                          managing highly complex data is so difficult, and
                                                                                    ground. After vegetated areas were isolated from the
                          because detailed exposure data were unavailable for
                                                                                    derived features through analysis of aerial imagery
                          some areas of the Greater Metro Manila Area, the
                                                                                    that accompanied the LiDAR data, a model of
                          project adopted an area-based approach to exposure
                                                                                    artificial elevated areas—i.e., buildings—was left.
                          data development. This approach allowed data to be
                          included in the database at a suitable level of detail    The extents and heights of buildings determined
                          while offering the flexibility to move to a feature-      from the LiDAR data were then used to estimate
                          based approach as data became available.                  the floor area of the buildings (which is ultimately
                                                                                    used to determine the amount of damage a building
                          Statistical information on population and building        will suffer if a hazard event occurs). The vertical
                          type (e.g., from National Statistics Office Census        distance between floors of buildings, also referred
                          data) was used to describe exposure characteristics       to as the inter-story height, was assumed for each
Figure 03—3                                                                         relevant barangay, and this was used in conjunction
                          for broadly defined areas (in this case, barangays, the
LiDAR provides an                                                                   with the areal extent of the building to calculate the
                          smallest administrative division in the Philippines,
opportunity to map                                                                  floor area. Sample images are in figures 3-3 and 3-4.
                          equivalent to an inner-city neighborhood or suburb).
and visualize in detail
                          This information was then supplemented with               Finally, the collected (census) data and calculated
the highly urbanized
                          exposure data derived through a novel technological       (LiDAR) data were combined into statistical models
environment
                          approach developed at Geoscience Australia, in            for individual barangays based on land use. These
of Manila.
                          which data from airborne LiDAR, which measures            formed the basis of the GMMA RAP exposure
Source: Danilo Pinzon     building heights very accurately, and high-resolution     database and the economic loss calculations
(World Bank).             aerial imagery were incorporated into GIS models.31       determined through the risk analysis.
                                                                                                                Figure 03—4 
                                                                                                                Application of aerial
                                                                                                                imagery, LiDAR
                                                                                                                data, and land-use
                                                                                                                mapping to develop
                                                                                                                exposure database
                                                                                                                (Taguig City).

                                                                                                                Source: Bautista et al. 2014.

                                                                                                                Note: High-resolution aerial
                                                                                                                imagery over Taguig City is
                                                                                                                shown in upper left; detailed
                                                                                                                land-use mapping is show in
                                                                                                                upper right; building heights
                                                                                                                determined from LiDAR data
                                                                                                                are shown in lower left (red
                                                                                                                = high; blue = low); and the
                                                                                                                number of stories is shown
                                                                                                                in lower right (blue = low
                                                                                                                rise; green = medium rise;
                                                                                                                orange = high rise).




Crowdsourcing in Indonesia. The Australia-
///                             ///
                                                       Team (Chapman 2012). OSM provides communities
Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction (AIFDR)      with tools to quickly, simply, and easily map their
initiative, which is a key part of Australia’s         environment; when mapping infrastructure, users
development program in Indonesia, collaborated         can tag objects with information (for example,
with the Indonesian National Disaster Management       about use, wall type, roof type, capacity, etc.). This
Agency (Badan Nasional Penanggulangan                  participatory mapping approach provides detailed,
Bencana, or BNPB), the GFDRR, and the World            local-scale exposure information that can be used
Bank to develop InaSAFE (see section 3-22). The        by governments and communities for developing
requirement to provide a spatially independent         impact assessments. It minimizes access and
product that could be applied anywhere across          usability issues by employing low-tech approaches
Indonesia meant it was not possible to underpin the    that are easy to carry out (for example, it uses
risk models with a single exposure database, as was    paper maps with digital imagery that can later be
the case in the GMMA RAP. Instead, a partnership       uploaded into a database); and because it engages
was formed to obtain location-specific exposure        communities in mapping their own vulnerability, it
information that was at the right scale, up-to-date,   has the added benefit of increasing their sense of
and complete.                                          ownership over resultant impact assessments.

To determine if OSM could be used to map exposure      This pilot was a first attempt to use OSM to collect
in Indonesia—that is, provide exposure data for        detailed exposure and vulnerability data and then
impact scenarios—a community mapping pilot was         feed it into scientific models to determine how
developed through collaboration with the Australian    a disaster would affect a specific location. An
aid–funded Australian Community Development            evaluation of OSM data showed that for the 163,912
and Civil Society Strengthening Scheme (ACCESS)        buildings mapped in Indonesia, results were not
Phase II and the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap            significantly different from ground-truthed and




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                93
94
                                                 CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                             referenced data (Gadjah Mada University and            are limited, and where existing data are limited as
                             HOT 2012).                                             well. Within this context, approaches to acquiring
                                                                                    exposure data depend on the scale, purpose, and
                             Figure 3-5 shows the increase in exposure data over
                                                                                    end-users of the risk assessment being undertaken,
                             time for three locations in Indonesia being mapped
                                                                                    as well as on factors specific to the assessment’s
                             by OSM. The first location was Dompu, in Sumbawa
                                                                                    location. The examples suggest, however, that
                             (top row of figure). The second location was Jakarta
                                                                                    procedures for collecting data may be useful for a
                             (middle row), where AIFDR and HOT partnered
                                                                                    range of applications if they are well thought out and
                             with DKI–Jakarta Regional Disaster Management
                                                                                    based on a consultative process involving technical
                             Agency, UNOCHA, World Bank, and University of
                                                                                    experts, decision makers, and disaster managers.
                             Indonesia to map critical infrastructure through
                             district workshops that captured local knowledge       Indeed, the project in Indonesia has since been
                             from urban village heads. The third location was       used as a template for similar endeavors worldwide
                             Padang (bottom row), where HOT asked volunteers        and as a model for coordinating and structuring a
                             to use its online tasking manager (developed to        crowdsourcing project. It is also an example of how
                             help large groups of volunteers to map in one area     developing countries can protect themselves from
                             without overlap or conflicting contributions) and      or prevent natural disasters. The project succeeded
                             where in two months, volunteers mapped 100,000         because it was supported by the local government
                             buildings.                                             with money and time depth; its methodology was
                                                                                    adapted to the nature of the mapping area (rural
                             Since the end of the pilot in March 2012, over 1.3
                                                                                    or urban); and it was well designed and defined in
                             million buildings have been mapped in Indonesia
                                                                                    terms of technical structure and human resources.
                             with OSM, over 900 Indonesians have been trained
                                                                                    Volunteers tended to remain involved with the
                             in the use of the software, and three universities
                                                                                    project both because they received incentives to
                             have begun to teach OSM within their GIS program.
                                                                                    continue their efforts, and because they could see
                             Conclusions. These two examples demonstrate
                             ///           ///
                                                                                    the importance of their efforts—that is, see how the
Figure 03—5                  different approaches to capturing exposure data        new data they had collected could be combined with
Growth in exposure           where budgets, time frames, and human resources        hazard layers to determine potential disaster impact.
data through
crowdsourced (OSM)
mapping of buildings
and infrastructure
in three locations
in Indonesia.

Source: Australia-
Indonesia Facility for
Disaster Reduction.

Note: Top row shows
Sumbawa in January 2011,
January 2012, and December
2012. Middle row shows
Jakarta in January 2011,
January 2012, and December
2012. Bottom row shows
Padang in January 2011,
August 2011, and December
2012.
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               03
3-5. International Collaboration of Space Agencies to
	
Support Disaster Risk Management Using Satellite Earth
Observation32
Philippe Bally (European Space Agency), Ivan Petiteville (European Space
Agency, CEOS Disasters Working Group), Andrew Eddy (Athena Global),
Francesco Gaetani (Group on Earth Observations Secretariat), Chu Ishida (Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency), Steven Hosford (Centre National d’Etudes
Spatiales), Stuart Frye (NASA), Kerry Sawyer (CEOS), Guy Seguin (International
Space Consultant)


Working together in groups such as the Committee        •	 Basic mapping. Nearly all the mapping
on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), national          services provided by satellite EO to DRM and
space agencies are seeking to coordinate their            humanitarian aid projects are underpinned by
efforts and resources to make large volumes of            basic mapping. This base-layer information serves
earth observation (EO) data available for use in          as a standardized geographical reference data set

risk management and disaster reduction. EO data           that can be used to determine key geographical
                                                          attributes of a given area.
are currently used operationally in the context of
disaster response by the International Charter (see     •	 Asset mapping. Asset mapping provides up-
box 3-2).                                                 to-date, synoptic, and objective infrastructure
                                                          information concerning the asset at risk. It can
The EO data come in various forms—medium-
                                                          also add to and improve knowledge about the
and high-resolution optical data; medium- and
                                                          potential impact of natural hazards in areas at
high-resolution microwave radar data (C, L, and           risk.
X band); interferometric SAR (synthetic aperture
radar) data products; infrared and thermal data; and    •	 Urban mapping. This service assesses the

meteorological data sets—and can serve as the basis       structure of the built-up areas. In agglomerations
                                                          where urban expansion is progressing very
of regular, detailed updates on the status of hazards
                                                          rapidly and the territorial conditions are
globally, regionally, or nationally. Currently, much
                                                          extremely constrained, EO data help to create
EO data complements ground data, but where in
                                                          easily updatable baseline maps of urban assets
situ information is limited, EO data may be the only
                                                          while taking into account location of informal
source of information available.
                                                          settlements and their high vulnerability to
                                                          natural hazards such as floods and landslides.
EO data can be instrumental in risk assessment
and disaster reduction. These data can be used          •	 Remote assessment of damage. This
for a range of applications, such as mapping              service uses processed satellite data from before
hazards, evaluating asset exposure, and modelling         and after a disaster to provide crisis mapping,
vulnerability:                                            situation mapping, and damage assessment




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     95
96
 Box 03—2  International Charter Space and Major Disasters                            for on-the-ground disaster response by
                                                                                      governments, first responders, and planners of
 A good example of the potential of satellite EO can be seen in the International
                                                                                      resilient recovery.
 Charter Space and Major Disasters (www.disastercharter.org), an international
 collaboration among space agencies that uses space technology to aid in
                                                                                    •	 Flood risk analysis. This service provides
 response to disasters. When a disaster occurs, the International Charter grants
                                                                                      information to support risk management and
 access to satellite data at no cost and in a rapid fashion. The Charter aims
 to help better organize, direct, and mobilize national disaster management           water resources management. Depending on
 resources during emergencies and to assist the international relief community        input data and methodologies used, different
 in situations requiring humanitarian assistance. The only users who can              types of information can be extracted, such as
 submit requests are Authorized Users, a predefined list of organizations with        the classified distribution of the land cover and
 a mandate related to DRM. The Charter is focused on hazards with rapid onset
                                                                                      socioeconomic units in areas at risk, or hazard
 scenarios, in the immediate response phase, and aims to service operational
                                                                                      damage information based on measurements of
 users wherever a disaster occurs. Since its inception in 2000 it has delivered
 services over 400 times in well over 100 countries.                                  water depth and/or flow velocity.

 To cite the Charter and its dramatic evolution over the last decade as progress    •	 Precise terrain deformation mapping.
 toward risk assessment may be surprising, given the Charter’s response-only          This service contributes to geohazard risk
 focus. Yet the Charter remains a striking example of what space agencies             assessment to support mitigation, prevention,
 working together can achieve. By raising the profile of satellites in disaster
                                                                                      and preparedness. For a wide range of risk
 response, the Charter has greatly increased the DRM community’s interest
                                                                                      assessments, including those concerned with
 in EO satellite data and EO-based solutions. Satellite based geo-information
 can contribute to the entire cycle of risk management, including mitigation,         flood, seismic hazard, and climate change,
 warning, response, and recovery. To date, much of the DRM effort of the EO           terrain-motion information has direct relevance.
 sector has been focused on disaster response and recovery, which by its
 nature attracts more attention but also more resources than pre-crisis phases.     •	 Landslide inventories and landslide
 Stronger ties to end-users and increased collaboration with DRM practitioners        monitoring. These services provide hazard
 would increase the impact of EO-based response activities such as those of           mapping information in landslide-prone areas
 the Charter. At the same time, meeting the ongoing need for information by
                                                                                      and carry out repeat observations over large
 supplying large volumes of data over large areas is very different from meeting
                                                                                      areas. (Locally, emergency monitoring of hot
 the more limited needs arising during the response phase; and within the
 context of existing systems, supplying EO data for disaster mitigation on a
                                                                                      spots typically is performed using ground-based
 global basis represents a clear operational challenge for satellite agencies.        radar as the primary source).
Box 03—3  Innovations in Earth Observation over the Coming Decade

The resolution and availability of earth observation satellites are much greater      With a constellation of two operational satellites allowing a five-day geometric
now than they were a decade ago. It is still the case, however, that the use of       revisit time, Sentinel-2 will provide systematic coverage of the overall land
satellite-based EO in DRM is constrained by the lack of observations for risk-        surface. Other EO missions that will greatly enhance global observations
prone areas.                                                                          for DRM applications include the ALOS-2 mission of JAXA (Japan Aerospace
                                                                                      Exploration Agency) and the Canadian Radarsat Constellation Mission (RCM).
Space agencies are addressing this issue by putting in place new data policies
                                                                                      Two new U.S. commercial optical satellites, Skybox and PlanetLab, will become
that will soon provide users with open and free access to agencies’ archives
                                                                                      available in the near future and will greatly enhance the accessibility of these
of images from the past 10 years, starting with SPOT images. They are also
                                                                                      high-resolution images.
developing complementary plans of observation. Two upcoming satellite
missions—Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2, jointly developed by the European
                                                                                      In complement to the systematic and frequent coverage over wide areas
Commission and the European Space Agency and scheduled to launch in
                                                                                      made available by EO missions, detailed and up-to-date observations are
spring 2014—will make high-quality SAR and multispectral data freely available
                                                                                      being provided through very high-resolution systems operated by commercial
to end-users.
                                                                                      players and national space agencies. Relevant missions are the Pléiades

The SAR data generated by Sentinel-1 can be used for global, national, and            mission of CNES (France’s National Center for Space Studies) and Astrium

local hazard assessments. The multispectral Sentinel-2 mission—for global             Geo-Information Services; Cosmo-Skymed of ASI (Italian Space Agency) and
land observation at high resolution with high-revisit capability—will provide         e-geos; TerraSAR/Tandem-X of DLR (German Aerospace Center) and Astrium
enhanced continuity of data so far provided by SPOT-5 and Landsat 7 and 8             Geo-Information Services; and Radarsat-2 of CSA (Canadian Space Agency)
and will offer data comparable to those provided by the U.S. Landsat system.          and MDA Corporation.




CEOS has developed a long-term vision for how                         3-3—and the volume of service delivery by current
it can expand its contributions to all phases of                      projects in DRM, users could consider how such
DRM. It anticipates contributions that are global                     volumes of data might be better exploited. Existing
in scope, even as they build on strong partnerships                   use for risk assessment and disaster preparedness
at local, national, or regional levels; that are user                 remains embryonic, despite evident potential.
driven; that address several hazard types; and that                   Further investment may be required to support
take into account all relevant EO-based capabilities                  new user communities and emerging partnerships.
available or under development. As part of this                       Looking at efforts to reduce disaster risk, existing
vision, and to demonstrate the benefits of EO data                    services have proved useful and have demonstrated
used in complement to more conventional data
                                                                      the cost benefit of providing risk assessment based
sources, CEOS is implementing pilots defined
                                                                      on satellite EO data. For some geo-information
with representatives of the user community
                                                                      needs, additional research and development is
(scientists, civil protection agencies, local resources
                                                                      required. For other needs the available products
management authorities, etc.) for floods, seismic
                                                                      are mature, precise, and documented. However,
hazards, and volcanoes in 2014–2016.
                                                                      currently it appears that the main obstacle to
Looking at the tremendous resources of new EO                         progress remains lack of awareness of what exists
missions—some innovations are described in box                        and what can be accomplished.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                                          97
98
                          CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




     3-6. Global Earthquake Model
     	
     Helen Crowley, Nicole Keller, Sahar Safaie, Kate Stillwell (GEM)


     The Global Earthquake Model (http://www.                •	 Collaboration. GEM is made up of people with
     globalquakemodel.org/) is a collaborative effort              a passion for contributing to the mitigation of
     involving global scientists and public and private            seismic risk, so collaborations have been built
     stakeholders. Founded in 2009, GEM aims to build              across sector, geography, and discipline.
     greater public understanding and awareness of
                                                             Between 2009 and 2013, GEM made a significant
     seismic risk, and to increase earthquake resilience
                                                             contribution toward advancing the science and
     worldwide, by sharing data, models, and knowledge       technology needed for global state-of-the-art seismic
     through the OpenQuake platform; by applying GEM         hazard and risk modelling, data collection, and
     tools and software to inform decision making for        risk assessment at the global, regional, national,
     risk mitigation and management; and by expanding        and local scales. These contributions include
     the science and understanding of earthquakes.           the following:

     During the last five years, GEM has focused on four       ISC-GEM Global Instrumental Earthquake
                                                             ///




     key pillars:                                            Catalogue (released January 2013). This risk
                                                                            ///




                                                             assessment data set is a homogenous global catalog
     •	 Trusted and credible science. Assessing              of nearly 20,000 earthquakes. Archiving and
        earthquake risk holistically requires                reassessing records from 1900 to 2009, the catalog
        multidisciplinary knowledge—seismology,              represents the state-of-the art record for earthquake
        geotechnical and structural engineering,             locations and magnitudes.
        economics, and social science—combined with
                                                               Historical Catalogue and Archive (released
        the latest technology. GEM has brought this
                                                             ///                                      ///




                                                             June 2013). This project archives almost a thousand
        diverse scientific community together in various
                                                             earthquakes. Using the most detailed and up-to-date
        scientific platforms which aim to achieve a
                                                             studies in the scientific literature, this archive spans
        common language, while keeping discussion and
                                                             nearly a millennium, from the early Middle Ages
        debate alive.                                        (1000 CE) to the advent of instrumental recording
                                                             at the start of the 20th century (1903 CE). The
     •	 Wide impact and public good. GEM has
                                                             catalog itself provides detailed parameters on 827
        focused on trying to bridge gaps—both from
                                                             earthquakes of magnitude greater than 7 across the
        science to practice, and from knowledge to
                                                             globe; see figure 3-6 for a sample image.
        action.
                                                               Geodetic Strain Rate Model (released February
                                                             ///                                ///




     •	 Openness and transparency. The OpenQuake
                                                             2014). This model estimates deformation rates on
        platform is being designed to allow users to         the Earth’s surface based on measurements from
        evaluate the impact of any assumption on results,    the global network of geodetic instruments using
        implement alternative data or models, and            the Global Positioning System (GPS). Building
        explicitly account for uncertainty. Source code of   upon a data set of more than 18,000 GPS velocity
        the software and tools is publicly accessible.       measurements worldwide, the GEM Global Geodetic
Strain Rate model represents a fivefold expansion         Global Exposure Database will be a multi-scale,        Figure 03—6 
of data from its 2004 predecessor. It features            multilevel database that will be an integral part of   A fuller picture of
global coverage and high resolution in actively           the OpenQuake platform. It has been designed to        seismic history
deforming regions.                                        accommodate data at four levels of resolution, from    is obtained when
                                                          national to individual-building scales.                instrumentally
  Active Faults Database and Tools (expected
///                                     ///




                                                                                                                 recorded events
release November 2014). This database assembles             Earthquake Consequences Database
                                                          ///                                         ///




                                                                                                                 are combined with
available national, regional, and global active-fault     (expected release November 2014). This database        events from historical
databases worldwide within a common repository. A         captures a full spectrum of consequences from          records (in pink).
capture tool has been developed to allow local and        earthquake-induced ground shaking, landslides,
                                                                                                                 Source: GEM Historical
regional geologists to feed data on local active faults   liquefaction, tsunamis, and fire following 66          Catalogue, Global
into the common database.                                 historical earthquakes between 1923 and 2011.          Earthquake Model, http://
                                                                                                                 www.globalquakemodel.
  Global Exposure Database (expected release
///                             ///                         Physical Vulnerability Database (expected
                                                          ///                                   ///
                                                                                                                 org/what/seismic-hazard/

November 2014). The first open database of global         release November 2014). This data set contains         historical-catalogue/.

buildings and population distribution is being            more than 7,000 existing and new fragility and
built through the GED4GEM project. GEM’s                  vulnerability functions (“damage curves”) from




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                99
100
                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      around the world, derived from empirical, analytical,    across the globe. It features 13 building attributes,
      and expert-opinion methods, and rated for quality.       including building occupancy, roof, and wall
      The functions form the basis for estimating              material. Selected characteristics are those affecting
      damage and loss in terms of fatalities and building      the seismic performance of a building, and also
      repair costs.                                            those used to describe exposure. This “common
                                                               language” will facilitate global collaboration to
        Socio-Economic Vulnerability and Resilience
      ///




                                                               understand the diversity and seismic vulnerability
      Global Database (expected release November
                          ///




                                                               of buildings.
      2014). This global database contains indicators
      measuring social vulnerability, resilience, and            Physical Vulnerability Guidelines (expected
                                                               ///                                      ///




      economic vulnerability at various scales. The
                                                               release June 2014). These guidelines apply to the
      data are structured and sub-structured according
                                                               development of empirical, analytical, and expert
      to a taxonomy that accounts for eight major
                                                               opinion–based vulnerability functions.
      categories (population, economics, education,
      health, governance and institutional capacities,           Inventory Data Capture Tools (released January
                                                               ///                                ///




      the environment, infrastructure and lifelines, and       2014). This set of open source tools captures data
      current indices).                                        on buildings (inventory) both before and after
                                                               an earthquake. Tools range from those capable
        Ground Motion Prediction Equations (released
      ///                                        ///




                                                               of extracting footprints from satellite photos, to
      December 2013). This initiative conducted a critical
                                                               tablet or paper forms suitable for field use. After
      appraisal of ground motion prediction equations
      (GMPEs) in published scientific literature from          validation, the captured data can contribute to the

      around the globe. Defining a clear and reproducible      Global Exposure Database or the Global Earthquake

      process for the selection of ground motion models        Consequences Database.
      across all tectonic settings worldwide, the initiative
                                                                 Socio-Economic Vulnerability and Resilience
      proposed a set of 10 GMPEs for use in seismic
                                                               ///




                                                               Tool Set (expected release November 2014). This
      hazard analysis in subduction, active shallow crust,
                                                                         ///




                                                               set of tools assesses integrated earthquake risk by
      and stable continental regions around the globe.
                                                               combining indices of physical risk with indices of
        Building Taxonomy (released December 2013).
      ///                       ///
                                                               socioeconomic vulnerability and resilience; the
      This taxonomy categorizes buildings uniformly            latter allows users to incorporate local knowledge.
                                                                                                                CHAPTER


                                                                                                                03
3-7. Global Probabilistic Risk Assessment: A Key Input
	
into Analysis for the 2013 and 2015 Global Assessment
Reports
Manuela Di Mauro (Risk Knowledge Section, United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction)


The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk           measure underlying risk factors and drivers. This
Reduction (GAR) is the UN flagship publication on       approach, however, had significant limitations; the
global disaster risk and disaster risk management.      short historical record used meant that temporal
Building on the UNDP (2004) report on global            and spatial information was limited, and records of
risk patterns and trends and on the World Bank’s        consequences lacked detail.
report on natural disaster hot spots throughout
the world (Arnold et al. 2005), the GAR has been        A probabilistic approach minimizes these

produced every two years since 2009 by the UN           limitations. It uses historical events, expert
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR). Each       knowledge, and theory to simulate events that
report is based on original research and a global       can physically occur but are not represented in
assessment of risk from natural hazards. Since 2013,    the historical record over the past few decades. A
this GAR global risk assessment has been carried out    probabilistic approach can generate a catalog of all
following a fully probabilistic approach applied at     possible events, the probability of occurrence of
global scale (UNISDR 2013a). The research carried       each event, and their associated losses. For these
out for the 2013 assessment (UNISDR 2013b) and          reasons, a probabilistic risk assessment approach
for the 2015 assessment involved contributions from     was used for GAR13, which began development
world-leading institutions. From this research,
                           33                           in late 2011, and it is being further developed
original data have been produced, new hazard            for GAR15. This approach delivers a number of
models have been built, and existing hazard and         key outputs:
risk modelling tools have been upgraded, with all
                                                        •	 Global stochastic hazard catalogs of earthquakes
outputs peer-reviewed.
                                                           and tropical cyclones that include their spatial,
Rationale for the probabilistic approach to                temporal, and intensity characteristics, and their
risk assessment. The 2009 and 2011 GAR took an             associated losses
historical approach to risk assessment. Researchers
                                                        •	 Regional probabilistic models for riverine flood
looked at hazardous events and their consequences
                                                           and agricultural drought
over the last 30 years and derived exposure and
vulnerability parameters (UNISDR 2009; UNISDR           •	 A global exposure database
2011). They then used these parameters to estimate
losses for any given year from 1970 to 2010. These      •	 Loss exceedance curves for each hazard at the
results were then used to produce a proxy of               country level, which provide an estimation of
current risk and past trends by region. The main           the average annual loss (AAL) and the probable
strength of this model was its capacity to reveal and      maximum loss (PML) for a given return period




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                    101
102
                               CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      The flood, earthquake, and tropical cyclone risk                    their investment planning, and to work with
      assessments were carried out using the CAPRA risk                   governments to reduce the risk for the country in
      modelling suite (www.ecapra.org).                                   which they plan to invest.

        Applications of the global risk model results.
      ///                                                     ///




                                                                    •	 For organizations representing small and
      The aim of the GAR global risk assessment is to                     medium enterprises (the commercial entities
      produce an order of magnitude of the risk at global                 that are usually most affected by disasters),
      scale as a basis for advocating for investments in                  results can offer a broad estimation of how major
      disaster risk reduction. Thus the GAR global risk                   hazards would translate into direct losses. This
      assessment’s results should not be downscaled
                                                                          information can in turn encourage businesses to
      to a local level and do not render other types of
                                                                          assess their particular risk and governments to
      risk assessments unnecessary. Instead, the GAR
                                                                          adopt DRM strategies.
      global risk assessment advocates for national and
      subnational risk assessments using consistent                   The Global Exposure Database. The Global
                                                                    ///                                    ///




      approaches and highlighting estimates of hazard,              Exposure Database (GED)—with a 5km x 5km
      exposure, and risk at national level.                         cell resolution (figure 3-7)—was developed for
                                                                    GAR13 by CIMNE and Associates and United
      The results from the GAR global risk modelling have
                                                                    Nations Environment Programme–Global Resource
      a variety of uses:
                                                                    Information Database (UNEP-GRID). The GED
      •	 They can be used by government officials and               includes the economic value and number of
            ministries as evidence to support the funding           residents in dwellings, commercial and industrial
            of higher-resolution risk assessments and can           buildings, and hospitals and schools in urban
            encourage countries to optimize their disaster          agglomerations (De Bono 2013). The physical
            risk management portfolios.                             areas were defined using an urban mask based on
                                                                    MODIS land cover (Schneider, Friedl, and Potere
      •	 For governments engaged in transboundary and               2009) and were divided into rural, minor urban,
            regional partnerships implying mutual support           and major urban areas. Population in urban areas
            and collaboration in case of disasters (e.g.,           was extracted from LandScanTM (ORNL 2007).
            ASEAN), they can be used to provide an overview         Building classes and percentages for each country
            of the risk levels of the partner countries.            were derived from various sources, including the
                                                                    World Housing Encyclopedia, detailed in WAPMERR
      •	 They can show international organizations                  (2013). The economic value was calculated through
            (international financing institutions, the UN,          analysis of income levels and education levels, with
            NGOs, etc.) how disasters are likely to affect          downscaled nationally produced capital based on a
            different countries, and can thus form the              gross domestic product (GPD) proxy. Further details
            basis for strategic definition, programmatic            of the exposure analysis are in De Bono (2013);
            prioritization and planning, budgeting, etc.            WAPMERR (2013); and CIMNE et al. (2013).

      •	 They can be used by investors to gain an                   For the 2015 release, the GED will be enhanced
            understanding of the overall level of risk, and         to enable inclusion of other initiatives, such
            thus the potential losses, that a country faces         as GED4GEM (see box 2-5 and section 3-6 for
            from specific hazards. They can be a means              more information), as well as future population
            of encouraging investors to perform detailed            distribution models, a building-type pilot study,
            risk analysis, to budget for DRM as part of             and critical facilities, should these become available
at a later stage. Additional improvements for 2015      •	 Improvements in the building class distribution       Figure 03—7 
include the following:                                        at national level and for large countries (e.g.,   Example of the 5km x
                                                              China and United States) to subnational levels     5km grid constituting
•	 The ability to account for both urban and rural
                                                              (e.g., administrative level 1).                    the exposure
  populations and buildings when calculating
                                                                                                                 database for GAR13.
  human and economic losses. This will involve          •	 System performance improvements in functions
  new geospatial layers defining urban areas, such            and algorithms that will support the increased     Source: UNISDR.

  as the global built-up area layer developed by the          data volume.
  European Union Joint Research Centre.
                                                          Earthquake. For GAR13, the stochastic earthquake
                                                        ///              ///




•	 The flexibility to replace the LandScanTM            event set (location, depth, frequency, and
  data with gridded population supplied by an           magnitude) was built considering principal seismic
  alternative source. This makes it possible to avoid   sources, tectonic regions and seismic provinces,
  any constraints to data distribution linked to        and historical earthquakes from the U.S. Geological
                                                        Survey National Earthquake Information Center
  proprietary licenses.
                                                        catalog. Analysis was undertaken using the CRISIS
•	 Inclusion of socioeconomic parameters, based on      2012 earthquake modelling software (Ordaz et
  income, employment, etc., to the most detailed        al. 2012; CIMNE et al. 2013), which is compatible
  level possible from subnational data.                 with the CAPRA modelling suite. The results are
                                                        expressed in terms of ground shaking (spectral
•	 A downscaled 1km x 1km GED in coastal areas          acceleration) in a 5km x 5km grid for each event.
  for the calculation of tsunami risk and the           The combination of the modelled losses for each
  integration of storm surges in the tropical           building class in each cell of the exposure grid is
  cyclone risk assessment.                              used to calculate the seismic risk for the cell.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                          103
104
                                   CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      For the 2015 GAR global risk assessment, the            the streamflow data. The calculated probabilistic
      earthquake model will be improved using the             discharges were introduced to river sections,
      products developed by the GEM foundation,               whose geometries were derived from topographic
      including the new set of ground motion prediction       data, and used with a simplified approach (based
      equations and the new historical seismicity catalog;    on Manning’s equation) to model water levels
      for more detail on these products, see section 3-6.     downstream.34

        Tropical cyclone. GAR13 assessed tropical cyclone
      ///                    ///




                                                              Improvements in the 2015 release include
      risk using stochastic cyclone tracks generated from     the following:
      historical track information from the IBTrACS
      database of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric        •	 Updates to the Global Streamflow database,
      Administration (NOAA). The track information was              and definition of new approaches to extracting
      integrated with data on global topography (derived            hydrological and climatic information from
      from NOAA) and terrain roughness (derived by                  the database
      integrating European Space Agency GlobCover and
                                                              •	 Consideration of the influence of dams on the
      Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center data
                                                                    different streamflow conditions, with particular
      sets) to estimate surface-level winds over land using
                                                                    attention to extremes
      the hurricane model of CAPRA (CIMNE et al. 2013).
                                                              •	 Updates to the model’s regionalization through
      The tropical cyclone risk model for GAR13 did
      not consider storm surge, even though this can                a reworking of the concept of homogeneous
      contribute substantially to the losses caused by              region with respect to more detailed metrics
      this hazard (as Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines             (e.g., reweighted area on the basis of rainfall
      in 2013 made clear). Storm surge will therefore               volume contribution, seasonality, and time
      be included in global risk assessment for GAR15.              series variance)
      GAR15 will also aim to implement improvements
                                                                Tsunami hazard. The global tsunami modelling
      in tropical cyclone modelling highlighted
                                                              ///                   ///




                                                              carried out for GAR13 constituted a significant
      in a peer-review process lead by the World
                                                              improvement to the first global-scale tsunami
      Meteorological Organization.
                                                              hazard and exposure assessment, carried out
        Riverine flood. A new, fully probabilistic Global
      ///              ///
                                                              for GAR09. In comparison with the previous
      Flood Model was developed for GAR15 by the CIMA         study, GAR13 provides a more complete coverage
      Foundation and UNEP-GRID.                               of tsunamigenic earthquake sources globally
                                                              (developed by the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute
      The GAR13 flood model calculated flood discharges       and Geoscience Australia).
      associated with different return periods for each
      of the world’s major river basins, based on flood       The GAR13 model uses two methods, one based on
      discharge statistics from 7,552 gauging stations        scenario analysis and one based on a probabilistic
      worldwide. Where time series of flow discharges         method known as Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard
      were too short or incomplete, they were improved        Assessment (PTHA) (Burbidge et al. 2009). The first
      with proxy data from stations located in the same       method now uses better input data and is applied for
      “homogeneous region.” Homogeneous regions               more sources than in the GAR09 model. The second
      were calculated taking into account information         method has been applied for the Indian Ocean and
      such as climatic zones, hydrological characteristics    the southwest Pacific using research and analysis
      of the catchments, and statistical parameters of        undertaken by Geoscience Australia (Cummins
                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                    03
2009; Thomas and Burbidge 2009). It calculates a          The next advance will be to improve the set of
set of synthetic earthquakes to obtain a distribution     vulnerability functions that capture regional
of possible run-up heights rather than using one          variations in construction practices. For GAR15,
scenario per location, and it allows for a robust         regional vulnerability curves will be adopted
determination of the return period.                       for East Asia, Oceania, and the Pacific Islands,
                                                          through consultation with local experts lead by
For GAR13, the tsunami hazard was calculated              Geoscience Australia under its existing international
based on earthquakes with a 500-year return               development programs (Sengara et al. 2010, 2013;
period—those earthquakes that are expected to             Bautista et al. 2012; Pacheco et al. 2013).
contribute most significantly to tsunami risk. For
                                                            Risk assessment for earthquake, flood,
GAR15, a fully probabilistic model will be developed
                                                          ///




                                                          and tropical cyclone. For each building class
through application of the PTHA method globally,
                                                                                   ///




                                                          associated with a grid point, the risk is calculated
in partnership with Geoscience Australia and the
                                                          using CAPRA by assessing the damage caused by
Norwegian Geotechnical Institute.
                                                          each of the modelled hazard events.
  Volcanic hazard. The Global Volcano Model
                                                          Because the model considers different events, each
///                ///




is working on an initial global assessment of
                                                          grid point can be associated with a probability
probabilistic volcanic ash hazard, using an updated
                                                          distribution of hazard intensity for certain return
version of the model developed at the University of
                                                          periods. As each point of the vulnerability curve
Bristol. The model employs stochastic simulation          is itself a probability distribution, a different
techniques, producing a large number of potential         probabilistic distribution of damages is calculated in
scenarios and their relative ash dispersal patterns       each grid point for each event and for each building
(Jenkins et al. 2012a, 2012b). In addition, a regional-   class. A distribution of losses is therefore calculated
scale probabilistic volcanic ash hazard assessment        for each grid point, for each modelled event, and for
is being undertaken using an innovative approach          each building class.
developed by Geoscience Australia. Building upon
                                                          This analysis produces an average annual loss
existing modelling methodologies (Bear-Crozier
                                                          metric, which estimates the loss likely every year
et al. 2012), this approach emulates hazard for
                                                          due to a specific hazard. As the GAR global risk
ash-producing volcanoes in the Asia-Pacific.35 A risk
                                                          assessment is performed at global scale, the AAL
calculation using the CAPRA platform will also be
                                                          assessed should be read as an order of magnitude
piloted; this approach combines the probabilistic
                                                          estimate for the potential recurrent extent of
volcanic hazard results and vulnerability models
                                                          losses in a country. The assessment also produces a
developed by Geoscience Australia with exposure
                                                          probable maximum loss metric, which estimates the
data from the GAR Global Exposure Database.
                                                          loss expected for long return periods—for example,
                                                          100, 200, or 500 years (depending on the hazard and
  Vulnerability functions. The vulnerability
///                        ///




                                                          the needs of the stakeholder). For GAR13, the return
functions used for the GAR13 global risk assessment
                                                          period of 250 years was used to assess the PML.
are based on those developed for the U.S. Federal
                                                          This corresponds not to a loss that will happen once
Emergency Management Agency’s Hazus-MH, also
                                                          every 250 years, but to an event that has 0.4 percent
taking into account different resistant construction
                                                          chance of occurring in any year.
qualities and the level of countries’ development
(which affects, for example, the completeness of and      It should be recognized that all results are uncertain.
adherence to building codes).                             The uncertainty arises from assumptions and data




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                       105
106
                              CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      sets used in the assessment of the exposed value, the    The deterministic approach developed for GAR13
      simplifications necessary to model the hazards at        analyzed the Normalized Difference Vegetation
      global scale, and the use of vulnerability curves that   Index, which is derived from 10 years of satellite
      are not country-specific. However, for the purposes      imagery. This data set, which combines data on land
      of global-scale analysis and country-to-country          use and agricultural information, provided a regional
      comparisons, the level of uncertainty is considered      assessment of drought frequency. This methodology
      acceptable. These results should thus be considered      is useful in that it draws on easily available data and
      an initial step toward understanding the extent          gives a general overview (Erian et al. 2012). Kenya
      of disaster losses that a country might face and         and Somalia will feature as case studies in 2015.
      toward determining further actions, such as detailed
                                                               An alternative approach undertakes probabilistic
      country and subnational risk assessments.
                                                               analysis of the relationship between crop losses and
        Landslide hazard and risk. Analysis in GAR09
      ///                            ///                       precipitation, temperature, and soil conditions. The
      showed that 55 percent of global mortality risk          technique is based on modelling the water content
      from landslides is concentrated in the Comoros,          needed by the soil to sustain vegetation, which is
      Dominica, Nepal, Guatemala, Papua New Guinea,            done by representing the relationship between water
      the Solomon Islands, São Tomé and Príncipe,              requirement, evapotranspiration, rainfall (satellite
      Indonesia, Ethiopia, and the Philippines. These          derived), soil water-holding capacity, etc. The
      countries also account for 80 percent of the             deficit in water content at critical times of the year
      exposure at risk of landslide (Peduzzi et al. 2009).     (i.e., when germination occurs) and for prolonged
      The landslide susceptibility is a result of terrain      periods of time translates into crop losses, which
      slope, soil and geology type, soil moisture content      are also determined stochastically by relating
      (resulting from rainfall), and seismicity. Given         known water deficits with data on crop losses. Once
      the localized nature of this hazard, a probabilistic     these relationships are established, it is possible to
      approach at a global scale is problematic; however,      produce a synthetic time series of crop losses.
      a number of case studies of countries highly prone
                                                               This stochastic water content event set was used
      to landslide were undertaken by the Norwegian
                                                               to determine average annual crop losses and
      Geotechnical Institute (NGI 2013).
                                                               the probable maximum crop losses for different
      Landslide risk in Indonesia and El Salvador was          return periods (Jayanthi and Husak 2012). This
      assessed in 2011 and 2013, respectively. The El          probabilistic approach will be applied to other
      Salvador model produced a detailed susceptibility        countries, possibly including different regions
      analysis, which was overlaid by population               in Africa, and will be improved based on peer
      distribution, to highlight high-risk areas. For 2015,    reviewers’ comments. Future work will also include
      the landslide hazard and risk will be calculated for     climate change scenarios based on changes in
      high-risk countries such as Italy and the Philippines,   seawater temperatures.
      and systematic improvements will be made in
                                                               To improve the transparency and the dissemination
      the analysis.
                                                               of the results, the GAR global risk assessment
        Agricultural drought hazard and risk. The
      ///                                         ///          follows an open data policy. The results and data
      GAR has used both deterministic and probabilistic        produced within the GAR global assessment reports
      approaches to analyze the complex phenomenon of          are available for viewing and downloading at www.
      agricultural drought.                                    preventionweb.net/gar.
                                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                    03
3-8. Global Water-related Disaster Risk Indicators
	
Assessing Real Phenomena of Flood Disasters: Think
Locally, Act Globally
Toshio Okazumi, Sangeun Lee, Youngjoo Kwak, Gusyev Maksym, Daisuke
Kuribayashi, Nario Yasuda, Hisaya Sawano (International Centre for Water
Hazard and Risk Management)

Water-related disasters, including both flood and                       flood events often do not highlight the potential
drought, continue to pose threats globally. Although                    intensity and therefore potential impact of the
preventive strategies have been devised to address                      event.
this risk, especially in the years since the Hyogo
Framework for Action (HFA), important steps still                     3.	 They must take into account the
                                                                        ///




need to be taken to guide DRM.                                          effectiveness of water infrastructure.            ///




                                                                        Global-scale hydrological models generally ignore
Water-related risk assessments do exist, but none
                                                                        the effectiveness of dams, reservoirs, levees, etc.
is without limitations. Credible water-related
disaster risk indicators need to meet five particular                   This practice produces inaccurate indicators
challenges (ICHARM 2013):                                               and fails to emphasize governments’ efforts to
                                                                        protect people from floods. (This issue is further
1.	 They must represent the real phenomena.
                                                                        discussed in section 3-23.
   ///                                                      ///




   Categorizing data and proxies on an ordinal scale
   creates indicators that lack transparency and                      4.	 They must use meaningful proxies for
                                                                        ///




   physical meaning.                                                    vulnerability. Using poverty-related proxies
                                                                                               ///




2.	 They must evaluate flood hazard in terms
   ///
                                                                        such as GDP per capita or a national wealth

   of the frequency and intensity of the                                index to represent vulnerability assumes a clear
   physical phenomenon. Hazard assessments
                                    ///
                                                                        relationship between poverty and flood risk,
   that examine the frequency of occurrence of                          though one has not been established. Nor does



                                                PAMPANGA                         CHAO PHRAYA                   TONE              Table 03—1 
                River length (km)                    265                              1,100                     322              Basic Characteristics
                Basin area (km2)                   10,540                            163,000                   16,840            of the Three
                   Population                     5.8 million                       23 million               12 million          River Basins
  Percentage of national population                  6.8                               40                        10
                                                                                                                                 Sources: JICA (2011) for
 River bed gradient in the midstream                                                                                             Pampanga; JICA (2013) for
                                              1/1,000 to 1/2,500               1/11,000 to 1/12,000      1/4,000 to 1/6,000
                      area                                                                                                       Chao Phraya; MLIT (2006)
 Average annual temperature at key           27.5oC, CLSU Munoz                28oC, Nakhon Sawan                                for Tone.
                                                                                                       15oC, Maebashi station
                gauging stations                   station                           station
         Average precipitation (mm/year)            2,100                             1,487                    1,300
         Peak discharge at key gauging                                          About 6,900 m3/s,
                                           About 1,880 m3/s, Arayat                                      About 9,200 m3/s,
  stations during the recent largest                                          Nakhon Sawan, station,
                                                station, 2004                                          Yattajima station, 1998




                                                                                                                                             107
                      flood                                                            2011




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
108
                                                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




Table 03—2                                                                     PAMPANGA                     CHAO PHRAYA                      TONE
Historical Flood                             Date of disastrous flood             Aug-04                          Jul-11                    Sep-47
Disasters in the Three                        Inundation area (km2)                  1,151                      28,000                        440
River Basins                                Affected people (persons)             757,000                     13,500,000                   600,000
                                                                            120 totally damaged          2,300 totally damaged       23,700 totally damaged
Sources: JICA (2011) for                  Damaged houses (numbers)
                                                                            1,200 partly damaged         97,000 partly damaged       31,400 partly damaged
Pampanga; JICA (2013), data
from Philippine Bureau of                 Affected agricultural area (ha)          71,772                      1,800,000                    177,000

Agricultural Statistics (2013)                 Fatalities (persons)                   14                          660                        1,100
for Chao Phraya; MLIT
(2006) for Tone.
                                    this approach provide guidance on how to protect               have not been a serious threat to the mainstream
                                    people from flood disasters (Wisner et al. 2004).              river, but the tributaries often experience floods.
                                                                                                   Nevertheless, large floods (those with a 100-year
                                 5.	 They must clearly identify risk hot spots.
                                                                                                   or greater return period) are anticipated to pose
                                    ///                                                    ///




                                    Identifying large target areas is insufficient
                                                                                                   a significant threat to the social and economic
                                    because affected people and fatalities may be
                                                                                                   systems, given the area’s high population density
                                    concentrated in risk hot spots that are small
                                    fractions of the target area.                                  and many links with domestic and overseas
                                                                                                   industries. Impacts of these historical floods in the
                                 The discussion below focuses on the third issue,                  three river basins are summarized in table 3-2.
                                 concerning the inclusion of water infrastructure in
                                 regional or national flood risk assessments, using                  Hazard assessment. To assess the flood hazard,
                                                                                                   ///                         ///




                                 three case studies. All three river basins discussed              we utilized a simplified modelling technology to
                                 are heavily populated, located in or near capital                 produce flood inundation depth (Kwak et al. 2012)
                                 cities, and suffer frequent floods from tropical                  based on flood river discharge simulated with the
                                 cyclones and typhoons. Table 3-1 summarizes the                   distributed hydrologic Block-wise TOP (BTOP)
                                 overall characteristics of the three river basins.                model (Takeuchi, Ao, Ishidaira 1999). Using global
                                                                                                   data sets, this enabled us to apply a standard hazard
                                 In the delta area of the Pampanga River, the flow
                                                                                                   assessment methodology to various river basins in
                                 capacity is so small that even low river discharges,
                                 such as those of floods with a five-year return                   different countries for inundations associated with a
                                 period, can cause flooding. Over the whole river                  selected return period such as a 50-year flood. This
                                 basin, floods happen almost every year.                           approach had a number of advantages:

                                 In the Chao Phraya River basin, four tropical                     •	 Data sets used (for precipitation, temperature,
                                 cyclones and Typhoon Nesat in 2011 caused floods                        topography, soils, land use, etc.) were
                                 that broke levees at 20 locations. For the period                       globally available.
                                 from July to November 2011, flooding damaged
                                                                                                   •	 Visual comparisons of 1-in-50 year flood events
                                 industrial parks and affected residents’ livelihoods
                                 over large areas inside and outside Bangkok.                            and historical flood inundation maps were
                                                                                                         possible.
                                 The Tone River basin experienced tremendous
                                 damage from Typhoon Kathleen in 1947. After this                  •	 Consideration of dam effectiveness made it
                                 event, the Japanese government strived to improve                       possible to account for individual dams’ flood
                                 levees and construct dams and retarding basins.                         control capacity, which in turn made it possible
                                 Although middle-sized discharges are common, they                       to reduce the 50-year flood discharge.
 CHAPTER


  03
Figure 03—8 
Effects of water
infrastructure in
reducing flood
inundation depths for
50-year floods.

Source: International Centre
for Water Hazard and
Risk Management.




        109
110
                                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




Table 03—3                                         PAMPANGA                       CHAO PHRAYA                             TONE
Potential Flood         Infrastructure       Dam             Without dam       Dam             Without dam        Levee          Without levee
Inundation Areas          Potentially
in the Three River      inundated area       1,320              1,360         14,310             18,060            130               890
Basins (considering         (km2)

or omitting dams and    Percent change                 3.2                                21                                86

flood protection)



Table 03—4                                        PAMPANGA                        CHAO PHRAYA                             TONE
People Potentially      Infrastructure       Dam             Without dam       Dam             Without dam        Levee          Without levee
Affected by               Potentially
Flood Inundation           affected         935,000           993,000        4,342,000          8,301,000        59,000            487,000
(considering or            persons

omitting dams and      Percent change                  6                                 48                                 88

flood protection)


                       •	 It was possible to consider levee effectiveness              comprehensiveness of the water infrastructure,
                          when calculating overflow water level (the                   including super-levees designed to protect the highly
                          overflow water level is calculated as the                    populated Tokyo metropolitan area.
                          difference between the flood water level of
                          the 50-year flood discharge and the bankfull                 Table 3-3 presents the respective values of flood

                          water level) and inundation depth for each grid              inundation area change in the three river basins
                          globally.   39                                               considering water infrastructure. The projected
                                                                                       flood inundation area due to a 50-year discharge
                       This hazard assessment calculated changes in                    decreases in response to both types of infrastructure
                       inundation with and without water infrastructure                (dam and levee). Above all, the Tone River basin
                       such as dams and levees; see figure 3-8. The                    case is noticeable, in that the reduction is as high as
                       inundation changes due to dams with flood control               86 percent owing to the effect of levees.
                       capacity are shown in panel a for the Pampanga
                       River basin and panel b for the Chao Phraya River               To assess flood exposure, we assumed a critical
                       basin; inundation changes due to levees are shown               inundation depth of 0.1m in view of the minimum
                       in panel c for the Tone River basin.                            resolution of topographical data and models.
                                                                                       We used the Global Population Database of
                       In the Pampanga River basin (panel a), the                      LandScanTM as a digital population map in order to
                       Pantabangan Dam makes a large change to                         estimate potentially affected people, i.e., population
                       inundation in its downstream area (see the enlarged             at grid cells where 50-year floods are likely to cause
                       area in panel a). In the Chao Phraya River basin                inundations beyond the critical level.
                       (panel b), three dams have very large flood control
                       capacities and reduce the inundation. In the Tone               Table 3-4 shows the respective values of flood
                       River basin (panel c), the water infrastructure                 exposure change considering water infrastructure.
                       does not affect the headwaters but creates drastic              The number of affected people decreases in
                       changes in the downstream area. This dramatic                   response to both dams and levees. The dams’
                       inundation change can be explained by the                       flood control capacity in the Pampanga River basin
resulted in a small decrease in flood inundation    basin, levee infrastructure has the potential to
depths and areas, implying a 6 percent decrease     significantly decrease inundation depths, implying
in the number of affected people. The decrease      a sharp decrease—88 percent—in the number of
in affected people was much more noticeable         affected people.
in the zone managed by the Pantabangan Dam
                                                    This analysis has clearly shown the importance
(see the enlarged areas figure 3-8, panel a). The   of including water infrastructure in a flood risk
number of affected people was reduced by about      assessment. Global and regional flood analysis that
30 percent. Dams in the Chao Phraya River basin     fails to consider water infrastructure should be
could moderately decrease flood inundation depths   treated with caution, as this type of analysis will
and areas, implying a 48 percent decrease in the    inevitably result in an overestimation of both the
number of affected people. In the Tone River        flood extent and impact to communities.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                          111
112
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      3-9. Government-to-Government Risk Assessment
      	
      Capacity Building in Australasia40

      A. T. Jones, J. Griffin, D. Robinson, P. Cummins (Geoscience Australia); R. U.
      Solidum Jr. (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology); M. V. De
      Guzman, A. Orquiza (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Manila); S.
      Hidayati (Badan Geologi); I. Meilano (Bandung Institute of Technology); J.
      Murjaya (Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics)


      During the last five years, Australia’s development       and Geoscience Australia staff based in Canberra. As
      cooperation program has supported a series of             a result of these activities, the Greater Metro Manila
      successful capacity-building activities for natural       Risk Assessment Project (GMMA RAP) has produced
      disaster risk assessment within neighboring               one of the world’s first noncommercial multi-hazard
      Southeast Asian countries. Although the modality of       risk assessments for a megacity on this scale. (See
      engagement between the agencies has varied in each        the section 3-4 for more information about this
      country context, the successes have been uniformly        project.)	
      underpinned by strong, long-term bilateral
                                                                  Background. The Australian government has
      government-to-government (G2G) relationships
                                                                ///           ///




                                                                invested in a variety of DRM activities, including
      between Geoscience Australia and partner technical
                                                                efforts to strengthen the capacity of partner
      agencies.
                                                                government technical agencies to map risks from
      In Indonesia, the Jakarta-based Australia-                natural hazards. The Australian development
      Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction provides        cooperation program draws on the technical
      a forum for ongoing interactions between risk             expertise of Australian government departments
      assessment practitioners from the government              to help developing country partners build their
      of Indonesia, technical agencies, and Australian          capacity to reduce disaster risk.
      risk and vulnerability experts posted in Indonesia.
                                                                Geoscience Australia, the Australian government’s
      Earthquake, tsunami, and volcanic hazard modelling
                                                                national geoscience agency, provides geoscientific
      activities have increased government capacity to
                                                                advice and information to support governmental
      understand the country’s natural hazard risk profile,
                                                                priorities. Geoscience Australia has had a long
      and these gains have in turn informed significant
                                                                engagement in disaster mitigation and preparedness,
      policy directives at the national level (e.g., the 2012
                                                                primarily through the quantitative modelling of the
      Indonesian Presidential Master Plan for Tsunami
                                                                potential risks posed by natural hazards in Australia.
      Disaster Risk Reduction).
                                                                Geoscience Australia has accumulated important
      In the Philippines, capacity-buildings activities         research, tools, and experience over the past 15 years
      have been facilitated through remote bilateral            as part of efforts to mitigate and prepare for the
      relationships between the government of                   risks to Australian communities from earthquakes,
      Philippines Collective Strengthening of Community         tsunami, severe wind, flood, and volcanoes. This
      Awareness on Natural Disasters (CSCAND) agencies          work has included the development of open source
                                                                                                                  Figure 03—9 
                                                                                                                  Earthquake
                                                                                                                  hazard map of
                                                                                                                  central Sulawesi
                                                                                                                  Province, developed
                                                                                                                  collaboratively by
                                                                                                                  Badan Geologi
                                                                                          High prone zone         and AIFDR.
                                                                                          Moderate prone zone
                                                                                                                  Source: R. Robiana, A.
                                                                                          Low prone zone          Cipta, A. Solikhin, J. Griffin,
                                                                                                                  and N. Horspool (Badan
                                                                                          Province area
                                                                                                                  Geologi and Australia-
                                                                                                                  Indonesia Facility for
                                                                                                                  Disaster Reduction).




software that can be used in quantitative modelling      engagement with technical partners in Indonesia
of these hazards and risks (see “Hazard and Risk         and the Philippines and explores the common
Assessment Tools” in part 2 for a review of relevant     factors that have led to significant gains in capacity
software packages). Examples include the EQRM for        in the region.
earthquake hazard and risk modelling (http://code.
google.com/p/eqrm/; Robinson, Dhu, and Schneider           Indonesia. The AIFDR, in operation since 2009,
                                                         ///         ///




2006) and the ANUGA for flood and tsunami                represents the Australian government’s largest
inundation modelling (https://anuga.anu.edu.au/).        bilateral commitment to reducing the impact of
For the past six years, as part of the Australian        disasters and is a key part of Australia’s development
development cooperation program, Geoscience              cooperation program in Indonesia.41 The program
Australia has been actively applying these hazard        aims to strengthen national and local capacity in
and risk modelling tools and experience to capacity-     disaster management in Indonesia and promote
building activities with partner technical agencies in
                                                         a more disaster-resilient region. Through its Risk
the Asia-Pacific region.
                                                         and Vulnerability work stream—led by Geoscience
Two of Geoscience Australia’s official development       Australia—the AIFDR facilitates partnerships
assistance programs, with the governments of             between Australian and Indonesian scientists to
Indonesia and the Philippines, have strengthened         develop and demonstrate risk assessment methods,
the capacity of partner technical agencies to            tools, and information for a range of natural hazards.
undertake natural hazard and risk modelling.
Though the two programs faced different challenges       Two activities undertaken between 2009 and 2013
and were delivered through different modalities of       illustrate this style of partnership: the Indonesian
engagement, both have been considered successful.        earthquake hazard project, and a volcanic ash
This case study outlines Geoscience Australia’s          modelling project.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                 113
114
                                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                        The earthquake project aimed to build the capacity     In addition, significant improvements were made
                        of the Indonesian government to understand and         in earthquake education and research; notably, the
                        quantify Indonesia’s earthquake hazard, including      program for Graduate Research in Earthquakes and
                        earthquakes’ likely location, size, and frequency. A   Active Tectonics was established at the Bandung
                        sample hazard map developed under this project is      Institute of Technology. This program has become
                        shown in figure 3-9. Achievements include a revised    a crucial resource for the government of Indonesia,
                        national earthquake hazard map for Indonesia,          providing it with opportunities for earthquake-
                        designed for use within Indonesia’s building codes     related education and collaborative research as well
                        as well as for more general risk assessment; the       as independent scientific expertise.
                        capacity to maintain and update this hazard map in
                                                                               A mixture of modalities was used in this program.
                        the future; and the production of over 160 real-
                                                                               The primary form of technical assistance was direct
                        time ShakeMaps and impact forecasts to inform
                                                                               training and mentoring of Indonesian scientists
                        emergency earthquake response.                         by Australian scientists who were based in Jakarta.

                        The project was implemented by a partnership of        These were supplemented with additional technical
                                                                               support from Canberra-based scientists through
Figure 03—10            Indonesian and Australian government science
                                                                               short-term (one- to three-week) missions. Funding
Badan Geologi and       agencies and academic institutions with additional
                                                                               was also provided to allow Indonesian students to
Geoscience Australia    technical and management support from AIFDR
                                                                               study in Australia, and to allow Indonesian students
staff working           staff (Indonesian and Australian scientists are
                                                                               and academics to undertake research in Indonesia.
collaboratively on      shown working together in figure 3-10). The major
probabilistic seismic   deliverables were produced collaboratively with        The second activity designed to build the risk
hazard maps for         five key Indonesian agencies;42 and the interagency    modelling capacity of Indonesian technical agencies
Indonesia.              memorandum of understanding developed                  focused on volcanic ash modelling. The activity’s
                        among these agencies represented the first formal      specific goal was to develop the capacity of Badan
Source: I. Maemunah
                        agreement on roles and responsibilities for            Geologi to undertake probabilistic volcanic ash
(Bandung Institute of
Technology).            understanding and managing earthquake hazard           modelling using open source modelling tools. This
                        analysis in Indonesia.                                 capacity allows the government of Indonesia to
rapidly assess the potential volcanic ash risk from         intensive probabilistic and near-real-time           Figure 03—11 
Indonesian volcanoes.                                       forecasted volcanic ash modelling into the future,   Badan Geologi and
                                                            the government of Indonesia has invested in          Geoscience Australia
The first phase of the activity focused on testing
                                                            high-performance computing equipment.                staff collect volcanic
and assessing existing volcanic ash dispersal
                                                                                                                 ash samples from a
models and identifying the most suitable model           •	 Badan Geologi has determined that further
                                                                                                                 roadside agricultural
for adaptation and use in Indonesia. The second             engagement with Geoscience Australia and
                                                                                                                 plot of land
phase involved validating the chosen model against          the AIFDR in volcanic ash modelling would be
                                                                                                                 approximately 10km
historical eruptions in Indonesia in order to assess        highly beneficial. This work would likely focus
                                                                                                                 from the summit of
the accuracy and uncertainty in the simulations, and        on building Badan Geologi’s capacity to produce
                                                                                                                 Ciremai volcano, West
implementing the model as part of a case study of           regional and national scale map products from
                                                                                                                 Java, in 2010.
four volcanoes located in West Java. (Field work is         volcanic ash modelling.
shown in figure 3-11.) The final phase of the activity                                                           Source:A. Bear-Crozier

primarily focused on building the capability to          The success of this program was demonstrated            (Geoscience Australia).

undertake near-real-time volcanic ash forecasting        in early 2013, when Gunung Guntur erupted in
using the existing model.                                West Java. After increased seismicity was detected,
                                                         Indonesian volcanologists at the Volcanology and
All phases of this activity were successfully            Geological Disaster Mitigation Centre assumed
completed, with the following results:                   responsibility for using the volcanic ash dispersal
                                                         models to gain some insight into how wind
•	 Badan Geologi has the capacity to use volcanic
                                                         conditions over the coming days could affect
   ash modelling tools in Indonesia.
                                                         ash dispersal. Figure 3-12 shows the center’s ash
•	 The government of Indonesia has probabilistic         dispersal model for the last historical eruption of
   volcanic ash hazard information available for         Guntur, in 1840.
   four West Javan volcanoes and near-real-time
                                                         The volcanic ash modelling activity was
   forecasting information available for two North
                                                         implemented almost entirely through short-term
   Sulawesi volcanoes.
                                                         missions, conducted as a series of workshops
•	 Badan Geologi has the capacity to apply the           hosted by both Badan Geologi and Geoscience
   volcanic ash dispersion model using standard          Australia. These workshops provided an important
   computers. To undertake more computationally          capacity-building environment for knowledge




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                              115
116
                                                   CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                             transfer and intensive skill building. In the months      of Metro Manila Communities to Natural Disaster
                             between workshops, Geoscience Australia staff             and Climate Change Impacts) program, which
                             provided ongoing remote technical support to              aimed to reduce the vulnerability and enhance the
                             Badan Geologi via email, telephone, social media,         resilience of Metro Manila and selected neighboring
                             and videoconference.                                      areas to the impacts of natural disasters and climate
                                                                                       change. As part of this larger program, Geoscience
                             Philippines. In 2008, a partnership between               Australia worked with CSCAND agencies on the
                             Australia and the Philippines was formed with the         Greater Metro Manila Area Risk Assessment
                             aim of reducing disaster risk. During the initial years   Project43 (described in detail in section 3-4). This
                             of this engagement, Geoscience Australia worked           collaboration contributed to the overall aims of the
                             with government of Philippines technical agencies         program by increasing the capacity of Philippine
                             (the CSCAND agencies) on a project to strengthen          government technical experts to understand how
                             natural hazard risk assessment capacity in the            the potential risks and impacts of natural hazards in
                             Philippines.                                              the Philippines can be assessed.

                             In 2010, Australia and the Philippines developed          In contrast to the Indonesia initiative, the work in
                             the BRACE (Building the Resilience and Awareness          the Philippines involved a multi-hazard probabilistic



Figure 03—12 
The dispersal of
volcanic ash from
the last historical
eruption of Guntur in
1840, as produced by
the Volcanology and
Geological Disaster
Mitigation Centre.

Source: Adapted from Bear-
Crozier and Simpson 2011.

Note: A combination of
field data and volcanic
ash dispersion modelling
was used to calibrate
the dispersion model
for forecasting possible
future eruptions.
                                                                                                                Figure 03—13 
                                                                                                                Modelled depths for
                                                                                                                a flood equivalent
                                                                                                                to that experienced
                                                                                                                in Manila during
                                                                                                                Typhoon Ketsana
                                                                                                                in 2009.

                                                                                                                Source: Adapted from
                                                                                                                Badilla et al. 2014.

                                                                                                                Note: The colored points
                                                                                                                are measured depths for
                                                                                                                comparison. Areas outside
                                                                                                                the model region are
                                                                                                                shaded semi-transparently.




risk assessment for a single megacity (Manila)             produce, exposure databases and exposure
that included estimations of economic loss and             information for analyzing natural hazard risk to
potential casualties. Significant coordination from        and climate change impacts on the Greater Metro
the Philippine Office of Civil Defense and associated      Manila Area.
agencies was needed to bring together the disparate
                                                        •	 Scientists within government technical agencies
agencies working on different hazards for the
                                                           are better able to assess the risk and impacts
same area.
                                                           from flood (figure 3-13), cyclone, and earthquake,
The key outcomes of the project are these:                 and better understand these risks in the Greater
                                                           Metro Manila Area.
•	 Manila and national government authorities have
  base data sets (such as high-resolution digital       The risk maps and models developed collaboratively

  elevation models, captured through LiDAR)             by the government of Philippines CSCAND

  available for analyzing natural hazard risk and       agencies and Geoscience Australia were delivered
                                                        to the mayors and planning officials of the Greater
  climate change impacts.
                                                        Metro Manila Area and selected neighboring areas
•	 Government of Philippines technical specialists      to inform their decisions about planning and
  better understand, and are better able to             mitigation for natural hazards.44




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                              117
118
                                                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                                       Like the Indonesia volcanic ash modelling activity,                  common factors—the presence of trust and use of
                                       the GMMA RAP was implemented almost entirely                         a catalytic approach—led to significant capacity-
                                       through short-term missions comprising workshops                     building gains. However, neither of these factors
                                       hosted by staff from both Geoscience Australia in                    is achievable without the right experts: building
                                       Canberra and CSCAND in Manila. Evaluation of                         technical capacity through a G2G relationship
                                       these programs has identified key success factors for                requires individuals with the right combination of
                                       building capacity (box 3-4).                                         specific technical and social skills. The success of

                                         Conclusions. Geoscience Australia’s long-standing
                                       ///              ///
                                                                                                            these projects has relied upon credible, capable,
                                       engagement in official development cooperation                       and committed professional staff members whose
                                       programs with the governments of Indonesia and                       interest in their work goes beyond the purely
                                       the Philippines has strengthened the capacity of                     technical issues to be resolved and includes an
                                       partner technical agencies to undertake natural                      understanding of partner countries’ systems,
                                       hazard and risk modelling. In both countries,                        cultures, and languages.




Box 03—4  Factors Leading to Successful Technical Capacity Building

The success of the programs involving collaboration by Geoscience Australia           capacity. It does so specifically by showing the technical capacity the project
and the governments of Indonesia and the Philippines demonstrates that                delivers; by demonstrating the added value of science; and by serving ad hoc
government-to-government cooperation is an effective mechanism for                    needs of counterparts. The catalytic approach fosters improvement in processes
technical capacity building. This observation is supported by recent research         and cooperation between partners through ongoing successful activities of
that indicates G2G capacity building is more effective and sustainable than           mutual benefit.
postgraduate training, learning by doing, and centers of excellence.(A) Two
broad factors led to successful capacity building in the G2G partnerships             A critical first step in using the catalytic approach is for the agencies within

between Australia and Indonesia/Philippines: the presence of trust and use of a       which capacity is being developed to identify their own capacity gaps

catalytic approach.                                                                   (Simpson and Dhu 2009). Once these gaps are known, it becomes possible
                                                                                      to showcase the potential impact of science in addressing them—without
The G2G projects showed repeatedly the importance of trust as a foundation for        taking on a structural role or starting work that in the long run should be
working relationships between technical experts. These projects suggest that          done by the recipient agency. The initial steps should always involve gaining
trust develops for a variety of reasons:                                              an understanding of how the existing system works or should work, so that
                                                                                      capacity-building efforts can focus on realizing or strengthening this system.
•	 Experts’ knowledge and skill make them credible. Technical experts’ ability
   to communicate with and speak the same technical language as recipient             Capacity-building interventions require a long-term, consistent, and predictable
   partners—the language of science and engineering—is a critical first step in       investment that facilitates repeated application of improvements, reinforcing
   building credibility, which in turn is the basis for developing relationships of   changes until they are sustainable. Strengthening public sector systems
   trust.                                                                             is complex and involves individual, institutional, and sectoral capacity.
                                                                                      Unavoidably, unforeseen complications emerge when systems are strengthened
•	 Government scientists have shared experience. Their common
                                                                                      or changed. These complications can be discovered only by working in line with
   understanding of government operations and the science-to-policy cycle can
                                                                                      anticipated systems, and resolving challenges in line. The system is sustainable
   solidify foundations of trust built through scientific expertise.
                                                                                      when it has been operating long enough for each step in the process to become
•	 G2G relationships are institutional and national. As such, they can be an          standard and routine.
   effective basis for long-term cooperation, diplomacy, and trust between
                                                                                      The focus for each of the activities outlined above is on realizing systems that
   partner countries.
                                                                                      produce ever-improving DRM outcomes in some of the world’s most hazard-
•	 Personal agendas are absent. Officials solely delivering to a government           prone nations. Capacity building is a long-term effort in this context, but a
   mandate feel less pressure to seek a high profile or to publish project            catalytic approach ensures that local capacity is enhanced and not replaced
   findings under their own name, and are more willing to maintain a supportive       or displaced.
   role in the background.
                                                                                      (A) Scholarships are more effective at the individual level and centers of
The catalytic approach exemplified in the G2G projects described above focuses        excellence are more effective at the national level, but G2G has proven to be
not on replacing or displacing capacity, but on building or strengthening             most effective overall. See Lansang and Dennis (2004).
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


	
3-10. Informing Disaster Risk Management Plans in                                                                   03
Aqaba, Jordan, through Urban Seismic Risk Mapping

Jianping Yan, Kamal Kishore, Zubair Murshed (United Nations
Development Programme)


Seismological and archaeological studies indicate       Aqaba’s new status was expected to increase its
that Aqaba, Jordan’s only coastal city, is at           seismic risk. To minimize the potential human and
significant risk of intensive earthquakes (figure       financial losses from seismic hazards, the Aqaba
3-14 shows historical seismicity for the country as a   Special Economic Zone Authority (ASEZA), the
whole). As many as 50 major events have occurred        United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
in the last 2,500 years, including one as recent as     and the Swiss Agency for Development and
November 1995. At that time, DRM considerations
                 45
                                                        Cooperation launched a project to integrate seismic
were not included in city plans.                        risk reduction considerations into Aqaba’s economic
                                                        development in 2009.
In 2001, Aqaba was declared a special economic
zone, which opened the door for investment,               Assessing risks and using risk information.
                                                        ///                                                ///




especially in tourism- and trade-related services.      Under this partnership, the Jordanian Royal
The anticipated urban growth associated with            Scientific Society conducted a seismic hazard risk




                                                                                                                 Figure 03—14 
                                                                                                                 Historical seismicity
                                                                                                                 in Jordan.

                                                                                                                 Source: Daniell et al. 2011;
                                                                                                                 Ambraseys 2009, 4333–55.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                              119
120
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      assessment. In addition to producing tools for          A key finding was the potential impact of the
      quantifying the level of seismic risk affecting the     earthquake on Jordan’s only seaport, through
      city (usable by both scientists and legislators), the   which most imports and exports pass. For example,
      project supplied the evidence for an earthquake risk    disruption of port activities for three months due to
      management master plan and served as the basis          damage or due to a focus on humanitarian activities
      for an operational framework for earthquake risk        could amount to US$420 million. This loss would be
      reduction.                                              nearly equaled by the predicted US$300 million loss
                                                              associated with a reduction in tourism.
      The seismic hazard risk analysis focused on two
      potential sources of earthquake hazard to Aqaba, the    This earthquake scenario made clear that unless
      first from the fault system that runs from the Wadi     DRM considerations were better accounted for in
      Araba fault, through the Aqaba fault to the Gulf of     city planning, the potential impacts of an earthquake
      Aqaba fault, and the second from an earthquake on       would be serious indeed. In response, ASEZA took
      the Dead Sea fault system (figure 3-15).                steps to strengthen DRM in the city Aqaba. Among
                                                              the improvements that were made are the following:
      A deterministic (impact) scenario from a maximum
      magnitude earthquake of 7.5 on the Aqaba fault          A new DRM master plan was prepared for the city.
      section was produced, showing the impact on
                                                              A DRM Unit and multi-stakeholder coordination
      people, buildings, and the economy. Key results are
                                                              committee were established within the ASEZA
      presented in table 3-5. This analysis was developed
                                                              to ensure that all development work takes risk
      from data on building distribution provided by the
                                                              reduction into account.
      Aqaba Department of Statistics, Population and
      Housing Census.                                         Through this city assessment, the Jordanian Royal
                                                              Scientific Society strengthened its risk assessment
      Analysis also pointed to temporal elevated changes
                                                              capacity and is now able to carry out seismic risk
      in the risk associated with the tourist peak season,
                                                              assessments for other parts of the country, including
      weekend, and/or Ramadan. Moreover, the hospital
                                                              the Irbid Governorate.
      capacity at the time of the analysis was 206 beds
      among three hospitals—a figure that clearly             Using the plausible seismic risk scenarios, ASEZA
      highlights challenges that would be encountered in      has also established and trained community-level
      the aftermath of an earthquake event, given that the    emergency response teams, including search and
      scenario predicted more than 1,900 people requiring     rescue teams, to save lives in the event of a disaster.
      treatment. The study also made estimates of the
      restoration times for critical infrastructure and       The Aqaba Development Company, a partner of the

      transport systems, and determined that main and         ASEZA, is now using the findings of the seismic risk

      secondary roads would likely be disrupted for more      assessment to make decisions about construction

      than 40 days, and wastewater systems disrupted for      projects and about allocation of land to new

      almost a month.                                         businesses.

                                                              The DRM Unit is now a focal point for coordinating
      Economic analysis undertaken at Hashemite
                                                              stakeholders and integrating DRM into all policies
      University (Al Waked 2011) provided a
                                                              and development planning. In partnership with
      comprehensive view of the direct, indirect, and
                                                              UNDP, the DRM Unit has trained more than 200
      secondary effects of this earthquake scenario.
                                                              officials to improve its capacity to plan, coordinate,
      Findings are summarized in table 3-6.
                                                                                                                           CHAPTER


                                                                                                                            03
                                                  EFFECT ON BUILDINGS
                                                                                                                         Table 03—5 
        Building damage state                     Number of buildings                Share of the total (%)
                                                                                                                         Seismic Risk
                     None                                 2,500                                   20
                                                                                                                         Scenario for Aqaba
                     Slight                              3,600                                    30
                                                                                                                         (maximum magnitude
                   Moderate                              2,300                                    20
                                                                                                                         7.5 earthquake)
                    Severe                                2,500                                   20
             Complete collapse                            1,200                                   10                     Source: Based on analysis
                Total (in 2010)                          12,100                                   100                    of data from Aqaba
                                                                                                                         Department of Statistics,
                                                                                                                         Population and Housing
                                                    EFFECT ON PEOPLE
                                                                                                                         Census.
        Human casualty class                                      Number of people
                 Minor injury                                              2,500
                Medium injury                                              1,300
                 Severe injury                                                 600
                     Dead                                                      600
                Total casualties                                           5,000

      Total affected population (in 2010)                                 106,000




and implement DRM responses more efficiently. The                                                                        Figure 03—15 
                                                                                                                 SYRIA
DRM Unit has also implemented a school awareness                                                                         Jordan’s fault system.
campaign to educate students about personal safety
                                                    mediterranean sea                                                    Source: Institute for
in earthquakes. These initiatives are being replicated
                                                                                                                         Geophysics, University of
in other Jordanian cities to improve capacities                                                                          Texas at Austin, http://www.
                                                                                      The Occupied
of local authorities to protect trade, tourism,                                        Palestinean                       ig.utexas.edu/research/
                                                                                        Territories
and culture.                                                                                                             projects/plates/data.htm.
                                                                                                            JORDAN
Because of these achievements and its overall
progress in reducing disaster risk, the city of Aqaba                                ISRAEL
was recognized by UNISDR as a role model city
at the First Arab Conference on Disaster Risk                                                         SC 2: Wadi Araba

Reduction, held in Jordan in March 2013. 

  Lessons learned through this process to
///




                                                                       SINAI
understand seismic risk in Aqaba. Five factors
                                            ///




were observed to contribute to the success of
this project:                                                                                  SC 1: Aqaba Fault


•	 A focus on decision making in risk assessment
                                                                                           SC 3: Gulf of Aqaba
•	 Use of evidence-based risk assessments
                                                                                                        SAUDI ARABIA
•	 Use of local expertise to ensure the sustainability
      and ownership of risk assessment activities




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                      121
122
                                               CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                         •	 Communication of the risk findings over the               Several challenges yet remain, including the
                           course of the project implementation                       following: managing and collecting data about
                                                                                      natural hazards; applying microzonation maps to
                         •	 Extensive stakeholder engagement, and
                           specifically the use of stakeholder workshops to           urban land-use planning; and continuing to build
                           disseminate knowledge and raise awareness of               institutional capacity to analyze, assess, and manage
                           seismic risk in Aqaba                                      disaster risks.




Table 03—6                       IMPACT INDICATORS                    LOSS (MILLION US$)                   SHARE OF 2010 GDP (%)
Economic and              Direct losses (wealth, compensation for
                                                                              856                                     2.8
Financial Impacts                  death and disability)
of Earthquake               Indirect losses (impact on output,
                                                                              694                                     2.5
Scenario (magnitude               emergency assistance)

7.5 earthquake)            Secondary effects (account balance,
                                                                               715                                    2.6
                                      fiscal impact)
Source: Al Waked 2011.                     Total                              2,265                                    7.9
                                                                                                             CHAPTER


                                                                                                             03
3-11. Tsunami Risk Reduction: Are We Better Prepared
	
Today Than in 2004?

Finn Løvholt, Carl B. Harbitz, Farrokh Nadim (Norwegian Geotechnical Institute);
Joern Birkmann, Neysa J. Setiadi, Claudia Bach (UNU-EHS); Nishara Fernando
(University of Colombo)


The Indian Ocean tsunami of December 26, 2004,        magnitude to about 8, one order of magnitude lower
which was responsible for over 220,000 deaths,        than the 2011 event (Geller 2011). Recent analyses
remains one of the deadliest disasters triggered      have shown that a tsunami of this size may have a
by a natural hazard event (MunichRe 2013). It         return period of about 500 years and should not
demonstrated the need for more research, improved     have been a surprise (Kagan and Jackson 2013).
planning activities, awareness raising, and early
                                                      Today, from a scientific point of view, many of the
warning systems (UNISDR 2005). It also provided
                                                      tools for tsunami risk assessment are available, but
important lessons for developing the HFA and
                                                      it remains unclear whether they are actually used in
sharpened the commitment for its implementation
                                                      national and regional DRM efforts. This case study
(UNISDR 2009).
                                                      reviews the application of DRM methodologies for
In hindsight, the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami should    tsunami risk, with a focus on Southeast Asia, and
not have come as a surprise (Satake and Atwater       in particular Indonesia and Sri Lanka, which were
2007). Events occurring two centuries ago provided    severely affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami.
a warning sign that was remarked by scientists a
                                                        Progress in tsunami hazard assessment.
short time before the disaster hit (Cummins and
                                                      ///                                            ///




                                                      Before the Indian Ocean tsunami occurred, and for
Leonard 2004). Recent paleotsunami deposits
                                                      a few years afterward, tsunami hazard assessment
provide evidence for past events in prehistorical
                                                      was mainly based on worst-case scenario analysis.
times (Jankaew et al. 2008). The 2004 Indian
                                                      As tsunamis having long return periods are believed
Ocean tsunami did introduce a paradigm change
                                                      to dominate the risk (Nadim and Glade 2006), the
in the sense that previous models for constraining
                                                      worst-case-scenario approaches may sometimes be
earthquake magnitudes along fault zones are now
                                                      appropriate, given the large uncertainty linked to
refuted (Stein and Okal 2007). As a consequence,
                                                      events having return periods of hundreds or even
mega-thrust earthquakes emerging from any of the
                                                      thousands of years. Furthermore, such scenarios are
large subduction zones in the world could no longer
                                                      often useful in areas that have a complex tectonic
be ruled out.
                                                      or geological setting, and that lack the information
The tsunamis that hit the Mentawai Islands in         needed to conduct a proper probabilistic analysis
2010 and Japan in 2011 also revealed weaknesses       (Løvholt et al. 2012a).
in the way society deals with tsunami hazard. The
                                                      The common metric associated with tsunami
2011 Tohoku tsunami was stronger than the design
                                                      hazard is usually the run-up height of the tsunami
standards of the tsunami barriers (Cyranowski
                                                      along a coastline. However, other metrics should
2011), and it revealed inadequacies in the Japanese
                                                      be considered. The Tsunami Pilot Study Working
hazard maps, which were largely based on historical
                                                      Group (2006) lists the following tsunami impact
earthquake records limiting the earthquake moment




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                 123
124
 Box 03—5  The Challenge of Multiple Tsunami Hazard Maps in                       metrics (intensity measures) that may be entered
 Padang, Indonesia                                                                as parameters in tsunami models for assessment
                                                                                  of mortality, building damage, and forces on
 The city of Padang, Indonesia, is a hazard-prone area, where the potential for
                                                                                  structures: tsunami flow depth; wave current speed;
 a major earthquake and tsunami is well established. As part of the tsunami
 risk reduction efforts in the city, international scientific groups as well as
                                                                                  wave current acceleration; wave current inertia
 local institutions developed tsunami hazard maps as a basis for mitigation       component (product of acceleration and flow
 and evacuation planning. The maps’ information on hazard zones, however,         depth); and momentum flux (product of squared
 differed significantly due to the different approaches and data used by the      wave current speed and flow depth and in many
 mappers. As of August 2008, at least eight different hazard maps had been
                                                                                  circumstances the best damage indicator).
 created.(A)

                                                                                  For hazard assessments, tsunami hazard modellers
 To help stakeholders reach agreement on the most acceptable hazard scenario
 and mapping approach for the city, the so-called Padang consensus meetings
                                                                                  take different approaches (even if all consider a
 were convened. The scientists and local decision makers who attended the         worst-case scenario), and assessments typically
 meetings reached agreement on the following major issues: earthquake             rely on different data sources for topography,
 source scenario (e.g., most plausible worst case, multi-scenario probability     bathymetry, and/or seismicity. These differences
 approach), basis data (topographical, bathymetry), and modelling parameters
                                                                                  can result in users being provided with multiple
 (e.g., consideration of roughness coefficient, consideration of buildings that
                                                                                  different tsunami hazard maps by different entities,
 modify the tsunami wave energy, and potentially inundated areas). Although
 some issues have yet to be resolved, the process has provided an opportunity
                                                                                  as is described in box 3-5. There is also a growing
 to reconcile various state-of-the-art scientific findings and to showcase a      recognition of the limitations of tsunami hazard
 science-policy platform for advancing tsunami hazard information.                mapping in areas with coarse resolution digital
                                                                                  elevation and bathymetry data sets; see box 2-4 for
 (A) The figure is based on personal communication with GTZ, 2008.
                                                                                  discussion of this challenge.

                                                                                  Over the last decade, probabilistic methods
                                                                                  for estimating tsunami hazard have become
                                                                                  increasingly available. One important approach
                                                                                  is the Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Assessment
                                                                                  (PTHA) method, which is largely based on the
                                                                                  well-documented approach to probabilistic seismic
                                                                                  hazard analysis originally proposed by Cornell
                                                                                  (1968). In recent years, PTHA has been used to
                                                                                  quantify tsunami risk in a number of areas, including
                                                                                  Japan, Australia, the West Coast of the United
                                                                                  States, and the Mediterranean (Annaka et al. 2007;
                                                                                  Burbidge et al. 2008; Parsons and Geist 2009;
                                                                                  Gonzalez et al. 2009; Thio, Somerville, and Polet
                                                                                  2010; Sørensen et al. 2012).

                                                                                  A crucial element in PTHA is the estimation of the
                                                                                  frequency of occurrence and maximum magnitudes
                                                                                  of large tsunami-generating earthquakes in each
                                                                                  source region. As the historical record for mega-
                                                                                  thrusts and other large earthquakes is very short
                                                                                  relative to their long recurrence times, it is not
                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                    03
possible to constrain the occurrence and maximum          In social sciences, the term vulnerability refers to
magnitudes of intense tsunamigenic earthquakes            societal vulnerability, which is related to a society’s
directly using observed seismicity. Recent events         exposure, susceptibility, and fragility, as well
such as the large 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and           its capacity to react to a hazardous event. A fair
the 2011 Tohoku tsunami demonstrate the reality of        amount of progress has been made in recent years
tsunami risk. Past mega-thrust events along other         in understanding the factors that influence societal
faults zones (such as those in 1960 in Chile and 1964     vulnerability and in developing relevant assessment
in Alaska) provide additional reminders of the need       methodologies. For example, important vulnerability
for precautionary actions.                                factors were revealed by the Indian Ocean tsunami
                                                          in 2004, which devastated Indonesia’s Aceh Province
  Progress in understanding exposure to
///




                                                          and many coastal districts of Sri Lanka. The
tsunamis. Mapping exposure in various hazard
           ///




                                                          especially high number of victims was due to the
zones exploits remote sensing data, geo-information       near absence of preparedness measures appropriate
systems, and existing data for population, buildings,     for such an extreme event.
critical facilities, etc. Population data are typically
obtained from available statistical data (population      Populations need to be educated about tsunamis
census) at the lowest administrative level, while data    and to be aware of hazard zones if evacuations are to
at the building level is normally obtained through        be safe and effective. There was little knowledge of
remote sensing analysis (e.g., Taubenböck et al.          tsunamis in the affected areas in Indonesia and Sri
2008). (A more detailed description of exposure           Lanka prior to the 2004 tsunami. An Asian Disaster
data collection is in part 2 above.)                      Reduction Center survey (ADRC 2006) conducted
                                                          in October–December 2005 showed that most of the
In Padang the approach to exposure also considered        Aceh population (88.50 percent) had never heard of
population groups with different evacuation               tsunamis before the 2004 event. The others (11.50
(physical) capabilities. The data included an             percent) said that they had heard of a big sea wave
activity diary that was part of household surveys,        coming to land (recounted in Islamic storytelling)
as well as local statistics and building data from        from family, friends, books, school, or television.
remote sensing (Setiadi et al. 2010). The analysis        In Sri Lanka, less than 10 percent of respondents
emphasized differentiated exposure related to the         reported having had any knowledge about tsunamis
spatial distribution of the city functions (building      before 2004 (Jayasinghem and Birkmann 2007).
uses) and characteristics of the population, and          This lack of knowledge led to what was identified
included factors such as work activities, gender, and     as a main reason for the high number of fatalities:
income groups (Setiadi 2014).                             a lack of preparedness for such an extreme event
                                                          (Amarasinghe 2007). In addition, many people
Progress in understanding and assessing
                                                          ran to the beach to watch the setback of the sea
vulnerability to tsunamis. Vulnerability is a
                                                          (Amarasinghe 2007).
multifaceted concept that has different definitions
depending on the context and discipline. In natural         Gaps and recommendations. In the actual
                                                          ///                                ///




sciences and engineering, vulnerability often             planning of tsunami risk reduction activities, limited
refers to the physical vulnerability of the exposed       use of hazard information (hazard maps) for buffer
population or elements at risk. Few reliable models       zones and evacuation maps was identified. More
of physical vulnerability to tsunamis currently exist,    advanced methodologies encompassing vulnerability
though substantial progress toward such models is         factors have not been fully integrated into risk
being made.                                               management activities. Continuous monitoring of




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                        125
126
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      vulnerability to tsunamis is hampered by the lack       While from a methodological perspective, important
      of a centralized database, absence of information       progress has been made in the last decade, the new
      sharing among different agencies and local and          methodologies are not widely applied in practice.
      regional institutions, and lack of standardized         Hazard maps, for example, are too often used only
      common guidelines on tsunami vulnerability              for establishing buffer zones when they could also
      assessment. Furthermore, tsunami risk reduction         aid in planning of construction and development
      planning tends to focus on hard measures—for            and in determining evacuation routes. More work
      example, physical construction of evacuation            is needed to develop indicators and criteria that
      shelters—but seldom considers soft measure,             determine the use of vulnerability information in
      such as evacuation behavior and utilization of          DRM, as well as to assess the effectiveness of key
      facilities. Second-order vulnerabilities (in the case   strategies and tools (like people-centered early
      of relocation) also call for a detailed analysis and    warning systems). These indicators and criteria
      careful implementation of DRM, taking into account      will ensure the application of the most recent
      factors like the lack of land title and information     findings on disaster risk and assist in choosing the
      about resettlement decisions.                           appropriate risk reduction strategies.
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               03
3-12. World Bank Probabilistic Risk Assessment
	
(CAPRA) Program for Latin America and the Caribbean:
Experiences and Lessons Learned

Fernando Ramírez-Cortés, Oscar A. Ishizawa, Juan Carlos Lam, Niels B. Holm-
Nielsen (World Bank, Latin America and Caribbean Regional Disaster Risk
Management and Urban Unit)


Urbanization in Latin America and the Caribbean         urban planning. To address these challenges, the
has been dramatic; between 1950 and 2010, the           Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Program
population living in urban areas increased by           was developed by the World Bank (initially as the
approximately 600 percent. This increase is more        Central America Probabilistic Risk Assessment
than twice the population growth experienced in the     Initiative) in partnership with the Inter-
entire region (UN-HABITAT 2010). Urbanization           American Development Bank, the UNISDR, and
has resulted in a greater concentration of people       CEPREDENAC (Central America Coordination
and assets in areas exposed to several natural          Center for Natural Disaster Prevention). The case
hazards, and has placed low-income groups               study described here focuses on the experiences
disproportionately at risk (Lall and Deichmann          and lessons learned during the implementation of
2009). By 2050, 150 million people in Latin America     Technical Assistance Projects (TAPs) carried out
and the Caribbean region are expected to live in        under the World Bank CAPRA Program from 2010
urban areas exposed to earthquakes.                     to 2013.

Decision makers, considering the combined               During the first phase of CAPRA, which began in
effects of climate change, disaster risks, and          2008, the activities mainly focused on developing
rapid urbanization, are increasingly citing a           the CAPRA software platform, a free and modular
lack of required information and awareness as a
                                                        risk modelling platform, through integrating
barrier to managing risk and fostering sustainable
                                                        existing software and developing new modules
development. Indeed, among decision makers
                                                        under a unified methodological approach (see
recently surveyed, 30 percent cited financial
                                                        Yamin et al. 2013). As part of the development and
considerations as a barrier to working on climate
                                                        testing of the CAPRA platform, more than 20 risk
change adaptation in their cities; 20 percent cited
                                                        assessment exercises were undertaken in Belize,
lack of awareness; and 20 percent cited a lack of
                                                        Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and
reliable information and knowledge (Fraser and
                                                        Nicaragua.46 The original objective of the CAPRA
Lima 2012).
                                                        Program was to transfer ownership of hazard and
Unfortunately, national and local governments           risk information generated by consulting firms
continue to face significant challenges in generating   to country governments for use in DRM policy
trusted, accurate, and targeted disaster risk           and program design. It quickly became apparent,
information that can be readily understood and          however, that risk information would be integrated
integrated into sustainable development and             into decision making only if government institutions




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                   127
128
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      were engaged more deeply and led the whole risk         and volcanic eruption, and as a result have difficulty
      assessment process.                                     investing in and implementing DRM plans and
                                                              policies.
      Thus in the second phase, which began in 2010,
      the focus of the program shifted to supporting          Volcanic risk—often overlooked because eruptions
      government agencies in building their own               are relatively infrequent, though the risk is
      institutional capacity to generate, manage, and use     significant for exposed populations—was prioritized
      disaster risk information. This level of engagement     by the Colombia National Planning Department for
      was accomplished through the implementation             a TAP in partnership with the World Bank. Galeras
      of Technical Assistance Projects. Through a             Volcano, one of Colombia’s 25 active volcanoes
      partnership between government institutions and         and the focus of the TAP, poses a significant risk to
      the World Bank, and with the financing of donors        neighboring towns. Three hazard zones around the
      through the GFDRR and the Spanish Fund for Latin        volcano cover a total of 888 km2. In the high-hazard
      America and the Caribbean, technical agencies           zone, there is more than 20 percent probability
      leading the development of a TAP were trained           that pyroclastic flows would completely destroy
      in risk modelling and analysis using the CAPRA          all property and kill any residents who did not
      platform, and also received technical advisory          evacuate. In the middle- and low-hazard zones, the
      services for generating, managing, and using hazard     probabilities are 10 to 20 percent and 10 percent,
      and risk information. The scope for each TAP was        respectively.
      defined by the needs and priorities of each of the
                                                              A recent cycle of volcanic activity in Galeras took
      institutions involved in the project. Under this
                                                              place between 1987 and 2010, with eruptions in 2010
      approach, a lead government agency establishes
                                                              forcing the evacuation of 8,000 people. Despite
      an interdisciplinary and cross-agency team for
                                                              this exposure, a number of municipal settlements
      undertaking the risk assessment and discussing the
                                                              stretch into the high-hazard zone. The Colombian
      results before using the generated information to
                                                              government is attempting to reduce this risk
      inform specific DRM policies and/or programs.
                                                              through resettlement of populations living in areas
      TAPs foster a hands-on approach to generating,          at highest risk, but the success of this effort will
      understanding, managing, and using risk                 depend on effective communication of trusted risk
      information, and thus promote ownership of the          information.
      process and the results of the assessment. Between
                                                              Starting in March 2011, the TAP aimed to
      2010 and 2013, eight TAPs were implemented in
                                                              complement the deterministic volcanic hazard
      Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Panama,
                                                              analysis on Galeras, undertaken by the Colombia
      and Peru, each focused on answering a different
                                                              Geologic Service (Servicio Geológico Colombiano),
      risk-related question. Key features of three TAPs are
                                                              with additional vulnerability and risk evaluation.
      described below.
                                                              Pyroclastic flows and volcanic ash were the focus
        Understanding volcanic risk at Galeras
      ///                                                     of the modelling activity. Modelling was based on
      Volcano (Colombia). Colombia has a distinguished
                            ///                               a compilation of data on historical events, a newly
      reputation for leading efforts to reduce the impacts    developed exposure database, and vulnerability
      of disasters, with significant progress made in the     functions. The exposure database included
      last 25 years. Despite these efforts, however, many     information on population, essential buildings,
      Colombian municipalities are struggling to analyze      public services, and housing, among others, all of
      the risks from hazards such as earthquake, flood,       which was compiled into a GIS database.
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                                                                  03
The program also delivered a series of technical         All hazard information produced under this
workshops designed to introduce specialists to the       TAP is being integrated into the National Public
CAPRA platform and to provide hands-on training in       Investment System (Sistema Nacional de Inversión
developing and carrying out comparative analysis of      Pública) database. This critical step facilitates the
the deterministic and probabilistic pyroclastic flows    sharing of findings with the scientific community,
and volcanic ash risk assessment results. Experts        government authorities, and the general public.
in charge of monitoring the Nevado del Huila and         This information will be essential in general urban
Machín volcanoes, both of which remain active, also      development planning and specifically in the design
participated in the training activities.                 and construction of infrastructure, schools, and
                                                         hospitals, as well as in mining. Moreover, local
  Consolidating the national seismic hazard
                                                         engineers and researchers trained in the use of
///




model and understanding the risk of
                                                         CAPRA’s seismic and tsunami hazard module47 will
earthquake to schools and hospitals in Lima
                                                         be able to use and update the hazard model and
(Peru). Peru has a long history of seismic activity,
                                                         incorporate their finding in future analysis.
       ///




with historical records telling of an earthquake in
1582 that destroyed most of the city of Arequipa. An     Under the second TAP, a seismic probabilistic risk
earthquake and associated tsunami in 1746 destroyed      assessment was carried out for 1,540 schools and
the city of Callao and resulted in more than 5,000       42 hospitals in Lima and Callao. Currently, the
fatalities. A number of subsequent events have           results of this study are being used by the Ministry
underscored the seismic risk in the country, with the    of Education to complement the countrywide
most recent events—in 2007—causing significant           infrastructure census and to design the National
damage and disrupting transportation, electrical,        School Infrastructure Plan. Under this process,
and communication networks.                              the World Bank is providing technical assistance
                                                         to (a) extend the seismic risk assessment to other
In Peru, two TAPs since 2010 have addressed
                                                         cities; (b) design a structural retrofitting program;
different needs. The first TAP developed a
                                                         (c) conduct a cost-benefit analysis of existing
seismic hazard model at the national level and
                                                         structural retrofitting alternatives; and (d) define
was completed in 2012. Under the second TAP,
                                                         short- and medium-term investment for the
the seismic risk assessment focused on essential
                                                         infrastructure rehabilitation.
services and in particular on a probabilistic seismic
risk assessment for schools and hospitals in the         The outcomes of the TAPs in Peru confirmed the
Lima Metropolitan Area.                                  importance of institutional engagement throughout
                                                         the whole modelling process: they showed that the
The national seismic hazard model was developed
                                                         greater the level of engagement, the more likely it
by a team of researchers and engineers from the
                                                         was that targeted and strategic risk information
National Seismological Service of the Peruvian
                                                         informed DRM decision making.
Geophysical Institute (Instituto Geofísico del Perú).
Team members collected, generated, and analyzed            Understanding and managing the risk to
                                                         ///




historical seismicity data and tectonic data, and also   water and sanitation systems (Costa Rica).         ///




tested different attenuation models. These results       Decision makers in Costa Rica have prioritized the
are currently considered as key inputs into the          analysis of natural disaster impacts on infrastructure
updates of the national building codes and standards     systems—that is, their focus is identifying the most
led by Peru’s National Committee for Building            vulnerable parts of a system, realistically assessing
Codes and Norms.                                         the expected damage at different locations and




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     129
130
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      the impact on populations, and setting investment        investments for protecting access to water and
      priorities with limited financial resources. The Costa   sanitation after an earthquake. They also provide
      Rican Water and Sanitation Institute (Instituto          an evidence base to guide design and siting of new
      Costarricense de Acueductos y Alcantarillados) has       infrastructure. Moreover, under Presidential Decree
      been working in partnership with the World Bank          No. 36721-MP-PLAN, CAPRA has been established
      to preserve and protect the water supply and to          as the standard tool for DRM purposes and
      establish a system that restores water and sanitation    provides for an active government-sponsored risk
      as soon as possible after an earthquake. Not only        management approach.
      does reducing interruption to water and sanitation
      reduce costs after an event, it can also reduce the        Lessons learned from the CAPRA Program
                                                               ///




      prevalence of waterborne diseases.                       experience about effectively developing,
                                                               communicating, and using risk information.             ///




      This TAP focuses on seismic risks to water and           The CAPRA Program has continually evolved and
      sanitation systems in the San José Metropolitan          developed to incorporate lessons learned about
      Area, the San Isidro area, and the Higuito area.         the effective development, communication, and
      Because these three systems differ in their demand       use of risk information. Specifically, it takes into
      levels and complexity, the project team had to           account the need for risk information to be targeted,
      consider a flexible approach that could work             strategic, interdisciplinary, dynamic, accessible, and
      anywhere in Costa Rica. For example, the San José        formal. These characteristics are explained below.
      Metropolitan Area includes 1.2 million residents;
      draws water from riverine, spring, and artesian well     Risk information is targeted and strategic when the
      sources; and has primary and secondary pipework          scope and specific objectives of the risk assessment
      of 570km and 2,610km, respectively, as well as           are consistent with the institutional needs and the
      numerous water treatment plants, storage tanks,          surrounding context (e.g., existing programs and
      and pumping stations. The San José wastewater            policies). The use of the resulting information from
      system covers 85km of piping, pumping stations,          risk assessment will define the level of detail of the
      and treatment plants. In contrast, the Higuito area      model and the resolution to be used.
      is serviced by two streams, a small treatment plant,
                                                               Entailing as it does the involvement of many
      eight storage tanks, and no wastewater facilities.
                                                               different institutions, disaster risk assessment is
      The TAP began by collecting the input data sets          a complex technical and institutional process that
      required to understand seismic hazard, inventorying      requires an interdisciplinary and cross-institutional
      and categorizing water and wastewater systems            framework.
      and components, and defining appropriate
                                                               Risk information should be dynamic: it should take
      vulnerability functions. The next step was to
                                                               advantage of new available data from hazard models
      analyze scenario earthquake events; this made it
                                                               and should include changes in exposure from the
      possible to understand what could happen to the
                                                               urban environment and sectoral infrastructure. Risk
      system, highlight the most vulnerable sections
                                                               information must remain accessible to support
      or components, and provide estimations of the
                                                               decision-making processes in each institution
      maximum probable physical and economic losses.
                                                               leading a risk assessment, even as institutional
      These results provided a baseline for the                needs evolve. Moreover, good practice requires
      formulation of a risk reduction program that             that the owners of the risk information clearly
      articulated short-, medium- , and long-term              communicate with information users. They need to
explain their understanding of the main hypothesis,     •	 When institutions participate in and lead risk
limitations, and uncertainties associated with the         assessment processes, they are more likely to take
assessment, and they need to highlight input data          ownership of the information and to be aware of
                                                           the information’s characteristics and limitations.
and information gaps and limitations in resolution
(so that the assessment may be improved upon).          •	 The formal/official dimension of risk information
                                                           encourages institutional endorsement, which in
Information is formal when it is generated under an        turn supports links between risk management
established institutional and legal framework. This        policies and policies that address the risk’s
is a critical condition for the effective use of risk      financial, social, and institutional impacts.
information in the design of public policies and risk
                                                        The CAPRA Program has found that well-targeted
reduction programs. Where information is formal
                                                        programs can help individual institutions strengthen
and has an official and legal status, decision makers   their own capacity to use risk information and
are more likely to promote its use and application      take decisions around it. However, from a broader
for specific purposes.                                  perspective, the lack of technical capacities for
                                                        generating, understanding, and integrating risk
Experience proves the following:                        information poses a complex problem. Experience
                                                        in Latin America and the Caribbean reveals
•	 When created under an official legal and
                                                        that government agencies and institutions need
   institutional framework, risk information is         considerably more technical support in order to
   considered legitimate for use in policy design and   undertake risk assessments and produce needed risk
   decision making in DRM.                              information.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                131
132
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




            3-13. Detailed Island Risk Assessment in Maldives
            	
            to Inform Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate
            Change Adaptation

            Jianping Yan, Kamal Kishore (United Nations Development Programme)


      With sea levels expected to rise and extreme            communities living on distant islands. This event
      weather events expected to increase in intensity,       caused severe damage to physical infrastructure
      Maldives, located in the central Indian Ocean, is       of many islands and set back development. The
      considered one of the world’s most vulnerable           total damages were estimated at US$470 million,
      countries. Eighty percent of all the islands that       amounting to 62 percent of GDP. Of these, direct
      make up Maldives are small, low-lying, and highly       losses totaled US$298 million, which is 80 percent
      prone to flooding and coastal erosion. More than        of the replacement cost of the national capital
      44 percent of settlements—home to 42 percent of         stock. Most of the islands that were destroyed
      the population—and more than 70 percent of all          in the tsunami were highly exposed, with little
      critical infrastructure is located within 100m of the   or no coastal protection. The tsunami led
      shoreline. As coastal erosion and pressure on scarce    Maldives officials to seek financially sustainable
      land resources increase, the physical vulnerability     and ecologically safe settlement planning and
      of island populations, infrastructure, and livelihood   socioeconomic development of atolls, and to
      assets will increase as well.                           integrate safety considerations into planning and
                                                              development.
      The most significant driver of increasing
      vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change     Toward this end, the Safe Island Programme was
      in Maldives is the absence of systematic adaptation     established in 2006. Its goals were to protect the
      planning and practice. Climatic risks and long-term     islands from natural and other hazards; to rebuild
      resilience are not adequately integrated into island    and improve existing infrastructure and economic
      land-use planning or into coastal development and       facilities; and to build community resilience
      protection policies and practice.                       to disasters through improved planning and
                                                              implementation of risk reduction investments. The
        Safe Island Programme. In order to reduce the
      ///                             ///




                                                              program emphasized that it was a multi-sectoral
      environmental, economic, and social vulnerability       effort and that it was to be seen as integral to all
      of the widely dispersed population, in 2002 the         development and planning (that is, not optional).
      government of Maldives initiated a program to           It held that decision making should be based on
      encourage voluntary migration to larger islands.        widespread consultation and participation, and
      The program’s long-term objective was to reduce         that human activities that damage the natural
      the number of inhabited islands and consolidate the     environment should be minimized and existing
      population in fewer settlements across an identified    damage rectified.
      number of islands. 
                                                              A key step in achieving the goals of the Safe Island
      The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami underlined                Programme involved producing a short list of
      the urgency of providing safe zones for isolated        potential safe islands through consultation, using
            Cross Section of an Island with Enhanced Mitigation Features
                                                                                                                        Figure 03—16 
                                                                                                                        The safe
         Mean sea level                  +1.3m                          +1.4m
                                                                                                                        island concept.
             ±00
                                                                                                                        Source: Ministry of Planning
 Outer                                                                                                      Harbour     and National Development
 Reef                           EPZ                         Elevated zone        Elevated zone
                               +2.4m                                                                                    Maldives.
                                         Drainage

                                                                                                                        Note: Elevated areas
                                                                                                                        are distributed across
                                                                                                                        the island and can be
                                                                                                                        used for emergency

                  Atoll                                                                                                 evacuation; schools and
                                                                                                                        public buildings up to two




                                                                                                            OU
                                                                                                                        stories in height can also




                                                                                                              TE
                                                                                                                        be constructed in these




                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                 RE
                                                                                                                        areas. EPZ = Environment




                                                                                                                   EF
                                                                                                                        Protection Zone.
                                                                       HA




           EPZ
                                                                         RB
                                                                           OU
                                                                             R




           Drainage Area
                                                    IN




           Elevated Area
                                                      NE
                                                        R
                                                       LA




           Cross Section
                                                         GO
                                                           ON




both subjective and objective criteria. Once the                particularly those related to health, communication,
short list of potential safe islands was agreed to,             and transport, and would have a buffer stock of basic
detailed island-level assessments were planned and              food and safe drinking water. Some of the enhanced
carried out. These assessments aimed at filling gaps            mitigation features of safe islands are shown in
in knowledge and engaging with island officials and             figure 3-16.
the general public.
                                                                  Identifying Safe Islands. Detailed risk
                                                                ///                              ///




The goal was for islands developed under the                    assessments were undertaken for 10 islands
program to have appropriate coastal protection;                 short-listed for development as safe islands (see
improved communication and transportation                       figure 3-17). The assessments, carried out with
facilities; improved housing, infrastructure, and               technical and financial assistance from UNDP,
social services; and adequate capacity/preparedness             aimed to produce risk information that would be
to manage emergencies and disasters. For example,               used to recommend specific mitigation options.
safe islands developed under the program would                  Key outcomes of the risk assessment included
have access to all basic services in an emergency,              the following:




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                    133
134
                                                    CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                               •	 Design and development of a risk information                infrastructures, and the most important
                                  process to generate critical inputs for the Safe            economic sectors (mainly tourism and fisheries)
                                  Island Programme
                                                                                        The project was carried out in three phases, starting
                               •	 Mapping of the selected islands’ overall hazard       in January 2007:
                                  context, including hazard event scenarios, their
                                                                                        Phase 1 involved hazard assessments of tsunamis,
                                  probability of occurrence, and their geospatial
                                                                                        swells or high tides, wind storms, heavy rainfall,
                                  extent, based on geological and historical disaster
                                                                                        storm surges, droughts, and earthquakes. These
                                  data and simulated hazard data
                                                                                        were conducted for return periods of 25, 50, and 100
                               •	 Assessment of the islands’ full range of              years for 10 islands (UNDP and RMSI 2006).
                                  vulnerabilities (environmental, physical,
                                                                                        An environmental vulnerability assessment was
                                  economic, social), with reference to multiple
                                                                                        undertaken at the same time. It examined the effects
                                  hazard events and relocation
                                                                                        of coastal erosion and compiled available data
                               •	 Creation of comprehensive risk information            on coastal erosion and hazards as well as related
                                  for coastal ecological systems, building stocks,      parameters. The assessment also included mapping
                                                                                        of coastal vegetation.

                                                                                        The exposure of buildings and infrastructure to
Figure 03—17 
                                                                                        different hazards was calculated and “safe” buildings
The islands selected
                                                                                        on each island identified. This effort included
for detailed
                                                                                        determining the capacity of safe buildings to serve as
multi-hazard risk
                                                                                        shelters, and identifying where public infrastructure
assessment.
                                                                                        required retrofitting.49
Source: Ministry of Planning
and National Development
                                                                                        In the second phase, hazard data from phase 1
Maldives.                                                                               were used to determine the vulnerability of fishery,
                                                                                        tourism, agriculture, small business, and home-
                                                                                        based industry sectors. This effort also included a
                                                                                        comparative analysis of livelihood opportunities and
                                                                                        relocation costs. A social vulnerability assessment
                                                                                        was undertaken that (among other things)
                                                                                        considered communities’ feelings about integrating
                                                                                        outsiders (since development of safe islands
                                                                                        requires relocating people).50

                                                                                        The third phase integrated all the information and
                                                                                        made recommendations for island-specific disaster
                                                                                        risk mitigation measures based on a cost-benefit
                                                                                        analysis. 51

                                                                                          Using risk information. The 2011 Strategic
                                                                                        ///                        ///




                                                                                        National Action Plan, which has been fully endorsed
                                                                                        by the government of Maldives, built on the
                                                                                        recommendations of the risk information and cost-
                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                    03
benefit analysis. The risk information is providing      •	 The islands were far apart from one another.
key inputs into the development of risk-sensitive              Arranging the field survey across 10 dispersed
national building codes. The risk outputs have                 islands posed challenges for physical access as
been used to design and develop a national training            well as information sharing.
program and to promote a national public awareness
                                                         •	 Data acquisition was not straightforward.
campaign for disaster risk reduction, early warnings,
                                                               Like risk assessments undertaken in other
and response actions. Launched in 2009 by the
                                                               developing countries, the assessment in Maldives
National Disaster Management Centre and Maldives
                                                               found data collection problematic. Maldives
Meteorological Service in partnership with the
                                                               lacked certain necessary data, including base
UNDP, the “Rakkaavethibiyya—Dhivehiraajje” (“Be
                                                               maps, long-term climatologic data, and historical
aware—Be prepared”) campaign was the country’s
                                                               event data; some necessary data were available
first public awareness campaign addressing disaster
                                                               but had to be purchased. For acquisition of
risk.
                                                               exposure data, field surveys were the only option.
There are still challenges to integrating risk
                                                         •	 Capacity and institutionalization were
information into the Safe Islands Programme, and
                                                               limited. The government of Maldives has
these have hindered progress toward the original
                                                               limited staff with the requisite skills and/or
vision. Specifically:
                                                               qualifications. Moreover, there is no institution
•	 The cost-benefit analysis showed that mitigation            or organization specifically responsible for risk
   investments must be approached with caution                 information and no unified data management
   because there is significant uncertainty in the             mechanism in place.
   analysis and because the benefit-to-cost ratios
                                                           Lessons learned. The work in Maldives on risk
   are not consistently positive or indeed very
                                                         ///                   ///




                                                         suggested the following lessons:
   high. Therefore any change in the underlying
   assumptions could result in a net loss                •	 Evidence-based hazard risk profiles are critical
   on investment.                                              for carrying out cost-benefit studies of disaster
                                                               risk mitigation measures and for communicating
•	 A significant shift in focus needs to take place
                                                               risks to national stakeholders.
   toward softer protection measures (e.g.,
   mangroves) and other options to increase              •	 Risk information can be an effective means of
   resilience.                                                 engaging national stakeholders and decision
                                                               makers, and maintaining engagement from
There were also challenges encountered during the
                                                               the start to finish will increase the buy-in of
implementation of the risk assessment activities:
                                                               the results.
•	 Insufficient time was planned for project
                                                         •	 It is important to systematically document data
   implementation. The duration of four months
                                                               collected and produced over the course of the
   for project implementation was not sufficient,
                                                               project, including the implementation plans,
   given the complexity of the analysis.
                                                               methodological framework, data and databases,
•	 Identifying local technical specialists was                 etc. This documentation provides critical inputs
   difficult. The project struggled to recruit a               to the institutionalization of the National
   local structural engineer, resulting in significant         Disaster Management Centre and lays down
   reallocation of responsibilities, including the             a solid foundation for the establishment of a
   diversion of staff from other UNDP programs.                national risk information system in the future.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                        135
136
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      3-14. Malawi: How Risk Information Guides an Integrated
      	
      Flood Management Action Plan
      Francis Nkoka, Pieter Waalewijn (World Bank)


      Natural and man-made hazards cumulatively                  National assessment of drought and flood
                                                               ///




      affected 25 million people in Malawi between             risk. Following the Standard Precipitation Index
                                                                     ///




      1974 and 2003, with weather-related disasters            methodology (McKee, Doesken, and Kleist 1993),
      occurring on average once a year over the last           the drought risk assessment measured daily
      40 years (Government of Malawi 2010). Disaster           rainfall from 45 meteorological stations in Malawi
      risk in Malawi arises from a combination of              to determine the precipitation time series. This
      tectonic activity, erratic rainfall, environmental       historical series was used to generate a 500-year
      factors, and socioeconomic vulnerability driven by       stochastic weather event set, which was in turn
      widespread dependence on rain-fed agriculture, a
                                                               embedded in an agro-meteorological model to
      narrow economic base, and extensive rural poverty
                                                               ascertain long-term drought frequency. The crops
      (Government of Malawi 2011). With climate change,
                                                               considered most exposed to drought included
      population growth, urbanization, and environmental
                                                               three types of maize and one type of tobacco.
      degradation, the trend is toward more frequent and
                                                               Economic crop production (and losses) leveraged
      more intense disasters.
                                                               data collected and shared by the Malawi Ministry of
      The government of Malawi recognizes that                 Economic Planning and Development.
      improved management of the natural hazard risk
                                                               The analysis, completed in January 2011, revealed
      can lead to intensified, yet sustainable, agricultural
      production, better transport links, and more secure      that the central region of Malawi had the greatest
      homes and livelihoods. With this vision of the           potential for losses, and that losses associated with
      country’s potential, the government of Malawi            LMZ (local) maize were the highest for any crop;
      partnered with the World Bank and GFDRR to               the 50-year return period loss of LMZ maize in
      undertake a national risk assessment (RMSI 2011).        central Malawi was US$34 million. Across the entire
      This proactive, evidence-based analysis sought           country, the loss for this maize at this return period
      to determine, quantify, and map Malawi’s flood           was as high as US$62 million, and the average annual
      and drought hazard potential both historically           loss for this maize was US$6 million. Composite
      and probabilistically, using average annual loss         maize was found to be the most drought-resistant.
      and probable maximum direct and indirect loss            Losses associated with tobacco were considerably
      as metrics. It was recognized that improved flood        lower, with an average annual loss of US$1 million.
      management in the Shire River Valley in particular
      could significantly reduce entrenched poverty            Flood hazard analysis used daily flow discharges
      and potentially make the Shire Valley a national         from 13 Malawi river stations over different two-
      economic hub. With this in mind, the government          year time periods, with ~90m resolution digital
      of Malawi also commissioned a detailed flood             elevation model, a digital river network, and HEC-
      analysis of the Shire basin (Atkins 2012). This staged   RAS flood modelling software. The Dartmouth
      approach to understanding risk in Malawi— national       Flood Observatory satellite images of the January
      to local level—highlights the need for understanding     2003 flood event were used to calibrate the flood
      of risk at many levels and for many purposes.            extent. Flood extent maps were produced to show
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                   03
return periods of 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, and        works currently in place are now considered
500 years. Exposure data consisting of population        unsafe or unsustainable due to poor engineering
and dwellings (households)52, roads, railway, and        practices. The Lower Shire River is the site of
agriculture (maize and tobacco) were then overlaid       flood disasters nearly every year, and these cause
on the flood extent maps. Results reveal that, on        damage to infrastructure that is never successfully
average, about 26,000 people and 6,000 dwellings         repaired. These disasters require significant flood
are inundated each year at a cost of US$6.5 million,     aid and other relief support to a region that is the
with the district of Chikwawa most affected.53           poorest in the country, and that already struggles
      The average annual loss to roads, railways, and
                                                         with inadequate sanitation and limited access to
agriculture was found to be US$38,000, US$61,000,
                                                         clean water.
and US$19 million, respectively.
                                                         The Shire River is economically and environmentally
Economic analysis reveals that Malawi loses about
                                                         very important. It is the site of hydroelectric
1 percent of GDP per year as a result of drought,
                                                         schemes that generate 98 percent of Malawi’s
though during a 1-in-25-year drought, GDP can
                                                         electricity; it contains extensive fisheries and
contract as much as 10 percent. A 1-in-25-year
                                                         wildlife conservation areas; and it provides
drought can also significantly exacerbate income
poverty—that is, can cause an almost 17 percent          freshwater for irrigated agriculture and for industrial
increase in poverty, which is equivalent to an           and domestic uses. A better understanding of flood
additional 2.1 million people falling below the          risk, and the mitigation of risk through targeted
poverty line. Malawi loses 0.7 percent of GDP per        measures based on the findings of the assessment,
year as a result of flooding in the south—the part       would help to improve agricultural production and
of the country where flooding is most severe. Since      generally aid the population that lives in the area.
farmers in other parts of the country and export
                                                         The integrated flood risk analysis aimed to achieve
farmers typically benefit from higher prices during
                                                         the following:
southern flood events, the 0.7 percent contraction
in national GDP really does not reveal the significant   •	 Construction and calibration of a hydrodynamic
localized impacts from flood.
                                                            model of the catchment capable of accurately
  Lower Shire River basin study.54 Following
///                                    ///
                                                            predicting inundation of the floodplain for
the national-level study and other analysis (Shela          extreme fluvial flooding. This model was
et al. 2008), a decision was made to undertake a            developed so that it can be updated in the
comprehensive flood analysis of the Shire River             future to improve accuracy and reliability as
basin. Approximately half a million people live in          better data become available and can assess
the Lower Shire valley and are regularly affected           the effectiveness of potential interventions to
by flooding and water pollution. The highest-risk           mitigate flood impact.
areas in the Shire Basin are Chikwawa and Nsanje
districts, which are located in the lower section of     •	 Simulation of floodplain inundation for 5-, 10-,
the basin, and Mangochi district, just downstream of        20-, 50-, 75-, 100-, and 500-year return period
the outflow from Lake Malawi in the upper section           flood events, and for 100-year return period
of the basin, where flooding is caused when lake            inundation considering change in rainfall
levels are high.                                            patterns with climate change.

Flooding in the Lower Shire River often occurs           •	 Production of flood maps of the catchment for
without warning, and some flood protection                  each of these design modelling scenarios.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                       137
138
                                                 CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                          •	 Development of a framework for flood                   Physical data sets on topography, land use, geology,
                             forecasting and an early warning system in             and soil type, as well as time series data, were used
Figure 03—18  (Left)
                             the basin.                                             in the flood analysis. A variety of improvements is
1-in-100-year flood
                                                                                    being made to these data for future analysis:
extent (in pale blue)
                          •	 Development of guidelines for flood
around the Elephant                                                                 •	 For topography, SRTM data were used, but these
                             mitigation measures.
Marshes of the Lower                                                                   have inadequate vertical accuracy and spatial
Shire Valley, Malawi.     •	 Building capacity of stakeholders involved in             resolution to serve as the basis for detailed flood
                             flood management and development of an                    modelling and mapping. Higher resolution digital
Source: Atkins 2012.
                             institutional development plan.                           elevation is being developed for the catchment,
                                                                                       and the integration of these data will result in
Figure 03—19  (Right)     The objectives were achieved by developing a Soil            substantial improvements in model accuracy.
Flood zoning in the       Conservation Service rainfall-runoff model (SCS
area of the Elephant                                                                •	 For flow and level data, sub-daily rainfall and flow
                          1986) using time varying rainfall data for different
Marshes based on                                                                       data are now being used to improve hydrological
                          return periods (derived from depth-frequency
different return period                                                                modelling.
                          statistical analysis of daily rainfall), with input and
flood events.
                          flow data, where available, used to calibrate the         •	 Observed water level on the Shire and its
Source: Atkins 2012.      model. A sample flood map is in figure 3-18.                 tributaries should be used to provide calibration
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               03
                                                         •	 Functional floodplain: land between the river at
   data. Once limitations in the location of gauges
                                                           normal flow levels and the 20-year flood event
   within the basin are addressed, better calibration
   of the model will be possible.                        After defining flood zones, the assessment then
                                                         provided guidelines for risk-sensitive development
An assessment of the baseline flood risk to high-risk
                                                         within the different zones: for example, emergency
villages was used in conjunction with the economic
                                                         and other essential services should be located in
assessment of flood damage to assess the likely          low flood hazard zones, water-compatible or less
benefits of implementing flood protection measures       vulnerable development should be in high hazard
such as defenses, catchment improvement through          zones, and a minimum of development should
reforestation, and flood storage. Key findings from      occur within the functional floodplain. However,
this analysis include the following:                     agriculture could be promoted within the highly
                                                         productive floodplain area that was found to be dry
•	 Increase in forest cover to reduce flood depth
                                                         during five-year flood events.
   in catchments should be applied on a case-by-
   case basis, since the measure is not effective in     Additional analysis and consultation based on this
   every catchment.                                      analysis led to development of the Shire Integrated
                                                         Flood Risk Management Action Plan. The plan is
•	 Flood storage options were found to be                guided by three principles:
   impractical and ineffective for events larger
   than those having a 10-year return period.            1.	 Flooding is a natural process and a
   These options appeared to reduce flooding in              development issue. The action plan will work
                                                             toward a more detailed and robust understanding
   more-frequent events, but the analysis was not
                                                             of flooding through improvements in input data.
   conclusive and would benefit from analysis of
                                                             It will also identify where human development
   higher-resolution LiDAR data.
                                                             and activities intersect with high flood risk
•	 Predicted changes associated with climate—such            areas and implement measures (both structural
   as a 12 percent increase in river flow—did not            and nonstructural) that protect populations
   result in a significant change in flood inundation        from flooding and ensure effective response
   along the river. However, changes may be                  to flooding.

   more apparent with a higher-resolution digital        2.	 Flood management requires a whole-of-
   elevation model.                                          government/country approach and entails
                                                             partnerships between government agencies,
Based on the flood hazard and inundation maps,
                                                             donors, communities, land owners, and private
flood zones (figure 3-19) were defined with the
                                                             sector players. The action plan creates an
following zoning categories for the Shire River basin:
                                                             improved institutional structure and aims to
•	 Low flood hazard zone: land inundated in a 500-           equip all stakeholders with the skills needed
                                                             to contribute to a holistic approach to flood
   year flood event
                                                             risk management.
•	 Moderate flood hazard zone: land inundated in
                                                         3.	 A pragmatic and integrated approach
   100- to 500-year flood events
                                                             to flooding includes flood management,
•	 The floodplain: land inundated in 100-year                risk reduction, preparedness, response,
   flood events                                              and recovery. The action plan has identified
                                                             approximately 100 intervention measures under
•	 High flood hazard zone: land inundated in 20- to          four main themes. Several sample interventions
   100-year flood events                                     are highlighted here.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                   139
140
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      4.	 Improving the hydrodynamic modelling                    overall, and consideration of improvements in
        framework that was produced in the                        light of flood risk assessment.
        first phase of analysis, in recognition of
        the limitations and uncertainties of this risk         7.	 Building institutional capacity through a
        assessment. Key activities include channel                comprehensive training package on collecting
        topographic surveys to extend the model to                hydrometeorological data, running the
        tributaries and improve the accuracy of the               hydrodynamic model, and building institutions.
        model, improvement of data-sharing procedures
        and protocols, and additional modelling of factors     As a step toward implementing the action plan,
        contributing to flood such as sedimentation.           and specifically with the goal of improving data
                                                               sharing across government agencies, in November
      5.	 Investing in structural interventions. These
                                                               2012 the Malawi government launched the Malawi
        focus on flood protection for villages found to be
                                                               Spatial Data Portal (MASDAP http://www.masdap.
        most at risk, catchment improvements through
        reforestation, maintenance of culverts and             mw/about/). This GeoNode already hosts 123 spatial
        bridges to improve flow capacity, considerations       layers,56 including infrastructure, OSM layers,
        of flood storage options, and a feasibility analysis   flood outlines from a 2012 Atkins study, elevation
        of a plan to flood-proof existing buildings to act     and other data, and data sets on soil type. (For
        as flood shelters.                                     more on the development and use of GeoNodes,
                                                               see the section 3-1 and box 3-1 above). It is part
      6.	 Supporting improvements to flood
        forecasting and early warning systems                  of the Malawi government’s effort to open data,

        through review of past programs and                    support community mapping activities, and develop
        interventions, improvements to monitoring              decision support tools that leverage open data for
        systems, assessment of the monitoring system           contingency and land-use planning activities.
                                                                                                                CHAPTER


                                                                                                                03
3-15. Reducing Seismic Risk to Public Buildings in Turkey
	
Elif Ayhan, Joaquin Toro (World Bank)

Seismic risk in Turkey is substantial. Estimates        buildings to earthquake shaking, and found they had
suggest that in the 76 earthquakes that have            a high potential for collapse.
occurred in Turkey since 1900, 90,000 lives have
                                                        This risk assessment made the following high-
been lost, 7 million people have been affected, and
US$25 billion in direct damages have been incurred      priority recommendations:

(Erdik 2013). The 1999 Izmit-Kocaeli and Duzce
                                                        •	 635 hospitals should be urgently prioritized for
earthquakes were vivid reminders of this risk. They
                                                           detailed assessment and retrofitting.
prompted scientific analysis that emphasized the
increased risk to Istanbul arising from the nature of   •	 Almost 2,000 schools should be urgently
the North Anatolian fault zone (Parsons et al. 2000).      reviewed and retrofitted to prevent “pancake-
Indeed, this analysis suggested that Istanbul’s 1          like” collapse during an earthquake.
million buildings have a 2–4 percent chance of heavy
damage and a 20–34 percent chance of moderate           •	 24 bridges with a high probability of collapse and

damage from a scenario earthquake event.                   two viaduct bridges should be urgently reviewed
                                                           and retrofitted to prevent collapse during an
In response to the heightened concern, the Istanbul        earthquake.
Metropolitan Municipality, in cooperation with the
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA),          •	 To reduce the risks of secondary fires and
prepared a microzonation study with various                explosions, systems that would automatically
seismic scenarios (Pacific Consultants International       shut down the gas distribution network after an
et al. 2002). This analysis involved developing            earthquake should be considered.
fundamental data sets on the seismology and
                                                        •	 A disaster management center should be
ground conditions that could amplify earthquake
                                                           established, and a campaign to raise awareness of
shaking.57 It also involved deriving exposure data—
                                                           disaster prevention should be conducted.
including data on public and private buildings,
land use, hazardous facilities, lifelines, and road     The Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality took these
networks—from a variety of sources such as              recommendations into consideration in developing
census and cadastral records, and then compiling        the Istanbul Earthquake Master Plan.58 This plan was
them into a GIS database. Impact analyses were          ultimately funded under a government of Turkey
undertaken for four scenario earthquakes, ranging       and World Bank risk reduction program known as
in magnitude from 6.9 to 7.7, which were selected       Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency
in partnership with researchers from the Turkish        Preparedness Project (ISMEP).59
scientific committee. The results suggested that 7–8
percent of buildings would have heavy damage, as        Implementation of this program has improved
many as 87,000 people would be killed, and 135,000      emergency preparedness, reduced risk to existing
would be severely injured—significantly greater         public facilities, and resulted in some improvement
damage than was found by the previous analysis.         to building code enforcement across Istanbul—
The newer analysis also highlighted the vulnerability   achievements that have collectively increased
of Istanbul’s schools, hospitals, and other public      Instanbul’s seismic resilience. Highlights of




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                    141
142
                                                       CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                            progress achieved under ISMEP by 2012 include the                    carried out for the Archeological Museum, Hagia
                            following:   60
                                                                                                 Irene Museum, and Mecidiye Kiosk, including
                                                                                                 development of recommendations about
                            •	 Seismic risk evaluation was carried out for 1,515
                                                                                                 structural reinforcement.
                               public buildings associated with 749 schools, 31
                               hospitals, 57 health centers, and 51 other public              This series of risk assessment studies, development
                               facilities.                                                    of risk reduction plans, and implementation of

                            •	 Work was done to retrofit or restore 658                       investments to reduce seismic risk in Turkey
                               buildings associated with 451 schools, 8 hospitals,            constitute a remarkable example of how risk
                               10 health centers, and 31 other public facilities.             information can influence and trigger actual on-
                                                                                              the-ground risk reduction. Turkey’s achievements
                            •	 Reconstruction was performed for 95 schools
                                                                                              came about because of (a) strong relationships
                               deemed not suitable for retrofitting (where
                                                                                              between those developing the risk information and
                               estimates gave a total retrofit cost ratio higher
                                                                                              the decision makers using the information; (b) clear
                               than 40 percent of the value of the building).
                                                                                              actionable recommendations from risk assessment;
                            •	 Inventories were made of 176 historical buildings              (c) strong political will to invest in risk reduction
                               in 26 complexes, and seismic evaluations were                  (driven by the devastation associated with the 1999




Figure 03—20                                         Prioritization of Public Buildings in Promoting Seismic Safety
Prioritization                                                       of Settlements with High Risks
methodology for
high seismic risk                                         Inventory of Public Buildings in Settlements and Spatial Analyses

public buildings.

Source: World Bank 2012b.                Attributes Contributing in Emergencies                      Attributes Contributing to Safety
                                                                                                                of Building
                                              • Use and Functions
                                              • Capacity                                            • Geological Properties of Site
                                              • Share of Services Provided                          • Infrastructure Dependence
                                              • Accessbility                                        • Hazardous Neighbors
                                                                                                    • Buildings to be Protected




                                                                                  Spatial Systems



                                                                   Determination of Building of Priority According
                                                                        to Their Contribution to City Safety




                                                               Re-Prioritization of Public Buildings According
                                                              to Engineering and Economic Efficiency Criteria
                                                                                                                            CHAPTER


                                                                                                                             03
             ATTRIBUTE                      WEIGHT                         CLASSIFICATION DETAILS
                                                        5: vital buildings such as hospitals                              Table 03—7 
      Current and emergency use               20%       4: schools, major public buildings, etc.                          Building
                                                        3, 2, and 1: less important buildings                             Classifications Used
  Service role (who and what relies on                  5: a single facility that serves the entire region or city        in Prioritization
                                              20%
             this building)                             1: facility for which there is reasonable redundancy              Methodology
                                                        5: a building that, if damaged, will cause physical damage to
             Urban context                    20%       surrounding buildings, fires, infrastructure problems, or other   Source: World Bank 2012b.
                                                        problems in its vicinity
                                                                                                                          Note: For brevity, only
                                                        5: an accessible building reachable by many roads or methods
              Accessibility                       15%                                                                     levels 5 and 1 are described,
                                                        1: a building likely to be inaccessible in a disaster
                                                                                                                          although each attribute can
                                                        5: a building on poor soils
      Geologic properties of sitea            10%                                                                         earn a score of 1 to 5. For
                                                        1: a building on better soils
                                                                                                                          certain attributes, there are
                                                        5: a building totally dependent on local infrastructure           multiple proposed methods
       Infrastructure dependence              10%       1: a building that can operate independently for at least two     for assigning values, such
                                                        weeks without external services                                   as based on the number of
                                                        5: an historically important building                             students in a school.
      Historical and cultural value               5%
                                                        1: not historically important




earthquakes); and (d) the prioritization of financial          Turkey’s Disaster and Emergency Management
resources to invest in risk reduction.                         Presidency, with support from the World Bank and
                                                               GFDRR, has developed a preliminary methodology
These achievements notwithstanding, seismic risk               for prioritization (World Bank 2012b). This
in Istanbul continues to increase—mainly because               approach involves the development of an inventory
of population growth, urbanization, overcrowding,              of public buildings, an evaluation of the relevant
and challenges associated with enforcement of                  importance of different buildings, and an assessment
land-use plans and construction policies. Moreover,            of the elements of the building construction that
other cities in Turkey have made less progress than            make them more or less likely to be damaged in an
Istanbul in reducing seismic risk.                             earthquake. This broad assessment methodology is
                                                               described in figure 3-20.
In light of the remaining seismic risk across the
country, the government of Turkey is seeking to                This methodology is used to distinguish building
build on the success of the ISMEP project and                  significance levels, which included low, moderate,
extend it nationwide, focusing on public buildings             significant, and high importance. Some of the

(schools, hospitals, administrative buildings,                 attributes used to classify buildings’ importance are
                                                               described in table 3-7.
emergency response centers, and other public
buildings with important life-safety or emergency              The estimation of the earthquake performance of
response functions). Given the immense scale                   buildings by experienced earthquake engineers was
of this task, however, robust and objective                    based on building geometry and number of stories;
prioritization of buildings for retrofitting or                construction quality and material properties; and
reconstruction is required.                                    geotechnical and geological maps. This information




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                      143
144
                                                   CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




Table 03—8                   BUILDING SIGNIFICANCE
                                                                                     STRUCTURAL VULNERABILITY CLASSES
Prioritization for                  LEVELS
Reconstruction and                                                     Low                         Medium                         High
Rebuilding                              Class I                         P5                            P4                           P1
                                       Class II                         P5                            P4                           P1
Source: World Bank 2012b.
                                       Class III                        P5                            P3                           P1
                                       Class IV                         P3                            P2                           P1




                            is used to determine the structural vulnerability                A pilot application of this method was completed
                            class of low, medium, or high collapse potential.   61           in Tokat Province of Turkey in 2013. The selection
                                                                                             of Tokat was based on its proximity to the highly
                            Based on a synthesis of both these criteria, buildings           active North Anatolia fault and building stock largely
                            for reconstruction/rebuilding were prioritized                   characteristic of the country. Among a sample of 12
                                                                                             buildings, two buildings were found to be priority
                            using the priorities defined in table 3-8. Under this
                                                                                             1 and therefore require urgent retrofitting and/or
                            methodology, all buildings that have a high collapse             reconstruction; one building was a priority 2, seven
                            potential, irrespective of the building’s significance           were priority 3 buildings, and two were priority 4
                            level as defined by its class, were allocated a priority         buildings. This methodology is now forming the
                                                                                             basis for ongoing dialogue between the government
                            1 (P1). Buildings with low structural vulnerability
                                                                                             of Turkey—specifically the National Disaster and
                            were assigned the lowest priority, P5, except for
                                                                                             Emergency Management Presidency—and the
                            class IV buildings, which were assigned a priority               World Bank on the design of future disaster risk
                            of P3.                                                           reduction investments.
                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                 03
3-16. Applying Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment to the
	
Development of a Seismic Retrofit Program for Public
Schools in Metro Manila, Philippines

H. Kit Miyamoto, Amir S. J. Gilani (Miyamoto International); Jolanta Kryspin-
Watson, Artessa Saldivar-Sali, Abigail C. Baca (World Bank)

The Philippines is among the top global disaster          and built-up area have increased in Metro Manila
hot spots, ranking eighth among countries most            during the past 10 years, the projected loss of life
exposed to multiple hazards and 13th among those          for a given scenario earthquake will likely increase
at high economic risk to natural disasters (Dilley        significantly as well.
et al. 2005b). Two events in 2013—the magnitude
                                                          The World Bank’s partnership with the Philippines
7.2 Bohol earthquake on October 15 and Super
Typhoon Yolanda on November 8—suggest the                 focuses on improving the resilience of public

country’s particular vulnerability to earthquakes         facilities to natural disasters by working with

and typhoons. The Philippines is also vulnerable to       counterparts in the Department of Public Works
nontropical cyclone precipitation, floods, volcanic       and Highways, the Department of Education, the
activity, and tsunamis. These natural hazard events       Department of Health, and other line agencies
are harmful not only at the human level, but at the       responsible for the construction and maintenance
economic level; it is estimated that 85 percent of        of critical infrastructure. While past projects
economic activity associated with national GDP            successfully raised awareness of hazards and risk,
occurs in at-risk areas (Dilley et al. 2005b). The need   the next step is to help the implementing agencies
for a robust natural hazards risk reduction program       prioritize risk reduction investments given limited
is great.                                                 budget resources. Using existing hazard and risk
                                                          assessment data, the current study—based on one
The National Capital Region, Metro Manila, is             component of the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure
home to approximately 13 percent of the country’s         program—has sought to develop a prioritization
population and generates 30 percent of its GDP. The       methodology for seismic upgrading and retrofitting.
PHIVOLCS, JICA, and MMDA (2004) Metro Manila              Preliminary results from a pilot analysis in Metro
Earthquake Impact Reduction study (the so-called          Manila show that systematically strengthening
MMEIRS study) estimated that 10 percent of the            and upgrading the most vulnerable public school
public schools in Metro Manila would incur heavy          buildings would greatly reduce the number of
damage or collapse from a magnitude 7.2 West Valley       projected fatalities from a magnitude 7.2 scenario
Fault earthquake, endangering 210,000 students.           earthquake on the West Valley fault.
This study also found that over 50 percent of the
area’s public school buildings are at high risk from        Prioritization methodology for seismic
                                                          ///




earthquakes. These estimates are expected to be           upgrade of schools. The prioritization method
                                                                                   ///




updated by the findings of the Greater Metro Manila       for determining which public school buildings were
Area Risk Assessment Program (GMMA RAP) being             most in need of a seismic upgrade was based on the
led by the Philippine government (see section 3-4         expected number of fatalities under the magnitude
for more information). Given that both population         7.2 scenario earthquake described in the MMEIRS




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     145
146
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      study. The method took the status quo (no retrofit)     •	 Damage functions. Using fatality rates based
      as the baseline, and quantified both the benefits          on Hazus (modified for Metro Manila) and
      derived from and the costs associated with a seismic       number of occupants, the number of fatalities for
      retrofit program.                                          each building was estimated.

      The number of fatalities associated with                •	 Cost estimates. Using the structural damage
      each school building was estimated using a                 data, and based on the buildings’ floor area and
      probabilistic risk analysis platform. Both the             cost estimates obtained from local building
      direct cost components (structural upgrade and/            contractors in Metro Manila, the cost (in 2013
      or replacement) and indirect cost components               U.S. dollars) for replacement as well as upgrade
      (fatalities) were considered. In other words, the          was obtained.
      analysis considered both probable maximum loss
                                                              •	 Aggregation. Fatalities and upgrade costs were
      and probable maximum death. The procedure used
                                                                 integrated to identify the optimal number of
      hazard, exposure, and building vulnerability as input
                                                                 buildings to be selected for the first phase of
      parameters as follows:
                                                                 seismic upgrade.
      •	 Seismic hazard. The seismic hazard data
                                                              The prioritization procedure can be summarized
         (earthquake intensity, proximity to earthquake
                                                              as follows:
         fault, and soil condition at the site) were input
         as a layered map for analysis. Data were based on    •	 The probability of the building experiencing any
         the provisions of the National Structural Code of       of the damage states was computed using the
         the Philippines (ASEP 2010).                            fragility functions corresponding to the building
                                                                 construction type, lateral load framing system,
      •	 Exposure. The Department of Education
                                                                 number of stories, and construction era.
         provided the project team with a database that
         lists the number of occupants (teachers, students,   •	 The fatality ratio for each building was computed
         etc.) for the facilities under consideration.           using the fatality rate for each damage state and
         Field surveys were conducted and data from              the probability of exceeding that damage state.
         these surveys were used to augment and modify
                                                              •	 The number of fatalities for each building was
         the database.
                                                                 computed using the fatality ratio and building
      •	 Building vulnerability. The risk analysis               occupancy.
         platform provided fragility information for
                                                              •	 The seismic upgrade cost for each building was
         buildings of various types (for example,
                                                                 computed using the cost estimate per square
         reinforced concrete moment frame) and vintages
                                                                 meter and the building floor area.
         (for example, constructed prior to adoption
         of modern seismic codes). In this study, the         •	 The fatalities and costs were aggregated for the
         recommended values of FEMA’s (2003) Hazus               186 most vulnerable buildings.
         model were used and modified for Metro Manila.
                                                              The costs to replace and to upgrade schools were
      Following evaluation, probabilistic estimates           gathered from a survey of several Metro Manila
      of structural damage to a given building were           contractors. A new or replacement school would
      determined. These data were then used to obtain         cost approximately 25,000 pesos (US$580) per
      the following:                                          square meter. Upgrading, which includes earthquake
            120
                                                                                                                           Figure 03—21 
                                                                                                                           Estimated Metro
                                                                                                                           Manila student
            100                                                                                                            fatalities per school
                                                                                                                           building for a
                                                                                                                           magnitude 7.2 West
                                                                                                                           Valley fault scenario
             80
                                                                                                                           earthquake occurring
                                                                                                                           in the daytime.
Fatalitiy




                                                                                                                           Source: Miyamoto
             60
                                                                                                                           International and
                                                                                                                           World Bank.

                       18% of fatalities
             40



                            25% of fatalities
             20
                                                           80% of fatalities



                   0
                         500        1,000         1,500       2,000        2,500         3,000        3,500        4,000

                                                          Building number




strengthening and functional upgrades (for example,            school was in session), it would result in an
bathrooms), would cost approximately 5,200 to                  estimated 24,400 student deaths given the current
11,000 pesos (US$120 to US$260) per square                     student population in Metro Manila. Over 25 percent
meter, depending on the number of stories and the              (6,385) of these fatalities would occur in only 5
site requirements.                                             percent (186) of the buildings, and 18 percent (4,320)
                                                               would occur in the most vulnerable 100 buildings
  Key findings of school retrofit prioritization
                                                               (3 percent) (see figure 3-21). By strengthening
///




study. Key findings of the prioritization study
                                                               40 percent (1,500) of the most vulnerable school
             ///




indicate that, because of the use of older seismic
                                                               buildings, potential student fatalities could be
design codes or poor-quality detailing and/or
                                                               reduced by 80 percent (over 19,000 student lives
construction, multistory reinforced concrete
                                                               saved).
construction of the variety typically found in Metro
Manila public schools is especially vulnerable to              The corresponding cost analysis showed that the
earthquake damage or collapse. The study further               cost of strengthening and upgrading a typical school
determined that if a 7.2 magnitude scenario                    building is between 20 percent and 40 percent
earthquake event occurred in the daytime (while                of the cost of new construction. Using the 20




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                      147
148
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      percent figure, Metro Manila could strengthen and      US$40 million and US$80 million (depending on the
      renovate five school buildings for the cost of one     extent of functional upgrades).
      new building.
                                                             It should be noted that there were limitations in the
      The Philippine Department of Public Works and          exposure and hazard data that were available for

      Highways has made the decision to implement            the demonstration seismic prioritization analysis.
                                                             When more accurate data become available, the
      the cornerstone phase (retrofit of 200 school
                                                             prioritization should be refined to identify the
      buildings) of the Safe and Resilient Infrastructure
                                                             highest-risk candidate buildings for strengthening.
      program in Metro Manila, with a view to eventual
                                                             Factors other than those related to structural
      scale-up to other sectors (including lifeline
                                                             vulnerability (such as the need to replace certain
      infrastructure) and geographic locations as well as    schools to meet modern standards for educational
      institutionalization of quality assurance systems.     delivery) should also be considered when developing
      Using local construction cost estimates, the cost to   the final prioritized list of buildings for upgrading.
      strengthen the most dangerous 5 percent (186) of       These factors will be incorporated through
      the vulnerable buildings is estimated to be between    consultations with the Department of Education.
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                   03
3-17. Morocco Comprehensive Risk Assessment Study62
	
Axel Baeumler (World Bank); Charles Scawthorn (Kyoto University, emeritus),
Erwann Michel-Kerjan (Wharton Business School, University of Pennsylvania)



In recognition of the accelerating series of global       The historical record of disasters in Morocco is
shocks—financial crises, commodity volatility,            relatively short and incomplete. However, it is clear
and natural disasters—officials in the government         that hydrometeorological hazard has affected the
of Morocco proactively developed and adopted a            most people and created the most economic loss,
national strategy for integrated risk management          whereas earthquakes have resulted in the most
(IRM). Working in partnership with the World              fatalities (12,000 people were killed by the 1960
Bank, Morocco is using this strategy to reduce the        magnitude 5.7 Agadir earthquake) and have also
potential impacts of future crises, to increase its       been a major source of economic loss. 63Given that
                                                          Morocco’s urban population is expected to increase
resilience and responsiveness when crises occur, and
                                                          15 percent by 2025, seismic and flood risk will
to support decision making on resource allocation
                                                          likewise increase unless well managed. In addition,
and prioritization. This effort followed initial
                                                          the country already experiences more intense
investment in preliminary risk profiles (see box 3-6).
                                                          and frequent droughts and floods resulting from
This integrated risk approach was viewed as critical      climate change, and increasingly scarce freshwater
because not all risks are equal across the public         availability.64
sector; thus any risk management strategy must be
                                                            Probabilistic disaster risk assessment. As part
appropriately targeted. An IRM approach avoids
                                                          ///                                            ///




                                                          of the IRM project, a probabilistic GIS analysis tool,
the tendency of risk management to be undertaken          MnhPRA (Morocco natural hazards Probabilistic
in “silos” and is a rare example of enterprise risk       Risk Assessment), was developed and used to assess
management—that is, the process of quantifying            current earthquake, flood, tsunami, drought, and
risks, comparing them with one another, and               landslide risk in Morocco (World Bank 2013).65
managing them in a coordinated manner—beginning                 This software package enables users to inventory
to be applied in the public sector.                       Morocco’s assets at risk, determine the hazard
                                                          characteristics and assign vulnerability functions,
The IRM initiative was launched in 2008 with
                                                          and estimate the impacts of these hazards on
financial support from the GFDRR and the Swiss
                                                          the assets in a robust and quantitative manner.
Agency for Cooperation and Development. It has
                                                          The impacts can be determined as estimates
focused on three key risk areas: (a) natural disasters,   of the fatalities, injuries, and direct economic
specifically earthquake, tsunami, flood, and drought      consequences of all possible hazard occurrences—
events; (b) commodity (energy) price volatility; and      ranging from rare and potentially catastrophic
(c) agricultural risks, comprised of drought, pests       events to frequent, lower-impact events. Loss
and diseases, and market price volatility. Of these,      estimates are provided in detailed tables at the
natural disaster risk has been the most extensively       commune level; in summary tables at the province,
assessed, and the results of these assessments are        region, and national levels; and as maps. Risk can
discussed here in greatest detail.                        be assessed under current conditions and for future




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                      149
150
 Box 03—6  Risk Assessments as an Advocacy Tool for DRM in                             points in time considering growth and urbanization
 the Middle East and North Africa                                                      as well as alternative public policies.

 In 2008, GFDRR provided seed funding to help scale up DRM engagements                 MnhPRA used input-output and computable
 in the Middle East and North Africa. Djibouti, Morocco, and Yemen received            general equilibrium modelling to measure the
 US$70,000, US$100,000, and US$150,000, respectively, to fund rapid risk
                                                                                       indirect economic costs of disasters (how the
 profiling and assessment. These projects enabled each country to better
                                                                                       economy adjusts to the shock, including the effects
 understand and more effectively communicate risk, and they sparked new
 cooperation in risk management across ministries. With additional funding for
                                                                                       on household income and consumption). These
 risk mitigation in the housing, infrastructure, energy, and education sectors,        models, which were developed in conjunction with
 government leaders partnered with the UN and European Union to carry out              the government’s High Commission for Planning,
 post-disaster needs assessments in Djibouti (for the 2011 drought, with funding       capture the interdependencies between all sectors
 of $60 million) and Yemen (for flooding in 2008, with funding of $30 million).        of the economy as well as the ex ante and ex post

 In all three countries, risk assessments were used as an advocacy tool. That
                                                                                       macroeconomic decisions of the government.
 is, the assessment results showing the potential average annual losses
                                                                                       The project built a comprehensive exposure model
 arising from a disaster were used to sensitize finance ministers to the need
 for DRM. With finance ministers aware of the cost of inaction, technical
                                                                                       for Morocco covering residential, commercial,
 assistance was expanded to multi-sectoral programmatic risk management:               industrial, and public infrastructure and agricultural
 early warning systems, risk management laboratories, and knowledge                    assets. The exposure model was compiled through
 centers were established, and risk reduction information was integrated into          a combination of existing data sets (collected from
 development plans and strategies. Following the success of this approach, risk        government institutions), satellite imagery, site
 assessments were initiated by government authorities in Algeria and Saudi
                                                                                       visits, and statistical modelling. The project found
 Arabia with the aim of sensitizing relevant ministries to the importance of DRM,
                                                                                       that the total value of the built environment in
 influencing vulnerability reduction strategies and financial disaster risk transfer
 instruments, and leveraging best practices. Partly as a result of getting finance
                                                                                       Morocco—that is, the replacement value of houses,
 ministries to recognize DRM’s importance, most countries in the Middle                businesses, factories, roads, bridges, ports, vehicles,
 East and North Africa have made progress in DRM in recent years. Especially           electrical networks, and other assets—is DH 2.7
 notable is the shift in these countries away from reactive response to disaster       trillion (US$ 330 billion), or around DH 90,000
 to more proactive DRM—a shift that signals increased commitment to HFA                (US$11,000) per capita.
 objectives and priorities.
                                                                                       Earthquake risk was found to be concentrated in
 Source: Andrea Zanon (World Bank).
                                                                                       the north of the country and in the seismically
                                                                                       active area between Fez, Marrakech, and Agadir—
                                                                                       essentially the mountainous belts formed by the
                                                                                       collision of the African and Eurasian plates. Five
                                                                                       provinces (Nador, Al-Hoceima, Berkane, Taza,
                                                                                       Tetouan) were found to account for 34 percent of
                                                                                       the estimated average annual loss from earthquake
                                                                                       despite having only 8 percent of the national
                                                                                       building exposure. These findings highlight the
                                                                                       government’s opportunity to significantly reduce
                                                                                       seismic risk in these provinces through focused
                                                                                       investments that increase earthquake resiliency.

                                                                                       Floods are a chronic disaster management challenge
                                                                                       for Morocco. Analyses showed that a significant
                                                                                       fraction of Morocco’s total exposure is at risk from
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               03
flood, but that four provinces contribute 60 percent     mitigation options. The BCR for these scenarios
of the total flood loss with respect to average annual   ranged from 54.0 to 1.1 (the higher the BCR, the
loss. These findings provide a clear target for future   more benefits for the money spent), with some
flood mitigation investments; they also indicate         specific ratios as follows:
which areas should give greater consideration to
                                                         •	 Flood warning systems for the Ouregha subbasin:
flood risk in future urban and land-use planning.
                                                               BCR = 54.0
The analyses also highlighted the effects of flood
on the economy—evident, for example, in the              •	 Culverts on railway lines in the Gharb plains:
vulnerability of the main railway line in the Gharb            BCR = 34.6
plains, which when damaged significantly reduces
the flow of goods across Morocco.                        •	 Strengthening of hospital buildings in Nador
                                                               Province: BCR = 5.8
Tsunami events were found to represent a rare but
potentially devastating risk to Morocco’s Atlantic       •	 Risk assessment for proposed new schools in the
and Mediterranean coastlines, with waves as high               country: BCR = 5.7
as 10m possible in Casablanca, Morocco’s largest
                                                         •	 Seismic strengthening of schools in Nador
port. Not much attention is paid to tsunami risk,
                                                               Province: BCR = 3.6
particularly in the Atlantic basin. But tsunami
caused significant loss of life in Morocco after the     These BCR analyses provide a quantitative measure
1755 earthquake (better known for its catastrophic       that promotes efficient resource allocation.
effects in Lisbon).
                                                         A risk assessment also provides a higher-level
Drought is an insidious and significant risk to the      perspective on the cost of various portfolio
agricultural sector in Morocco, which currently          investment choices. For example, the cost to
employs about 40 percent of the nation’s work force.     strengthen the seismic resilience of all schools
Especially at risk are the lowlands where cereal         and hospitals in high-risk provinces was estimated
crops are grown, which are subject to considerable       at DH 1.7 billion (US$207 million) and DH 700
variation in annual precipitation. Indeed, on average,   million (US$85 million), respectively. For flood,
drought occurs every third year in Morocco, creating     early warning systems in three regions would
volatility in agricultural production that is the main   involve a capital outlay of about DH 400 million
constraint to expansion in the sector.                   (US$49 million), with annual operating costs of DH
                                                         40 million (US$4.9 million). Overall, total losses
Cost-benefit analysis provided a key tool in             associated with a disaster event were typically
communicating the costs and benefits of different        found to be 25 to 30 percent higher than the direct
risk reduction and mitigation actions. While benefits    losses calculated through physical loss modelling
can be derived by increasing mitigation efforts, these   (Government of Morocco 2012).
efforts come with an increasing cost. Hence it is
critical to determine, through cost-benefit analysis,      Conclusions of IRM study. The probabilistic
                                                         ///                           ///




the optimal level of mitigation—that is, the point       risk assessment revealed that natural disasters
where decreasing loss equals the increasing cost         will cost Morocco DH 5.0 billion (US$611 million)
of mitigation.                                           annually on average, of which flood contributes
                                                         the greatest loss. However, the average annual
For Morocco, the comprehensive probabilistic             loss does not fully characterize Morocco’s risk. An
risk assessment allowed benefit-cost ratio (BCR)         extreme event, such as an earthquake striking a
analyses to rank the effectiveness of 51 potential       major population center, could have direct costs




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                   151
152
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      on the order of DH 100 billion (US$12 billion),            Quantifying these risks will help Morocco to move
      equivalent to 5 percent of GDP, or 23 percent of the       toward the next phase of managing the risks,
      national budget. This amount is substantially higher       mainly through dedicated investment programs
      if indirect socioeconomic costs are considered,            targeting both physical and fiscal risks. Using risk
      such as the ripple effects on other sectors of the         analysis, the government of Morocco has begun
                                                                 to prioritize key short- and medium-term actions
      economy. While the government would not bear the
                                                                 across all three risk categories (natural disaster,
      full cost of the damage to residential assets, there is
                                                                 commodity price volatility, and agricultural
      an implicit liability attached to this sector, and it is
                                                                 risks). For natural disasters, short-term priorities
      likely that government aid for asset reconstruction
                                                                 include establishing early warning systems for
      and livelihood support would be significant.               flood, tsunami, and earthquake events; carrying
                                                                 out additional hazard and risk analyses; enhancing
      The loss from disasters, however, is not the sole
                                                                 building code compliance; mounting an education
      risk for Morocco. In 2011, oil volatility in Morocco
                                                                 campaign around the need for seismic retrofits
      resulted in a DH 30 billion (US$3.6 billion) negative
                                                                 in the most seismically at risk areas of Morocco;
      impact on the national budget, a result of the
                                                                 and establishing a national catastrophic insurance
      country’s existing fuel subsidy system. In 2008, the       program for private assets. Lastly, MnhPRA has been
      country’s agricultural risks cost an estimated DH          installed in government ministries, with the aim that
      75 billion (US$9 billion), and projections suggest         it will become an ongoing tool for monitoring and
      that these costs could rise as high as DH 185 billion      managing exposure and risk at both the national and
      (US$22.6 billion) by 2020.                                 local level.
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                   03
3-18. Risk Assessment for Financial Resilience: The
	
Approach of the World Bank
World Bank/GFDRR Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program


Risk assessment is the first step in managing            decision makers. With these data as a foundation,
disaster risk. Understanding and quantifying the         governments can develop effective strategies that
risk allows policy makers to estimate the potential      build financial resilience across society, increase the
direct physical and human losses from adverse            financial response capacity of the state, and protect
natural events. This information can in turn help        long-term fiscal balances.
governments, communities, and individuals make
informed decisions to strategically manage their         The level of application and detail of the catastrophe
risks. Like other efforts to manage risk, financial      risk model will depend on the decision to be made
protection strategies through disaster risk financing    and the availability of data. Risk models for use in
and insurance (DRFI) rely on risk information.           financial risk-transfer applications require high-
Financial risk assessment and financial diagnostics      resolution and high-quality data sets that can
build on this information to help decision makers
                                                         withstand scrutiny by international finance and
understand financial and fiscal exposure to disaster
                                                         insurance institutions. They also require robust
risk.
                                                         reporting as well as methodologies that effectively
Experience has demonstrated that different DRFI          convey the nature and uncertainty surrounding risk.
questions require different types and resolutions
of disaster risk information. For example, a               What DRFI decision making requires from
                                                         ///




national disaster risk profile undertaken at a coarse    catastrophe risk models. The financial
                                                                                      ///




resolution could be the starting point for a policy      analysis enabled through simulated catastrophe
dialogue on DRM within a country, and could be           risk data empowers policy makers to take more
used to raise public awareness of disaster risks.        informed financial decisions in the public
It could also provide momentum for the more              financial management of natural disasters.
resource-intensive and detailed risk assessments         While sophisticated financial decision making
needed to guide specific financial decisions about       requires highly detailed and granular outputs, risk
risk reduction investments.                              modelling provides many useful applications even

An analysis of historical loss information can           in the absence of such detailed data. For example,
inform initial thinking on DRFI. The next step in        comparatively coarse and incomplete data can still
developing a robust financial and fiscal protection      be sufficient for showing governments the relative
strategy should be a quantitative risk assessment        importance of different risk layers.
with detailed probabilistic modelling. Historical
loss data and simulated loss data from catastrophe       But to provide the necessary level of granularity of

risk models can be used as the basis of financial        outputs for the most complex financial decision
decision making (see figure 3-22). Financial risk        making, catastrophe risk models require high-
analytics helps translate technical risk information     quality, high-resolution inputs of their own.
into financial analysis that is useful to nontechnical   Specifically, they require the following:




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                       153
154
                                                   CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                             •	 A database of assets at risk (exposure                    yet physically plausible events (even if these have
                                module). A high-resolution exposure database              a very low likelihood of occurrence).
                                comprised of the assets at risk to natural
                                                                                       •	 A database of asset fragility curves (vulnerability
                                hazards is essential in informing DRFI decision
                                                                                          module) that make the translation from hazard
                                making. At a minimum, individual risks should
                                                                                          and exposure to damage and loss. A high-
                                be identified in terms of their georeferenced
                                                                                          resolution vulnerability database is crucial for
                                location, value (economic replacement cost),
                                                                                          linking the physical characteristics of the assets
                                usage (school, office, hospital, etc.), and
                                                                                          at risk with the local intensity of the hazards to
                                construction type.
                                                                                          determine damage and loss estimates. Fragility

                             •	 A probabilistic hazard module comprising                  curves are described as mean damage ratios
                                                                                          and will vary by building use, construction,
                                synthetic representations of all possible
                                                                                          height, and age. The vulnerability component
                                hazard types. The hazard module of a
                                                                                          of a catastrophe risk model must reflect the
                                catastrophe risk model comprises a stochastic
                                                                                          impact of these key asset components, as well as
                                event catalog, which contains simulated
                                                                                          geographical changes across a country, such as
                                hypothetical events of different magnitudes.
                                                                                          those due to variations in regional construction
                                Events are modelled with a geographic footprint
                                                                                          codes and practices.
                                of hazard values represented at high resolution,
                                and take into account local site conditions such       Commercial (vendor-built) catastrophe risk models
Figure 03—22                    as soil type, surface roughness, or elevation. It is   that are used in the private insurance industry also
Flowchart for financial         important that the event catalog is well calibrated    generate estimates of the possible broader sectoral
decision making.                to historical records, but also allows for extreme     impacts of disasters. Some models can apply




            Collect historical loss data
             and simulated loss data
                                                             Specify objectives
                 from catastrophe
                    risk models


                  Interpret data
              and make assumptions                     Specify potential strategies
                                                                                                      Monitor experience
               about the economic                              for analysis
                   environment



                   Conduct comparative analysis of potential strategies



                   Make a decision and implement the preferred strategy
                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                    03
adjustments to loss calculations—either based on          catastrophe risk models play an important role: they
projections of inflation in labor costs and building      allow analysts to identify the potential economic
materials during the post-disaster reconstruction         impacts of natural disasters over different time
phase arising from increased demand, or based on          frames so that analysis can test potential approaches
increases in the cost of food affecting government’s      to risk retention and risk transfer before a severe
contingent liability to food security response.           event occurs.
Particularly sophisticated catastrophe risk analyses
also attempt to include potential inflation mitigation    Technical information generated by detailed risk
effects, such as the flow of labor and materials from     models enables decision makers to carry out a range
unaffected regions (increased supply) and the use of      of important tasks:
public work forces.
                                                          •	 Model and evaluate the cost-benefit ratio of
The outputs generated by such catastrophe risk               complex financial instruments, such as (re)
models feed into the DRFI decision-making process.           insurance contracts and catastrophe risk (CAT)
Typically these probabilistic models produce 10,000          bonds when applied as the basis of financial
or more years of simulated event losses and are the          analytics tools
basis for metrics such as average annual losses—an
                                                          •	 Understand potential losses due to
estimate of the average annual losses that a portfolio
                                                             extreme events
of risks would be expected to incur from the hazards
modelled—and probable maximum losses—the                  •	 Quantify AALs and PMLs
maximum probable losses that could be expected
given the model inputs. PMLs are often described in       •	 Model different sovereign DRFI strategies, which
terms of either a return period of occurrence (e.g.,         blend risk-retention, risk-transfer, and budgetary
a loss expected to occur, on average, once every 100         mechanisms, to compare the protection offered
years) or an annual probability of occurrence (e.g.,         and associated cost
a loss expected to occur, on average, with an annual
                                                          •	 Understand how key economic assumptions in
probability of 1 percent).
                                                             the models (such as inflation and interest rates)
Deterministic (also known as “scenario” or “what             affect the losses
if?”) catastrophe model outputs are also useful to
governments because they allow analysis to focus on       AAL and PML metrics are particularly useful for
the financial impact of single, defined events. This      feeding into financial analytical tools, to both inform
approach is particularly beneficial if the country in     and test prototype DRFI strategies. Financial risk
question has a history of severe natural disasters        analysis allows decision makers to take the raw
(one or more of which may still be fresh in residents’    risk information and model complete financial
memory) or has neighbors that have recently               protection strategies, and in this way to understand
experienced a catastrophic event.                         government’s average cost as well as probable
                                                          maximum retained cost.
  How this information is used. Countries starting
///                                ///




a DRFI engagement require a robust process to             AAL and PML metrics enable complementary
understand the financial risks they face and to assess    aspects of financial risk analytics to inform
and evaluate potential DRFI strategies. This process      decisions. The AAL metric, calculated from all
includes the statistical analysis of historical losses,   possible hazards affecting a country, places the
case studies, and simulated risk data. Probabilistic      focus on the likely annual financial cost of natural




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                        155
156
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      disasters. Once this number (or range) is identified,    which depends on the clear identification of asset
      it can be used to inform decisions, such as what         classes in the underlying exposure databases,
      the size of a national disaster reserve fund, and the    ensures that only risks that the government
      potential annual budgetary allocations to it, should     considers to represent contingent liabilities are used
      be. Graphical representations of the contributions of    in the financial analysis and evaluation of potential
      factors such as hazard type, geography, and affected     DRFI strategies. For example, a recent preliminary
      asset classes to the AAL across a territory can help     exposure database developed in Colombia for the
      decision makers understand which factors cause           cities of Bogota, Medellin, and Cali identified the
      most of the expected loss.
                                                               following asset divisions: residential (low, medium,
      PML metrics at different return periods help             and high socioeconomic classes), commercial,
      to identify potential financial requirements for         industrial, health (public and private), education
      catastrophic events with a low annual probability        (public and private), and institutional (public and
      of occurrence. Five-to-ten year PMLs can inform          private). Information like this allows governments
      decisions about the size of potential short- to mid-     to identify the contingent liabilities that should
      term financing instruments, such as contingent           inform DRFI decision making.
      lines of credit. Similarly, low annual probability
                                                               The risk information generated by financial risk
      PMLs (e.g., 100-year or 250-year return periods)
                                                               assessment and modelling is not only valuable
      can inform the size of financial protection
      instrumentation for the purpose of transferring          for developing comprehensive sovereign DRFI

      sovereign risk to the international capital and (re)     strategies. Given their high level of detail, the data
      insurance markets.                                       sets can in some cases be adapted, often quickly
                                                               and at low cost, to inform local-level planning. The
      An important component in DRFI is clarifying             Pacific Catastrophe Risk and Financing Initiative,
      contingent liabilities of the state. Disaster risks      for example, has adapted data sets in this way. (For
      create implicit and explicit contingent liabilities
                                                               more information, see section 3-19).
      to the government budget, though these are
      generally not well defined in law, making fiscal risk      Limitations and challenges in risk modelling
                                                               ///




      assessment complex. Beyond explicit contingent           for DRFI. The use of risk assessments’ quantitative
                                                                         ///




      liabilities and associated spending needs, such as the   outputs for DRFI purposes is constrained by a
      reconstruction of public assets and infrastructure,      number of challenges. First, low- and middle-income
      governments may in cases of disaster have a moral        countries tend to lack the technical understanding
      and social responsibility (implicit contingent           needed to perceive the importance of ex ante DRFI
      liability) to offer their populations emergency          initiatives and the potential gains arising from
      assistance (such as food, shelter, and medication)       ex ante DRFI programs. Countries often lack the
      and to finance recovery/reconstruction activities
                                                               capacity, resources, and experience to properly
      (e.g., through stimulus grants for rebuilding low-
                                                               use existing products. Globally, countries and
      income housing stock).
                                                               international donors invest significant resources in
      Suitable granularity of catastrophe risk modelling       data collection and risk modelling. But the resulting
      output is crucial for determining the elements           technical risk information (simulated losses, average
      driving the state’s liability—that is, the key asset     annual losses, probable maximum losses, etc.) is
      classes, the location of vulnerable populations, and     difficult to understand for policy makers and often
      responsibility for food security. This granularity,      unsuitable for use in financial analysis.
Second, appropriate risk modelling tools are still       Box 03—7  R-FONDEN: The Financial Catastrophe Risk Model
lacking in countries that need them the most. The        of the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit in Mexico
sophisticated risk modelling tools required for
                                                         Mexico has developed a comprehensive financial protection strategy
DRFI analysis are generally unavailable for low-
                                                         relying on risk retention and transfer mechanisms, including reserve funds,
income countries and even for middle-income              indemnity-based reinsurance, parametric insurance, and catastrophe bonds.
countries. The science required for modelling some       An in-depth understanding of the risks has allowed the Mexican government
important contingent liabilities, such as those from     to successfully access international reinsurance and capital markets to transfer
                                                         specific risks.
food insecurity, is still immature; even for better-
understood risks, such as earthquakes, existing risk     A fundamental feature of the strategy is the R-FONDEN, a probabilistic
modelling tools are often inadequate for the needs       catastrophe risk assessment platform developed to estimate the government’s
of DRFI and require substantial improvements and         financial exposure. R-FONDEN offers scenario-based as well as probabilistic
                                                         analysis at national, state, and sub-state levels of four major perils
additions if they are to be used for DRFI purposes.
                                                         (earthquake, floods, tropical cyclones, and storm surge) for infrastructure in
Exposure data, for example, may rely heavily
                                                         key sectors (education, health, roads, and low-income housing).
on official census data and disregard unofficial
settlements (such as shanty towns or squatter            R-FONDEN takes as input a detailed exposure database (with information
                                                         on buildings, roads, and other public assets) and produces as outputs risk
towns) that regularly suffer the most damage in a
                                                         metrics such as annual expected loss (AEL) and probable maximum loss (PML).
disaster.
                                                         This model is currently used by the Ministry of Finance, in combination with
                                                         actuarial analysis of historical loss data, to monitor the disaster risk exposure
Catastrophe risk models used in low- and medium-
                                                         on FONDEN’s portfolio and to design risk transfer strategies.
income countries are usually not tailored to provide
the type of information that is essential for DRFI       Source: Text is from “Disaster Risk Assessment and Risk Financing: A
                                                         G20/OECD Methodological Framework,” http://www.oecd.org/gov/risk/
(total ground-up losses suffered by the entire built
                                                         G20disasterriskmanagement.pdf.
inventory, number of collapsed buildings, fatalities,
homeless population, impact on crops, impact on
food security, etc.). Retuning existing commercial
models can be an expensive endeavor. It is also
important to keep in mind that the exposure data
underlying risk modelling tools become obsolete
quickly; some are even born obsolete or inaccurate.
Using old census data to collect information on
exposure in fast-growing developing countries is
a risky and potentially inaccurate business, even
if data are trended. Ownership from countries is
needed to maintain these tools, update databases,
and essentially keep them alive. This ownership is
hard to establish, and significant efforts in capacity
building are often needed even where it exists.

Third, underlying disaster risk information is often
lacking in developing countries. DRFI solutions are
only as reliable as the risk assessment models that
support them, and the latter are only as good as
the data used to develop them. Data on exposure




                                                                                                                                    157
158
                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      may be scattered among different governmental            strategies are required to address this demand,
      ministries and other organizations, and may be kept      help governments increase post-disaster financial
      in precarious conditions (see “Exposure” in part 2       response capacity, and build domestic catastrophe
      for additional discussion of these challenges). Use of   insurance markets. Probabilistic risk assessment
      satellite imagery is often the only way to gather up-    and catastrophe risk modelling tools can empower
      to-date exposure data, but the cost of acquiring such    policy makers to take better-informed decisions,
      images can be prohibitive for developing countries,      while technical support helps countries collect the
      unless organizations provide information already         underlying data and build the required models. More
      in their possession free of charge for development       work is needed to establish the link from technical
      purposes. (The U.S. State Department’s Imagery           outputs to financial analysis so that nontechnical
      to the Crowd initiative does just that; for more         decision makers can use catastrophe risk data.
      information see section 3-3.)                            Through simplifying complex technical data and
                                                               providing key financial figures, DRFI analytics helps
      Despite best efforts, challenges and imperfections       strengthen the connection of policy makers and
      will remain in every exposure database and need          technical experts and ensures that policy makers
      to be taken into account when modelling loss             have the information they need to take the best
      estimates. Inflated, detrended historical loss figures   decisions about financing disaster risk.
      provide useful statistical information about the risk
      faced and can be used to adjust outputs from the         Two initiatives that exemplify how probabilistic

      risk model. The collection of actual loss data should    risk assessment and catastrophe risk modelling
                                                               can facilitate DRFI decision making are Mexico’s
      complement efforts in collecting exposure data.
                                                               National Fund for Natural Disasters (Fondo
        The way forward. Developing countries are
      ///                 ///




                                                               Nacional de Desastres Naturales, FONDEN),
      increasingly requesting advisory services to             created in 1996 (box 3-7), and the comparatively new
      proactively manage the fiscal costs of natural           Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk
      disasters. New financial instruments and                 Insurance Facility, or SEEC CRIF (box 3-8).
                                                                                                                                      CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                       03
                                                                               Box 03—8  Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk
                                                                               Insurance Facility

                                                                               The Southeast Europe and Caucasus Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
                                                                               (SEEC CRIF) project was created to respond to a growing demand from
                                                                               Southeast European countries for assistance in reducing their fiscal
                                                                               vulnerability to natural disasters and for greater access to high-quality and
                                                                               affordable catastrophe insurance products for homeowners and small to
                                                                               medium enterprises.(A) In support of these efforts, the World Bank provided
                                                                               financial and technical assistance to Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of
                                                                               Macedonia, and Serbia to establish the Europa Reinsurance Facility (Europa
                                                                               Re).

                                                                               The main objective of Europa Re is to increase access to affordable
                                                                               catastrophe insurance products for homeowners and to facilitate the
                                                                               development of the catastrophe insurance market in member countries.
                                                                               Specifically, Europa Re aims to increase the level of catastrophe insurance
                                                                               coverage from the current 1–2 percent to 10–25 percent over the next 5 to 10
                                                                               years. The design of Europa Re follows that of similar successful catastrophe
                                                                               insurance programs in Turkey and Romania. The Turkish catastrophe insurance
                                                                               pool, for example, currently provides coverage for over 6 million households,
                                                                               while the Romanian catastrophe insurance program insures over 5 million.

                                                                               Increased access to insurance products will occur through investment in key
                                                                               areas. These include educating homeowners and business owners about the
                                                                               exposure of their properties and businesses to natural hazards; improving and
                                                                               standardizing catastrophe insurance products’ credit quality; providing support
                                                                               to enable insurance companies to sell complex weather and catastrophe risk
                                                                               insurance products; and helping governments and insurance regulators enact
Seismic hazard map for Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia showing              regulatory and policy reforms that promote the development of catastrophe
horizontal peak ground acceleration at the surface with an exceedance          and weather risk markets.
probability of 10 percent in 50 years (equivalent to a mean return period of
                                                                               A critical factor underpinning the success of the SEEC CRIF is access to
475 years).
                                                                               high-quality and high-resolution catastrophe risk models, which have been
                                                                               developed for FYR Macedonia, Serbia, and Albania by AIR Worldwide. For
                                                                               example, earthquake loss estimates are now available for these countries;
                                                                               they give a 1 percent exceedance probability for losses of €1.15 billion, €611
                                                                               million, and €955 million for Albania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia, respectively;
                                                                               a sample seismic hazard map produced in this analysis is shown here.

                                                                               (A) The program is strongly endorsed by and has received financial support
                                                                               from multiple donors, including European Union, UNISDR, Swiss State
                                                                               Secretariat for Economic Affairs, and Global Environment Facility.

                                                                               Source: Europa Re.

                                                                               Note: MRP = mean return period; EQ = earthquake.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                                159
160
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      3-19. The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment Initiative66
      	
      Olivier Mahul, Iain Shuker, Michael Bonte (World Bank)

      The Pacific Islands are extremely exposed to natural     was created and made available for the 15 Pacific
      hazards, including volcanic eruptions, floods,           Island countries: the Cook Islands, the Federated
      droughts, earthquakes, tsunamis, and tropical            States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue,
      cyclones. With rising populations, increasing            Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Marshall Islands,
      urbanization, and changes in climate, the impacts        Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
      from these hazards are growing. Indeed, some             Vanuatu, and Timor-Leste.67 This information is
      Pacific Island countries (PICs) face losses that         now housed in the Pacific Risk Information System
      could well exceed their annual gross domestic            (PacRIS) platform (hosted and managed at the
      product. The September 2009 tsunami that hit             SOPAC) and includes the following:
      Samoa, American Samoa, and Tonga provides a
      tragic reminder of the potential impacts of disasters    •	 Database of Historical Tropical Cyclones
      in the Pacific. This tsunami left 150 people dead           and Earthquakes (hazard database). The
      and some 5,300 people—2.5 percent of Samoa’s                database is the result of an exhaustive effort to
      population—homeless. It also caused extensive               collect, merge, and process data from multiple
      damage to Samoa’s infrastructure. The total cost of         sources regarding historical Pacific earthquakes
      the tsunami—restoring infrastructure, maintaining           and tropical cyclones, along with the monetary
      access to basic social services, providing social           losses and impact on populations associated
      safety nets to the affected population, and investing       with these events. The historical earthquake
      in DRM—is estimated to be a staggering 21 percent           catalog currently includes about 115,000 events
      of GDP over the next three to four years (World             of magnitude 5 or greater that occurred in the
      Bank 2010a).                                                region between 1768 and 2009, while the tropical
                                                                  cyclone catalog includes 2,422 events from 1948
      In 2007, the World Bank established the Pacific
                                                                  to 2008.
      Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing
      Initiative (PCRAFI) to develop disaster risk             •	 Database of Accumulated Losses
      assessment tools and practical technical and                (consequence database). Most of the events
      financial applications to reduce and mitigate the           included in the hazard database did not have
      vulnerability of Pacific Island countries to natural
                                                                  major consequences for the human population,
      disasters. This was a joint initiative of the World
                                                                  infrastructure, residential buildings, or crops, but
      Bank, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community
                                                                  some did. A consequence database was assembled
      Applied Geoscience Technology Division (SOPAC),
                                                                  containing approximately 450 events from 1831
      and the Asian Development Bank, with financial
                                                                  to 2009 that affected at least one of the 15 PICs.
      support from the government of Japan and the
                                                                  This database, which is the most complete in
      Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery,
                                                                  existence for the Pacific region, shows that,
      and technical input from Geoscience Australia, GNS
                                                                  on average, these countries have collectively
      Science, and AIR Worldwide.
                                                                  experienced losses in the order of US$1 billion
      Under the PCRAFI initiative, the largest regional           per decade, rising to US$4 billion in both the
      collection of geospatial information on disaster risks      1980s and the 1990s.
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                                                                  03
•	 Database of Assets Exposed to Disasters                with different return periods. They also were the
   (exposure database). This database contains            basis for maps of the geographic distribution of
   components for buildings and infrastructure,           hazards, assets at risk, and potential losses, which
   agriculture, and population. The exposure              can be used to prioritize DRM interventions. This
   database was created by collecting existing            analysis determined that the average annual loss
   data sets, remote sensing analysis, and field          caused by natural hazards across the 15 countries
   surveys. Country-specific data sets were used to       is about US$284 million, or 1.7 percent of regional
   characterize buildings (residential, commercial,       GDP. Vanuatu, Niue, and Tonga were found to
   and industrial), major infrastructure (such            experience the largest average annual losses,
   as roads, bridges, airports, ports, and utility        equivalent respectively to 6.6 percent, 5.5 percent,
   assets), major crops, and population. For the          and 4.4 percent of their national GDPs. The analysis
   building and infrastructure data set, more than        also found that in a given year, there is a 2 percent
   500,000 footprints of structures were digitized
                                                          chance that the Pacific region will experience
   from high-resolution satellite images. These
                                                          disaster losses in excess of US$1.3 billion from
   buildings represent about 15 percent (36 percent
                                                          tropical cyclones and earthquakes.
   without Papua New Guinea) of the estimated
   total number of buildings in the PICs. Of these,       Key outcomes of this work include the following:
   about 80,000 buildings were physically checked,
   photographed, and classified. An additional 3          1.	 A substantial investment in improving the

   million primarily rural buildings were geo-located        underpinning data sets that enable robust risk

   and classified using remote-sensing techniques.           modelling in the Pacific.
   In addition to information on infrastructure and
                                                          2.	 Substantial efforts to ensure all data and
   residential buildings, the database also includes
                                                             analytical results produced under this initiative
   topological maps and information on major cash
                                                             are available to all stakeholders in the Pacific,
   crops, ground cover, and population. To date, this
                                                             for DRM purposes, but also more broadly for
   database is the most comprehensive of its kind
                                                             development planning.
   for this part of the world.
                                                          3.	 Support to PICs to highlight the potential
•	 Database of Modeled Probabilistic Hazards
                                                             impact of disasters from a physical and financial
   and Losses. The effort generated a variety
                                                             perspective, and assistance to nations to
   of risk-related information, including hazard
                                                             improve their macroeconomic planning for
   maps for earthquake and tropical cyclones for
   different return periods, maps of average annual          natural disasters.

   losses, and summaries of key return-period levels
                                                          4.	 Establishment of a catastrophe risk pool for six
   of loss for various disaggregated subnational
                                                             Pacific Island nations—the Cook Islands, the
   administration units.
                                                             Marshall Islands, Samoa, the Solomon Islands,
The PCRAFI project used these data sets to develop           Tonga, and Vanuatu. This pilot program tests
catastrophe risk profiles for 15 Pacific Island nations      a risk transfer arrangement modelled on an
using state-of-the-art risk modelling that simulated         insurance plan that uses parametric triggers,
thousands of cyclones, earthquakes, and tsunamis.            such as cyclone intensity, to determine payouts,
These risk models provide a robust estimation of             so disbursements are quick. This insurance
the economic losses caused by natural disasters              program recently paid out US$1.27 million to




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                      161
162
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




        Tonga following the damage from Cyclone Ian in        codes that include country-specific seismic and
        January 2014.   68
                                                              wind loads; these will guide building designs that
                                                              ensure adequate shelter for the population.
      In the future, the data provided in PacRIS can also
      support efforts aimed at the following:               •	 Rapid disaster impact estimation. The aim
                                                              of this application is to model the expected
      •	 Urban and development planning. Planners
                                                              losses from a catastrophic event immediately
        can use the information to evaluate the impact of
                                                              after a disaster using already collected baseline
        changes to land use and zoning based on natural
                                                              information on assets. Rapid assessments after a
        hazard risk, to develop investment plans to
        retrofit buildings for earthquakes, or determine      disaster will facilitate a faster flow of funds.

        the benefits of raising floor levels to avoid
                                                            •	 Understanding the impacts of disasters as
        flooding due to tropical cyclones. The data can
                                                              the climate changes. PCRAFI and the World
        also be used in cost-benefit analyses of proposed
                                                              Bank, in partnership with Geoscience Australia
        disaster prevention or mitigation investments.
                                                              and the Pacific Australian Climate Change
      •	 Improved building codes. The earthquake and          Science and Adaptation Program, are undertaking
        tropical cyclone hazard models provide critical       analyses to understand future cyclone risk to
        information for creating and revising building        critical assets in the Pacific (see section 3-24).
                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                 03
3-20. From Multi-Risk Assessment to Multi-Risk
	
Governance: Recommendations for Future Directions

Anna Scolobig (Institute for Environmental Decisions, ETH Zurich; Risk, Policy
and Vulnerability Program, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis);
Alexander Garcia-Aristizabal (Analisi e Monitoraggio del Rischio Ambientale);
Nadejda Komendantova, Anthony Patt (Institute for Environmental Decisions,
ETH Zurich; Risk, Policy and Vulnerability Program, International Institute
for Applied Systems Analysis); Angela Di Ruocco, Paolo Gasparini (Analisi e
Monitoraggio del Rischio Ambientale); Daniel Monfort, Charlotte Vinchon, Mendy
Bengoubou-Valerius (Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières); Roger
Mrzyglocki (German Committee for Disaster Reduction [DKKV]); Kevin Fleming
(Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, German Research Centre for Geosciences [GFZ],
Potsdam)


Disasters caused by natural hazards can trigger          making, the interactions between science and
chains of multiple natural and man-made hazardous        practice in terms of knowledge transfer, and
events over different spatial and temporal scales.       more generally to the development of capacities
Multi-hazard and multi-risk assessments make it          at the local level. So far, research has focused on
possible to take into account interactions between       the scientific aspects of risk assessment. But the
different risks. Classes of interactions include         institutional aspects, such as the issues arising
triggered events, cascade effects, and the rapid         when multi-risk assessment results need to be
increase of vulnerability during successive hazards      implemented within existing risk management
(see Marzocchi et al. 2012; Garcia-Aristizabal,          regimes, are also important, though they have
Marzocchi, and Di Ruocco 2013).                          received less attention.

Recent research has greatly increased the risk           The project described here focused on the
assessment community’s understanding of                  institutional context of disasters, which includes
interactions between risks. Several international sets
                                                         a variety of elements ranging from sociopolitical
of guidelines and other documents now advocate
                                                         to governance components. It looked at how to
adopting an all-hazard approach to risk assessments
                                                         maximize the benefits arising from, and overcome
(for example, see UNISDR [2005]; European
                                                         the barriers to, the implementation of a multi-
Commission [2010a, 2010b]; for an overview, see
                                                         hazard and multi-risk assessment approach within
Council of European Union [2009, section 2]).
                                                         current risk management regimes. Working at two
Nevertheless, barriers to the application of multi-      test sites, one in Naples and one in Guadeloupe, the
risk assessment remain. The challenges for the           research team engaged with local authorities and
development of multi-risk approaches are related         practitioners to better understand how to effectively
not only to the applicability of results, but also       implement the results of multi-risk assessment.
to the link between risk assessment and decision         Among the hazards considered were earthquakes,




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     163
164
                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      volcanic eruptions, landslides, floods, tsunamis,        engineers, and policy makers to reduce risk and
      wildfires, cyclones, and marine inundation. Beside       vulnerability. Moreover, both sites have performed
      the practitioners working in the two test sites,         multi-risk assessments. In Naples, two scenarios of
      risk and emergency managers from 11 countries            risk interactions were considered for quantitative
      also provided feedback. In total, more than 70           analysis: the effect (on seismic hazard and risk)
      practitioners took part in the research.                 of seismic swarms triggered by volcanic activity,
                                                               and the cumulative effect of volcanic ash and
        Research design. The project, which aimed to
                                                               seismic loads. Both cases can be combined into a
      ///                 ///




      encourage interaction between researchers and
                                                               single scenario of interactions at the hazard and
      practitioners/decision makers, began with a policy/
                                                               the vulnerability level; the combination highlights
      institutional analysis—that is, desk studies of legal,
                                                               the different aspects of risk amplification detected
      regulatory, and policy documents—to provide
                                                               by the multi-risk analysis (Garcia-Aristizabal,
      a description of the institutional and regulatory
                                                               Marzocchi, and Di Ruocco 2013). In Guadeloupe,
      framework for risk governance within different
                                                               researchers conducted a scenario analysis of cascade
      natural hazard contexts and countries.
                                                               effects and systemic risk. Following a deterministic
      To identify the barriers to effective decision           approach, the analysis considered interaction
      making in the case of multiple hazards, we then          between earthquake and landslide phenomena,
      engaged practitioners in interviews and focus group      along with its consequences on the local road
      discussions. In parallel, we performed multi-risk        network in Guadeloupe and the transport of injured
      assessments of some specific scenarios at the two        people to hospitals and clinics (Monfort and
      test sites. During workshops with practitioners,         Lecacheux 2013).
      we presented the results and also discussed the
                                                                 Results. A first (and expected) finding is that
      barriers to and benefits of implementing multi-
                                                               ///         ///




                                                               risk and emergency managers rarely have the
      risk assessments. Table 3-9 summarizes the key
                                                               opportunity to deal with multi-risk issues, including
      research phases, the methods employed, and the
                                                               triggered events, cascade effects, and the rapid
      accompanying aims.
                                                               increase of vulnerability during successive hazards.
      Both test sites face multiple hazards. Naples, the       Moreover, multi-risk assessments for different
      biggest municipality in southern Italy, has a widely     scenarios are at present rarely performed by
      recognized high volcanic hazard and is also exposed      practitioners at either the national or local level.
      to interconnected hazards such as earthquakes,           A second finding is that most participants saw the
      floods, landslides, and fires. The French overseas       benefits of including a multi-risk approach in their
      department of Guadeloupe (Département-Région             everyday activities, especially in land-use planning,
      d’Outre Mer), an archipelago in the Lesser Antilles,     as well as in emergency management and risk
      is exposed to similar hazards (though it is less         mitigation.
      exposed to fires) and has a high risk of cyclones and
                                                               Practitioners identified the following as among the
      tropical storms; its major geological risk is from
                                                               greatest benefits of a multi-risk approach:
      the active volcano of la Soufrière and the seismic
      activity along the inner Caribbean arc, both of which    ///   1. Multi-risk assessment improves land-use
      can trigger tsunamis and landslides.                     planning.         ///




      Both Naples and Guadeloupe have plans and                According to practitioners, a multi-risk approach
      policies designed to protect their citizens from         provides a holistic view of the risks affecting a
      these risks, and both have deployed scientists,          territory and is appropriate in all geographic areas
                                                                                                                     CHAPTER


                                                                                                                     03
susceptible to several types of hazards. It would be       Damage to some lifelines (water, electricity) was
helpful to have clear criteria to use in determining       also taken into account. The final results of the
which scenarios would be most appropriate for a            scenario determined realistic times required for the
multi-risk assessment. For landslide, for example,         evacuation of the injured, either considering or not
hazard and risk mapping may not address the                considering the damage to the road network and the
specific effects of different possible triggering events   connectivity to lifelines of the hospitals (Desramaut
(intense rainfall, earthquakes, etc.). In the case of      2013; Monfort and Lecacheux 2013).
Naples, a detailed map with the areas susceptible
to landslides is available, but it does not include        ///   3. Multi-risk assessment identifies priorities
information about the possible short-term effects of       for mitigation actions.      ///




volcanic eruptions, even though an eruption could
                                                           The quantified comparison of risks that would allow
produce unstable ash-fall deposits (including in
                                                           a multi-risk approach was also seen as a benefit.
low-susceptibility areas) that afterward contribute
                                                           Quantified comparison is particularly useful for
to the generation of lahars (mud flows) triggered by
                                                           identifying priorities for actions—a difficult task for
rainfall events.
                                                           policy makers, who generally rely on assessments
Urban planners emphasized how a multi-risk                 that do not take cascade and conjoint effects into
assessment could influence decisions about building        account. The quantified comparison of risks has
restrictions, which themselves influence urban and         policy implications for the planning of mitigation
economic planning—for example, by permitting               actions. It can show, for example, that prioritizing
or forbidding construction of new houses and/or            a particular hazard may mean giving insufficient
economic activities.                                       weight to other hazards, and that mitigation
                                                           measures against a prioritized hazard could actually
      2. Multi-risk assessment enhances
                                                           increase the area’s vulnerability to a different
///




response capacity.
                                                           hazard.
                       ///




Practitioners asserted that emergency management
                                                                 4. Multi-risk assessment encourages risk
would greatly benefit from adopting a multi-
                                                           ///




                                                           awareness and cooperation.
hazard and multi-risk approach. Civil protection
                                                                                               ///




managers were especially interested in developing          Multi-risk assessment can help to increase a
multi-hazard and multi-risk scenarios to facilitate        population’s awareness of natural risks, of multi-
management of emergency situations in real time            risk, and of associated cascade effects. Practitioners
(Monfort and Lecacheux 2013). In Guadeloupe, for           in Guadeloupe working for municipal authorities
example, evidence suggests that failure to consider        noted that while the culture of primary risks (such
cascade effects (earthquake-landslide interactions)        as cyclones, earthquakes, and volcanoes) is well
and to employ a systemic approach may result in            established in Guadeloupe, the culture of secondary
gross underestimation of risk. The work undertaken         risks (such as tsunamis, landslides, marine and
in Guadeloupe considered the interaction between           inland floods, and coastal and slope erosion) is less
earthquake and landslide phenomena and its                 established. Practitioners from other countries
consequences for road networks and the removal             indicated that communicating the results of multi-
of injured people to medical facilities. It took into      risk assessment to the general population would
account the possibility that a landslide triggered         help to increase awareness of secondary risk.
by an earthquake in the northwest of Basse-Terre
might cut off a main east-west road that is critical       A multi-risk approach can also enhance cooperation
for moving the injured to hospitals and clinics.           and foster needed partnerships between policy




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                         165
166
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      makers, private sector actors, and scientists. One       freely available online. The same is not true for
      key to promoting such partnerships is to establish       the databases, however, although the reason for
      a common understanding of what multi-risk                this is simple: most practitioners do not know how
      assessment is, what the preferences and needs of         to use them. The issue, then, is not whether data
      practitioners are, and what the implications for         are available, but who uses and interprets the data
      regulatory instruments (related to urban planning,       and for what purpose—or more fundamentally,
      for example) may be. Interviewees and workshop           who is able to access and present information
      participants, especially from the private sector,        in a meaningful and useful manner. Scientists
      cited the importance of partnerships between             maintain that data collected by private actors
      insurers and policy makers in using improved risk        (such as private consultants or insurers) are often
      information for the development of risk financing        not available to them, or that these data are not
      schemes that cover large losses after multi-hazard       collected systematically and thus cannot be used for
      catastrophic events.                                     scientific purposes.

        Barriers to multi-risk assessment in
      ///
                                                               Practitioners and researchers also have different
      the science domain. Barriers to effectively
                              ///
                                                               views about the preferred agenda for future
      implementing multi-risk assessment are found             research on multi-risk assessment. Researchers
      in both the science and practice domains. In the         working on the technical/scientific aspects want
      science domain, a major barrier involves differences     to improve knowledge of the physical processes
      between the geological and meteorological sciences       and models related especially to cascade effects;
      and the research carried out under their auspices.       harmonize terminology and databases; make
      These differences extend to concept definitions,         uncertainty assessment a focus; combine single-

      databases, methodologies, classification of the          risk analyses into integrated multi-risk analyses;
                                                               integrate the results of multi-risk assessment into
      risk levels and uncertainties in the quantification
                                                               existing emergency scenarios and capture cascading
      process, and more. Thus each type of risk has its
                                                               effects in probabilistic terms; and conduct multi-
      own scale or unit of measure for quantifying risk or
                                                               vulnerability assessment.
      damages (e.g., damage states for seismic risk and
      loss ratios for floods). These differences may make      Practitioners on the other hand prioritize collecting
      it harder for the various risk communities to share      evidence about lives and property saved using a
      results and may represent a barrier to dialogue on       multi- versus a single-risk approach, gaining an
      multi-risk assessment.                                   overview of multi-risk contexts at the town level,
                                                               and especially learning to use and integrate new
      A barrier that is more worrying for risk managers
                                                               research results in existing emergency and urban
      than for researchers is the lack of open access to
                                                               plans. Depending on the practitioners themselves
      risk and hazard databases, the lack of tools for
                                                               (risk versus emergency managers, regional officers,
      sharing knowledge, and the difficulties associated
                                                               insurers, etc.), the needs and expectations vary
      with accessing new research results. According to
                                                               extensively.
      a practitioner working for a meteorological service,
      “The researchers want to keep the data because             Barriers to multi-risk assessment in the
                                                               ///




      they want to publish.” Another practitioner stated:      practice domain. Differences in the approaches,
                                                                                  ///




      “Private companies and research institutions often       tools, and methodologies used for single-risk
      do not make their data available . . . for the benefit   assessment have resulted in a lack of integrated
      of their competitiveness.” Scientists view the matter    practices for multi-risk governance. Especially where
      differently and maintain that research results are       risks are managed by authorities acting at different
                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                 03




governmental levels, cooperation among institutions      which—depending upon the risk, the country, and
and personnel is a challenge. The priorities of the      the availability of insurance schemes—may differ.
various agencies vary extensively, and there may         Different levels of responsibility are attributed to
be insufficient financial capacity to cover them all.    property owners in geological versus meteorological
In some cases a multi-risk approach is perceived
                                                         risk prevention, for example. In the case of
as competing with (rather than complementing)
                                                         earthquakes, the level of individual responsibility
single-risk approaches.
                                                         is high (given that property owners are usually
Capacities, mainly financial, but sometimes also         in charge of household vulnerability reduction
technical and institutional, are especially lacking at   measures). In the case of floods, public authorities
the local level, even though responsibility for DRM      have responsibility for decisions about risk
often falls to local authorities or private actors.
                                                         mitigation measures such as protection works, and
The transfer of responsibility for disaster risk
                                                         the costs are covered collectively. In general, there
reduction to the local level (to the municipal level
                                                         are few options for public-private responsibility
in many European countries) has often occurred
without sufficient resources for implementing            sharing, especially for households exposed to
necessary programs (UNISDR 2005b, 2013).                 multiple risks (and especially where insurance
Private actors, especially property owners, are          schemes are not available, as is the case in some
being given increasing risk-related responsibilities,    European countries).




96
                                                                                                                    167
168
                            CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      3-21. Build Back Better: Where Knowledge Is Not
      	
      Enough71

      Authors: Jason Brown (Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction);
      Jonathan Griffin (Geoscience Australia)


      Understanding risk and knowing how to prepare for         of houses, and the potential for even larger
      and mitigate the potential effects of natural disasters   earthquakes within the next few decades (Sieh et al.
      are critical for saving lives and reducing economic       2008) made clear that the affected population would
      losses. But is knowledge enough? Between 2009 and         need to start building back better to avoid a similar
      2013, the Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster       catastrophe in the future.
      Reduction tested the premise that improved
                                                                A post-disaster engineering survey in October–
      knowledge would result in changed risk behavior           November 2009 assessed how different types of
      among earthquake-affected populations. AIFDR’s            building performed during the earthquake. The
      work in West Sumatra found that better risk               survey was followed by an 18-month province-wide
      knowledge had limited impact on risk behavior, even       Build Back Better campaign based on the slogan
      among communities that had recently experienced           Bukan Gempanya Tapi Bangunannya! (It’s Not
      a traumatic earthquake event. This finding raises         the Earthquakes, But the Buildings!). Finally, an
      important considerations for governments, donors,         evaluation was undertaken to analyze the impact
      and program implementers seeking improved DRM             of the campaign and specifically to learn about
      outcomes, particularly in the early recovery and          recovering communities’ motivations for engaging
      disaster rehabilitation phases.                           in safer building practice. Each of these elements is
                                                                discussed below.
      The magnitude 7.6 earthquake that struck West
      Sumatra on September 30, 2009, claimed more than            Engineering survey. Though the damage done
                                                                ///                    ///




      1,100 lives, injured 3,000, destroyed or damaged          by the 2009 earthquake was reasonably well
                                                                documented (it destroyed 119,005 houses and
      over 270,000 houses, and affected more than 1.25
                                                                damaged 152,535),72 there was little documentation
      million people in 13 of West Sumatra’s 19 districts.
                                                                of how many houses were undamaged and what
      Water supply, electricity, and telecommunications
                                                                made those structures more resilient. Nor was the
      were severed, and many government office
                                                                information on damaged structures disaggregated by
      buildings collapsed, paralyzing services and making
                                                                construction type, age of construction, and ground
      emergency response difficult. Damage and losses
                                                                shaking experienced.
      were estimated at US$2.3 billion, with about 78
      percent of all needs concentrated in the housing          To fill this gap, AIFDR and the Indonesian National
      sector (BNPB and Bappenas 2009).                          Disaster Management Agency (BNPB) supported a
                                                                comprehensive engineering survey jointly led by the
      The earthquake exposed a combination of poor              Bandung Institute of Technology and Geoscience
      housing design, poor housing construction, and            Australia, with additional expertise supplied by
      weak settlement planning (BNPB and Bappenas               Andalas University, Padang. This team consisted
      2009). The enormity of the damage, the need for           of 70 members with engineers from Indonesia,
      reconstruction and repair of hundreds of thousands        Australia, New Zealand, and Singapore.
                                                                                                                  Figure 03—23 
                                                                                                                  Two common
                                                                                                                  housing types in
                                                                                                                  Padang: Unreinforced
                                                                                                                  masonry construction
                                                                                                                  using river stone
                                                                                                                  and mortar with no
                                                                                                                  reinforcement (left)
                                                                                                                  versus confined
                                                                                                                  masonry construction
                                                                                                                  using steel-reinforced
                                                                                                                  concrete columns in
                                                                                                                  the corners and tops
The engineering survey included a comparison             campaign’s messages by radio, and an estimated 2.7
                                                                                                                  of walls (right).
of two common housing types: (a) unreinforced            million people by television.
masonry—typically houses built from bricks, river                                                                 Source: Australian
                                                         Evaluation. To determine how successful the
stone, or similar material, and mortar; and (b)                                                                   Department of Foreign
                                                         ///          ///




                                                         campaign was in reducing barriers to behavior
confined masonry—houses built from bricks and                                                                     Affairs and Trade, 2009.
                                                         change, an evaluation was carried out to see
mortar with simple concrete and steel reinforcing
                                                         whether homeowners had been influenced to adopt
(figure 3-23). The results were unambiguous.
                                                         earthquake-safe building techniques. 73
Overall, unreinforced masonry houses in heavily
shaken areas were 5 times more likely to suffer          The evaluation of the Build Back Better campaign
damage than confined masonry and 10 times more           found that knowledge does not translate into action.
likely to collapse (Sengara et al. 2010). 	              “The population in West Sumatra has received and
                                                         internalised general information about earthquake
Build Back Better campaign. The AIFDR and
                                                         safer construction,” the study found, but “when
///                              ///




BNPB expected that the rebuilding process would
                                                         rebuilding their homes, they failed to act on this
motivate the people of West Sumatra to prepare
                                                         knowledge” (Janssen and Holden 2011, 7). More
themselves for future earthquakes. This preparation
                                                         specifically: approximately half of the families
seemed even more important because the risk of a
                                                         in West Sumatra were knowledgeable about
larger, potentially tsunamigenic earthquake in the
                                                         earthquakes, related risks, and available mitigation
same general area within the next few decades had        strategies, partly as a result of the campaign;
not been diminished (Sieh et al. 2008; McCloskey et      respondents found it difficult to remember exact
al. 2010). Despite the increased costs associated with   technical specifications; there was a high level of
building earthquake-resistant houses (estimated          indifference to, and no social or political pressure
at around 30 percent more than a typical house), it      for, promoting safer building techniques for housing
was assumed that—given the impact experienced by         (Janssen and Holden 2011).
the West Sumatra population and the trauma felt by
many families—residents who rebuilt their houses         Perhaps the most intriguing finding of the
would be open to applying new knowledge of safe          evaluation was that the earthquake itself had little
building techniques to build safer houses.               impact on people’s resistance to change. Specifically,
                                                         the campaign’s key assumption, that the experience
For West Sumatrans to build back safer, individuals      of the earthquake would lead the population of
needed to understand that building a safer house         West Sumatra to be more willing to build back
was possible, and they needed to know how to get         better, was not true. Janssen and Holden (2011)
technical assistance if they needed it. Between          found that those living in the worst-affected areas
February 2010 and June 2011, the Build Back Better       demonstrated possibly higher resistance to change
campaign ran public service announcements 8,192          than those in less-affected areas. The influence of
times on radio and 2,275 times on television. An         the earthquake on safe building practice seemed
estimated 1 million people were exposed to the           to be limited to those who had gone through




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                            169
170
                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      a traumatic, first-hand experience during the           The Build Back Better campaign highlights
      earthquake, such as being trapped or injured by         two key lessons: Knowledge is important for
      falling debris.                                         reducing resistance to change and for promoting
                                                              contemplation of change to safer building
      The evaluation found that reducing people’s
                                                              techniques. But it is not enough to ensure action.
      resistance to change was a precondition for getting     The post-campaign evaluation found several barriers
      them to contemplate change, but it also found that      that kept people from moving past contemplation of
      actual exposure to the earthquake did not affect the    change to action. These included a lack of resources
      degree to which they were contemplating change.         (more than half of respondents said safer building
      Exposure to loss of assets or even loss of life         techniques were too expensive); inadequate access
      appeared to make no difference.                         to technical information; mistrust of construction
      The researchers identified and tried to understand      workers or building supply store employees, who
      a dramatic gap between knowledge and practice—          respondents feared were trying to mislead or cheat
      that is, to understand why the information and          them; and incentives and disincentives, such as a
      knowledge did not translate into action. This           lack of enforced building standards for local housing
      conundrum was highlighted in answers to the             and a lack of social and/or financial incentives.
      following line of questioning:                          As a follow-up to the Build Back Better campaign
                                                              evaluation, a laboratory-style safe construction
      1.	 When asked what would be the most disruptive
                                                              program showed that given the correct combination
          event that could take place in a person’s life,
                                                              of timely information, technical training, community
          most respondents answered “a natural disaster.”
                                                              supervision, and financial and nonfinancial
      2.	 When asked what would be the worst possible         incentives and disincentives, individual homeowners
          consequence of a natural disaster, 62 percent       will put knowledge into practice. It showed further
          replied: “A family member getting killed.”          that the timing of interventions is critical. Janssen
                                                              and Holden (2013) propose that government
      3.	 When asked what was the main cause of people
                                                              subsidies be invested in immediate needs (including
          getting killed in an earthquake, 80 percent         the provision of easy-to-build, cheap, temporary
          replied: “Collapsing buildings.”                    shelter) concurrently with livelihood support
      4.	 When asked whether their houses were strong         programs that enable communities to more quickly
          enough to withstand an earthquake, 67 percent       recover from the disaster event. Immediately after
          said “No.”                                          an earthquake, most people are trying to get on with
                                                              their lives with the resources available to them, and
      5.	 When asked what could be done to make their         the effect of the earthquake on reducing resistance
          houses safer in the face of an earthquake, 68       to change is negligible. Once livelihoods are
          percent could provide three correct building        reestablished, programs to facilitate construction
          techniques to improve the house.                    of permanent, earthquake-resistant housing may be
                                                              more effectively implemented using appropriately
      6.	 Considering that retrofitting a house takes about
                                                              targeted incentives or disincentives.
          three months, the respondents were asked what
          they would do if they were certain an earthquake    The AIFDR initiatives have unveiled a rich array of
          would hit in six months: 68 percent said            data and experience that can assist in the design
          they would run away, while 1.2 percent said         of both pre- and post-disaster programs into the
          they would retrofit their houses to make them       future. The Build Back Better experience showed
          earthquake safe.                                    that understanding and effectively communicating
                                                                                                             CHAPTER


                                                                                                             03




risk information and risk reduction strategies        disaster risk reduction to the extent we would
is necessary but does not on its own lead to          intuitively assume, interventions may be more
behavioral changes. Interventions must consider,      successful after livelihoods and a sense of normalcy
and experiment with, incentives and disincentives     have been reestablished. Identifying barriers
for acting on risk knowledge. Because communities     to action within the local context is crucial to
recovering from a major disaster may not prioritize   achieving change.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                 171
172
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      3-22. InaSAFE: Preparing Communities to Be a Step
      	
      Ahead74

      National Disaster Management Agency, Indonesia (BNPB); 75 World Bank;
      Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery; Australia Government76


      Indonesia is one of the most disaster-prone and         The subnational focus of InaSAFE is intended to
      populous countries in the world. Its disaster           improve the capacity of local governments and
      managers and local government planners recognize        communities to make more informed disaster
      the importance of investing in preparedness, but        preparedness decisions. The InaSAFE tool is linked
      have faced many obstacles to accessing and using        to Indonesia’s disaster preparedness standards, and
      up-to-date and accurate data from hazard and risk       as part of its analysis it suggests various actions
      assessments. Unfortunately, there is a tendency         for local governments to consider in response to
      for technical studies that analyze risk to end up       a hazard scenario. So far AIFDR’s core partners
      on a shelf or archived on a hard drive. InaSAFE         have trained more than 150 Indonesian disaster
      (originally the Indonesian Scenario Assessment          managers across six provinces to use InaSAFE,
      for Emergencies), an open source disaster impact        and have provided the necessary skills for disaster
                                                              managers to collect their own hazard and exposure
      modelling tool, was launched in 2012 to help
                                                              information through links with science and
      overcome obstacles to understanding and using
                                                              mapping agencies and the use of crowdsourcing
      impact information. Developed by Australia and
                                                              techniques. Furthermore, complementary
      Indonesia in collaboration with the World Bank
                                                              programs in partnership with the Humanitarian
      and GFDRR,77 InaSAFE enables communities,
                                                              OpenStreetMap Team (HOT) have promoted
      local governments, and disaster managers to
                                                              the use of OpenStreetMap participatory mapping
      use realistic natural hazard scenarios for floods,
                                                              technology to supplement government baseline data
      earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunamis to underpin
                                                              and prepare key inputs for InaSAFE, leading to over
      emergency planning, disaster preparedness, and
                                                              1.4 million buildings being mapped throughout high-
      response activities.
                                                              risk areas in Indonesia.
      To date, InaSAFE has been used to develop
                                                                How InaSAFE works. InaSAFE is usable by anyone
                                                              ///                        ///




      disaster impact scenarios for national government
                                                              experienced in disaster management and possessing
      disaster exercises in Indonesia, including the 2014     basic computer skills. Users answer a series of
      International Mentawai Megathrust Tsunami               questions posed by the tool about a potential
      Exercise. It has been implemented in Jakarta, East      disaster scenario; the tool then combines hazard
      Java, and South Sulawesi to develop realistic flood     models or footprints with exposure information
      scenarios for contingency planning. During 2014, the    to produce impact analysis—specifically, reports
      Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction     estimating the potential damage caused to people
      and Indonesia’s National Disaster Management            and facilities, maps of affected areas, and lists of
      Agency (BNPB) will focus on helping district            recommended actions to assist disaster managers in
      disaster management facilitators and universities to    decision making. InaSAFE is capable of integrating a
      develop the necessary skills to use, and train others   wide range of data sets developed by various groups
      to use, the InaSAFE methodology.                        (scientists and engineers; international, national,
and local institutions; NGOS and communities).              buildings in Indonesia. Since 2011, this program     Figure 03—24 
Table 3-10 lists the currently available hazard inputs      has successfully mapped more than 1.4 million        InaSAFE can be
for InaSAFE 2.0, the version released in February           structures, and OSM now forms a key part of          used to improve
2014; table 3-11 lists the currently available exposure     the ongoing capture of local knowledge. These        understanding of the
data; and table 3-12 lists sample impact functions.         valuable data sources are critical elements of the   impact of disaster
                                                            InaSAFE engagement, where new analyses can           events, such as floods
InaSAFE’s openness, scalability, and adaptability
                                                            be dynamically run whenever the information          in Jakarta.
make it an especially valuable tool for users seeking
                                                            is updated.
information about hazards and their impact.                                                                      Source: World Bank.
A variety of other characteristics contribute to          •	 Focus on social vulnerability. InaSAFE has
its utility:                                                been designed to take into account gender and
                                                            age as part of the impact analysis for vulnerable
•	 Integration of latest science with local
                                                            groups. For example, the impact analysis results
   knowledge. To ensure disaster managers have
                                                            specify steps that must be taken to meet the
   access to the best information to support their
                                                            needs of pregnant or lactating women (such as
   decisions, AIFDR is working through Geoscience
                                                            providing additional rice) and of infants and the
   Australia in partnership with the Indonesian
                                                            elderly (such as providing extra blankets).
   Geological Agency (Badan Geologi), Indonesian
   Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and                •	 Demand-driven development. InaSAFE
   Geophysics (BMKG), Indonesian Institute of               started through a partnership with BNPB and
   Science, and Bandung Institute of Technology to          was intended to address the needs of subnational
   improve the scientific knowledge about hazards           disaster management agencies conducting
   in Indonesia and to supply up-to-date hazard             emergency contingency planning. Disaster
   information to subnational disaster management           managers and scientists are still working
   agencies. In addition to using population data           collaboratively to develop InaSAFE, with the
   and demographic information from the national            majority of requests for new development coming
   census, AIFDR piloted a participatory mapping            from Indonesian national government officials
   program through a grant to HOT to map                    and provincial disaster managers, who continue




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                            173
174
                                        CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




Table 03—9                   HAZARD TYPE                                   MODEL                               HAZARD FOOTPRINTS
Hazard Data Accepted                                          Ground shaking (Modified Mercalli
                               Earthquake
in InaSAFE 2.0                                                            Intensity)
                                 Tsunami                     Maximum inundation depth (meters)
                        Volcanic eruption–ash fall                    Ash load (kg2/m2)                              Hazard zones
                                  Flood                      Maximum inundation depth (meters)                     Flood-prone areas
                       Tropical cyclone, storm surge        Wind speeds, inundation depth (meters)




Table 03—10                           EXPOSURE TYPE                                                        SUB-TYPE
Exposure Data                              Population                                                 Density (people/units2)
Accepted in InaSAFE                         Buildings                                           Schools, hospitals, public buildings
2.0                                    Other structures                                         Bridges, telecommunications, etc.
                                             Roads                                                         Major, minor
                                            Land use                                                  Agriculture, industrial




Table 03—11                                 EVENT                                                            OUTPUT
Sample Impact                                                                          Number of fatalities and displaced persons; number of
                                           Earthquake
Functions                                                                                               buildings affected
                                                                                        Number of people affected; number of people to be
                                            Tsunami
                                                                                                            evacuated
                                        Volcanic ash fall                                          Number of buildings affected
                                                                                       Number of people affected; number of people needing
                                             Flood
                                                                                  evacuation; number of buildings closed and/or damaged
                                                                                       Number of fatalities and displaced persons; number of
                                           Earthquake
                                                                                                        buildings affected
                                                                                        Number of people affected; number of people to be
                                            Tsunami
                                                                                                            evacuated
                                        Volcanic ash fall                                          Number of buildings affected
                                                                                       Number of people affected; number of people needing
                                             Flood
                                                                                  evacuation; number of buildings closed and/or damaged
                                                                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                                                                  03
  to request (and receive training in) the use of            automatically pushed to a BNPB server, where an
  InaSAFE. This training increases the capacity              InaSAFE impact assessment is produced within
  of local governments and communities to use                minutes to inform rapid disaster response. The
  scientific and local knowledge to inform disaster          results are also shared with the public on the
  preparedness decisions.                                    BNPB website (http://bnpb.go.id).

•	 Client focus. Since its beta release at the         •	 Tested in multiple contexts. InaSAFE has
  Understanding Risk Forum in Cape Town in July              been used to produce impact assessments for
  2012, InaSAFE has been downloaded over 1,000               earthquakes in Yogyakarta, for a tsunami in
  times. Since InaSAFE is an open source tool, the           Padang, and for community-level flood scenarios.
  InaSAFE user community is helping national                 Most recently, during the Jakarta floods of
  governments to tailor the software to members’             2012–2013 and 2013–2014, reports of flooding
  needs.                                                     from village heads were joined with the subvillage
                                                             boundaries captured through participatory
•	 Effectiveness across DRM decision making.
                                                             mapping. This flood footprint was used by the
  From its beginnings as a tool to aid in preparing
                                                             Jakarta disaster management agency and the vice
  for disasters, InaSAFE has been used effectively
                                                             governor of Jakarta to illustrate the change in
  to visualize critical infrastructure (such as
                                                             flooding over time.
  schools, hospitals, or roads) in flood-prone areas
  across Jakarta. As InaSAFE develops in response      •	 Award-winning software development.
  to client requirements, its relevance to all               InaSAFE was called one of the top 10 “open
  parts of the DRM cycle increases. In the future,           source rookies of the year in 2012”—alongside
  InaSAFE could support risk-based land-use                  software developed by Microsoft, Yahoo!, and
  planning, determine priorities for infrastructure          Twitter.78 This recognition not only affirms
  retrofitting, generate real-time impact forecasts          the technical merits of the software and its
  for a variety of hazards, and contribute to post-          commitment to open source philosophies, but
  disaster needs assessments or pre/post damage              also highlights the exemplary multi-institutional
  and loss assessments.                                      collaborative development of InaSAFE.

•	 User contributions. As part of the InaSAFE          •	 Dynamic and inclusive software
  approach to developing contingency planning and            development. In February 2014, InaSAFE 2.0
  preparedness scenarios, OSM tools are used to              was released with new features that had been
  capture high-resolution baseline geographic data           requested by disaster managers, including road
  on critical infrastructure. In Jakarta in 2012, in         exposure data, additional map customization,
  partnership with AIFDR, HOT, World Bank, and               and InaSAFE reporting. This version marks the
  UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian             first release with contributions from developers
  Affairs, the provincial disaster management                focused on applications outside of Indonesia,
  agency (BPBD-DKI Jakarta) pioneered a data                 such as the addition of new population impacts
  collection program to map over 6,000 critical              from the Philippines by partners at Environment
  infrastructure locations and 2,668 subvillage              Science for Social Change Inc.
  boundaries within OSM.
                                                         InaSAFE global. Preparing for a disaster requires
                                                       ///                  ///




•	 Real-time analysis. Through its collaboration       people from various sectors and backgrounds to
  with AIFDR and BNPB, BMKG produces ground-           work together and share their experience, expertise,
  shaking maps following an earthquake. These are      and resources. Using InaSAFE to develop a scenario




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                      175
176
                                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                         requires the same spirit of cooperation and same        and disaster contingency plans. Three LGUs were
                         sharing of expertise and data. The more sharing         assisted with the mapping of critical public buildings
                         of data and knowledge there is by communities,          using OSM and with analysis of flood impacts
                         scientists, and governments, the more realistic and     using InaSAFE. This initiative has also supported
                         useful the InaSAFE scenario will be.                    customization of InaSAFE based on localized needs,
                                                                                 including functionality for analysis of detailed
                         It is in this spirit that further application of the    population data and the integration of InaSAFE with
                         platform in other countries and regions is being        the web-based tools of the Philippines Department
                         planned as part of the GFDRR–World Bank Open            of Science and Technology’s Project NOAH
                         Data for Resilience Initiative (for more information,   (Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards).79
                         see section 3-1). InaSAFE has shown itself to be an
                         efficient and credible way to save agencies time and    In Sri Lanka, significant investment by the
                         resources in developing risk assessment information     government in OSM is being capitalized through
                         and hazard impact modelling tools. Hence a number       InaSAFE and QGIS training (for more detail, see
                         of governments in other countries have expressed        section 3-2). This work has demonstrated the power
                         interest in using, improving, and refining the          of InaSAFE to dynamically pull data from OSM and
                         InaSAFE tool.                                           the Sri Lanka GeoNode for analysis. In particular,
                                                                                 it has triggered significant interest in InaSAFE as
                         In the Philippines, a partnership between the           a fundamental tool for disaster management in Sri
                         World Bank and Local Government Units (LGUs)            Lanka and has led to widespread interest in the open
                         focused on the preparation of risk-sensitive land-use   source QGIS software, both of which will continue
                         plans, structural audits of public infrastructure,      to be supported in years to come.




Figure 03—25 
QGIS2.0 with the
InaSAFE 2.0 dock
showing a map and
indicative results for
an assessment of the
impact of flooding on
roads in Jakarta.
                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                 03
3-23. Global River Flood Risk Assessments
	
Philip J. Ward (Institute for Environmental Studies and Amsterdam Global
Change Institute, VU University Amsterdam); contributing authors Brenden
Jongman, Jeroen C. J. H. Aerts (Institute for Environmental Studies and
Amsterdam Global Change Institute, VU University Amsterdam); Arno Bouwman
(PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency); Rens van Beek, Marc
F. P. Bierkens (Department of Physical Geography, Utrecht University); Willem
Ligtvoet (PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency); Hessel C.
Winsemius (Deltares)

The economic losses associated with flooding are        Brakenridge 2013). However, Gall et al. (2011) also
huge. Reported flood losses (adjusted for inflation)    found evidence for non-exposure-driven increases in
have increased globally from US$7 billion per year      disaster losses in the United States over the period
during the 1980s, to US$24 billion per year in the      1960–2009, pointing to changes in hazard frequency/
period 2001–2011.80 In response, the scientific         intensity as possible drivers of risk.
community has developed a range of models for
assessing flood hazard, flood exposure, and flood       Several global flood risk assessment models have
risk at the global scale.81 These are being used to     been developed in the last decade. Initially, these
assess and map the current risk faced by countries      models provided estimates of risk under current
and societies. Increasingly, they are also being used   conditions (i.e., they did not account for changes in
to assess future risk, under scenarios of climate       climate and/or socioeconomic development).
change and/or socioeconomic development.
                                                        The earliest of these was the “hot spots” project of
The growing number of global-scale flood risk           the World Bank, which sought to provide “a spatially
models being used for an increasing range of            uniform first-order, global disaster risk assessment,”
applications is mirrored by the growth of events        including the risk of flooding (Dilley et al. 2005a).
and networks specifically focusing on global-scale      Maps were developed showing risk severity at a
floods and global-scale flood risk assessment. For      spatial resolution of about 2.5’ x 2.5’ (about 5km x
example, the Global Flood Working Group82 has           5km at the equator), categorized into deciles. The
been established by the Joint Research Centre of        maps were based on a georeferenced data set of
the European Commission and the Dartmouth               past extreme flood events between 1985 and 2003
Flood Observatory.                                      from the Dartmouth Flood Observatory, combined
                                                        with gridded population maps. The flood extent
A large number of studies have attempted to assess      data were based on regions affected by floods, not
trends in past (flood) risk, based on reported          necessarily on actual flooded areas. Nevertheless,
losses in global loss databases, such as the EM-        the project was successful in identifying global
DAT database83 and MunichRe’s NATHAN and                disaster risk hot spots, and since then improved
NatCatService databases (e.g., Barredo 2009;            flood risk maps have been developed for the
Bouwer 2011; Neumayer and Barthel 2011).                GAR2009 (UNISDR 2009), which based flood
These studies have found that reported losses           extent data on the modelling approach of Herold
have increased over the last half century, mainly       and Mouton (2011) and produced global hazard
because of increased exposure, such as population       maps for a limited number of flood return periods.
growth and the location of assets in flood-prone        These data were combined with high-resolution
regions (IPCC 2012; Kundzewicz, Pińskwar, and           maps of population and economic assets, as well




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                     177
178
                                                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                                 as indicators of vulnerability, to develop maps of             urban area). A description of the model framework
                                 current flood risk at a spatial resolution of 1km x            (Winsemius et al. 2013) included a case study
                                 1km. Pappenberger et al. (2012) have developed a               application for Bangladesh (figure 3-26), in which
                                 model cascade for producing flood hazard maps                  changes in annual expected damage were projected
                                 showing flooded fraction at a 1km x 1km resolution             between 2010 and 2050. These preliminary results
                                 (resampled from a more coarse 25km x 25km grid).               showed that over that period, risk was projected
                                 The cascade can be used to develop flood hazard
                                                                                                to increase by a factor of 21–40. Both climate
                                 maps for different return periods but has not yet
                                                                                                change and socioeconomic development were
                                 been used to assess risk.
                                                                                                found to contribute importantly to this increase
                                 As part of recent efforts to project changes in risk           in risk, although the individual contribution of
                                 in the future under scenarios of climate change                socioeconomic development is greater than that
                                 and socioeconomic development, Jongman, Ward,                  of climate change. The model was then further
                                 and Aerts (2012) assessed and quantified changes               developed and applied at the global scale (Ward et
                                 in population and assets exposed to 100-year flood             al. 2013b). GLOFRIS is currently being used within
                                 events between 1970 and 2050. Combining the flood              and outside the scientific community to assess
                                 hazard maps developed for the GAR with projections             changes in flood risk at the global scale under a wide
                                 of changes in population and GDP, they found that              range of climate and socioeconomic scenarios.
Figure 03—26                     socioeconomic development alone is projected to
Observed flood                   drive an increase in the global economic exposure to           Also in 2013, Hirabayashi et al. (2013) developed a
extents in                       flooding between 2010 and 2050 by a factor of 3.               global inundation model, and combined this with
Bangladesh during                                                                               high-resolution population data, to assess and map
                                 In 2013 and 2014, three new global flood risk
July and August                                                                                 the number of people exposed to 10- and 100-year
                                 assessment models were presented. The first of
2004: Dartmouth                                                                                 flood events at a spatial resolution of 15’ x 15’ (about
                                 these was GLOFRIS (GLObal Flood Risk with Image
Flood Observatory                Scenarios) (Ward et al. 2013b; Winsemius et al.                30km x 30km at the equator). They then used this
database versus                  2013). GLOFRIS estimates flood risk at a spatial               model to quantify the change in the number of
GLOFRIS model.                   scale of 30” x 30” (about 1km x 1km at the equator),           people affected by 10- and 100-year floods between
                                 whereby risk is expressed as several indicators                the periods 1970–2000 and 2070–2100. The study
Source: Winsemius et al.         (annual exposed population, annual exposed GDP;                used discharge data from 11 global climate models
2013.                            annual expected urban damage, and annual affected              and for four different scenarios of climate change.



                 Dart m out h m om ent of flooding                                     GLOFRIS m om ent of flooding
                                                                                                                                         Aug. 10 2004
 27°N                                                               27°N                                                                 Aug. 5 2004

                                                                                                                                         July 30 2004
                      hi




                                                                                        hi
                    s




                                                                                      s




 26°N                                                               26°N
                                                  Bra hm ap ut ra                                                     Bra hm ap ut ra
                 Ko




                                                                                   Ko




                                                                                                                                         July 28 2004
             Gan ge s                                                          Gan ge s
 25°N                                                               25°N                                                                 July 25 2004
                                     am una




                                                                                                         am una




 24°N                                                               24°N
                                                                                                                                         July 22 2004
                                                   a




                                                                                                                       a
                                                  hn




                                                                                                                      hn




                                                                                                                                         July 20 2004
                                              eg




                                                                                                                  eg
                                    J




                                                                                                        J
                                              M




                                                                                                                  M




 23°N                                                               23°N
                                                                                                                                         July 15 2004

 22°N                                                               22°N                                                                 July 10 2004
                km                                                                km

         0      125     250                                                0      125     250
                                                                                                                                         No flooding
    85°E 86°E 87°E 88°E 89°E 90°E 91°E 92°E 93°E                      85°E 86°E 87°E 88°E 89°E 90°E 91°E 92°E 93°E
                                                                                      50-year flood depth [m]

                                                                                                                     Figure 03—27 
                                                                                                       10.0
                                                                                                                     Map of modelled
                                                                                                                     inundation extent
                                                                                                       5.0           and depth in Nigeria
                                                                                                                     using GLOFRIS. Maps
                                                                                                       3.0           of this type can be
                                                                                                                     used to assess which
      11°N                                                                                             2.0           areas are exposed to
                                                                                                                     flooding.

                                                                                                       1.5

                                                                                                       1.0
      7°N
                                                                                                       0.5

                                                                                                       0.3

                                                                                                       0.1
      3°N
        1°E                5°E                        9°E                13°E
                                                                                                       0.0




More recently, Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes (2014) used          World Bank Africa Disaster Risk Management team
a simpler method to assess changes in flood risk            carried out the National Flood Risk Management
between 1960–1990 and two future time periods               Implementation Plan for Nigeria.
(2050s and 2080s), using results from 19 global
climate models, four climate scenarios, and five            At the time, little information was available for
scenarios of socioeconomic development. This                assessing the level of flood risk in Nigeria. At the
study found that under a “middle-of-the-road”               request of the GFDRR and World Bank’s Africa
socioeconomic scenario, climate change by 2050              team, GLOFRIS was used to carry out a rapid
would lead to an increased exposure to river flood          assessment of flood risk per state in Nigeria. Maps
risk for between 100 million and 580 million people,
                                                            were produced showing the expected extent of
depending on the climate change scenario.
                                                            flooding for different return periods (figure 3-27),
Using the results of global-scale river flood
///
                                                            as well as the annual affected population per state
risk assessments in practice. The results of
                                 ///
                                                            (figure 3-28). The model and its results were “a
global-scale river flood risk assessment have been          great first step in providing a national map showing
applied in practice. Several examples are described         vulnerability to floods for Nigeria, where previously,
below.                                                      no such methodologies were in place.” However,
                                                            an assessment of the number of people affected by
State-level flood risk in Nigeria. In 2012, floods
in Ibadan, Nigeria, killed hundreds of people,              different inundation depths was found to be critical,
displaced over 1 million people, and destroyed crops.       as the difference between 10cm and 1m of flood
A post-disaster needs assessment carried out by the         inundation is clearly significant. Since GLOFRIS
GFDRR urgently recommended strengthening the                had been developed in a flexible manner, it was easy
country’s resilience to flooding, and in response the       to integrate this request into the model structure,




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                             179
180
                                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                           and tailor the output to the needs of the model’s      a return period of 1,000 years or less, are shown
                           end-users.                                             in figure 3-29. In all regions, the urban population
                                                                                  living in flood-prone areas is projected to grow
                           Present and future urban flood risk. In 2014,          rapidly between 2010 and 2050, while in almost all
                           UN-HABITAT will publish the fourth edition of its      regions the rural population living in flood-prone
                           report on urban water and sanitation. This is the      areas is projected to decline. An exception is Sub-
                           first edition to project conditions into the future    Saharan Africa, where the rural population living in
                           and to treat flood risk. GLOFRIS is being used to      flood-prone areas is projected to continue growing
                           project present and future flood risk in the world’s   after 2030.
                           cities (PBL 2014), based on the scenario study for
                           the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and         GLOFRIS has also been used to assess the increase
                           Development Environmental Outlook to 2050              in annual exposed GDP between 2010 and 2050,
                           (OECD 2012).                                           as well as to give a preliminary assessment of how
                                                                                  much the overall risk could be reduced by improving
                           GLOFRIS has been used to project changes in            flood protection standards. Figure 3-30 shows the
                           annual exposed population and annual exposed GDP       annual exposed GDP in urban and rural areas for
                           to flooding, aggregated to the World Bank regions.     2010 and 2050, assuming different flood protection
                           Projections of the number of people living in flood-   standards. The figure suggests that in all regions, the
                           prone areas, defined as areas exposed to floods with   risk is projected to increase substantially between




Figure 03—28 
Maps of Nigeria
showing the modelled
results of the number
of people affected
per state (expressed
as a percentage of
the total population
per state) for floods
of different severities.
Maps of this type
can be used for
identifying risk hot
spots.
                                                                                                                Figure 03—29 
                                                                                                                People living in
                                                                                                                flood-prone areas
                                                                                                                in different regions,
                                                                                                                2010–2050.

                                                                                                                Source: PBL 2014.
 PBL NL




                                                                                                                Note: Flood-prone areas
                                                                                                                are defined as areas with a
                                                                                                                probability of a flood once
                                                                                                                in 1,000 years or less. Note
                                                                                                                different scales on y-axes.
  PBL NL




2010 and 2050, and also that better protection          also be provided. These new Aqueduct map layers
standards could significantly reduce flood risk.        will help identify where new flood risks will emerge
                                                        and how severe they will be, what their potential
The World Resources Institute’s Aqueduct                causes are, and how best to adapt to, mitigate, or
Water Risk Atlas. This atlas (available at http://      prevent them.
aqueduct.wri.org/) offers a suite of interactive maps
that help people better understand where and            Changes in future flood risk due to inter-
how water risks and opportunities are emerging          annual variability. Knowledge is this area is less
worldwide. Most of the current available map layers     well developed. GLOFRIS is currently being used to
focus on water resource availability and droughts.      determine whether flood risk might be increased or
Aqueduct will be extended to include global-scale       reduced as a result of naturally occurring variations
flood risk maps based on GLOFRIS. The maps will         in the climate system, like the El Niño Southern
show the current level of river flood risk, per sub-    Oscillation (ENSO), and if so, how this information
catchment, across the globe, expressed in indicators    might be used by the (re)insurance industry.
such as the annual affected number of people and        Research is beginning to show that flood hazard and
level of economic risk. Future scenarios of risk will   risk are indeed strongly correlated to ENSO at the




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                            181
182
                                                  CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                             global scale (Ward et al. 2010, 2013a, 2014); the Risk   when these limitations are recognized and
                             Prediction Initiative, based at the Bermuda Institute    communicated, and the models are used to answer
                             of Ocean Science, is facilitating the translation        appropriate questions. But because of the models’
                             of this research into usable results for insurance       limitations, their results should not be used in
                             and reinsurance companies. For example, claims           all situations.
                             may increase (or decrease) in particular ENSO
                             phases, affecting the amount of financial resources      The matter of spatial resolution is very important.
                             necessary for covering eventual losses.                  Although many global hydrological models run
                                                                                      with grid cells of approximately 50km x 50km, for
                             Limitations of global-scale river flood risk
                                                                                      modelling impacts a higher resolution is preferable,
                             ///




                             assessments, and how they should not
                             be used in practice. Global-scale flood risk
                                                    ///
                                                                                      since the impacts of flooding are dependent on
                             assessment models are coarse by their very nature,       physical and socioeconomic processes at a much
                             and represent both physical and socioeconomic            finer scale. Hence, flood risk research should aim
                             processes in simplified ways. This is not a problem      to simulate floods at a higher resolution than the




Figure 03—30 
Annual exposed GDP
to flooding in 2010
and 2050, under
different assumptions
of flood protection
                             PBL NL




standards.

Source: PBL 2014.

Note: Y-axes use different
scales.
                             PBL NL
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                   03
native 50km x 50km grid size of global hydrological       A final limitation of the global modelling approaches
models.                                                   described here is that they do not capture pluvial
                                                          floods or local-scale flash flood events. While flash
Geographical scale is also an issue. Although a           floods cause many human fatalities in some parts
1km x 1km grid may be appropriate for calculation         of the world (Gaume et al. 2009), their local-scale
purposes, the actual model outcomes at this               character makes it challenging to simulate their
resolution are subject to huge uncertainties.             probability and extent at the global scale.
Presenting results for a given grid cell is not
encouraged, since it may give a false sense of safety,    Main research needs for the coming 5–10
                                                          ///




or indeed of risk. Moreover, global models are not        years. Increases in available computational power
                                                                 ///




intended to give assessments of risk at this high         are allowing global hydrological models to adopt
resolution, but rather to indicate risk, and relative     finer spatial resolutions, a development that will
changes in risk, across larger regions, such as           create new scopes for application and raise new
continents, countries, river basins, and states. A        research questions.
high-resolution detailed flood risk map for a city,
district, street, or building requires a more detailed    To date, the accurate representation of vulnerability
modelling approach, as well as more detailed local        has been one of the largest obstacles in large-scale
knowledge and interaction with local stakeholders.        flood risk assessment. Large-scale risk studies either
                                                          have not incorporated the vulnerability of exposed
To date, global-scale river flood risk models have        people and assets (Hirabayashi et al. 2013; Jongman,
generally assessed flood risk under the assumption        Ward, and Aerts 2012; Nicholls et al. 2008), or have
that no flood protection measures are in place (an        done so in a highly stylized manner (e.g., Feyen et
issue addressed in the case study in section 3-8). In     al. 2012; Ward et al. 2013b; Rojas, Feyen, and Watkiss
reality, many regions are protected by infrastructural    2013). Anecdotal evidence from studies at more local
measures up to a certain design standard. Ward et         to regional scales suggests that societies become less
al. (2013b) assessed the sensitivity of global flood      vulnerable over time. An improved understanding
risk modelling results to this assumption. Under the      of temporal changes in vulnerability, and their
assumption of no flood protection measures, they          influence on risk, is a research priority.
simulated annual expected urban damage of about
US$800 billion (PPP) per year.                            Another priority is improving the representation of
                                                          exposure in global flood risk models. While high-
However, assuming protection standards of 5 and           resolution and high-quality gridded data sets of
100 years globally, this estimate fell dramatically,      current population, GDP, and land use are available,
by 41 percent and 95 percent, respectively. Clearly,      and provide useful proxies for representing current
then, existing flood protection standards should be       exposure, high-resolution projections for population
included in global flood risk assessment models.          and GDP are only beginning to become available;
                                                          and land-use projections at the required resolution
It is possible to incorporate flood protection            are still scarce. Recently, a first global forecast
standards in flood risk assessments to assess the         model of urban development was presented that
impacts of different strategies to reduce risk;           simulates urban expansion at a horizontal resolution
see for example Jongman et al. (2014) for such            of 1km x 1km resolution, based on empirically
an assessment on continental scale. But such              derived patterns (Seto, Güneralp, and Hutyra 2012).
assessments should be used only for assessing the         Once available publicly, such high-resolution data
large-scale effects of strategies, and not the detailed   could provide important new information in global
effects of individual measures. For example, the          flood risk studies.
global model could be used to assess how much
a country could reduce its risk by increasing the         The need for a coherent database of current flood
protection standard of its dikes and levees. But          protection standards is becoming more and more
it should not be used to dimension individual             important. Preliminary efforts to include flood
dike sections.                                            protection standards in large-scale flood risk




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                       183
184
                                                    CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                               assessments have been presented (Hallegatte et al.     change the duration, depth, and flow velocities
                               2013, Ward et al. 2013b; Jongman et al. 2014) using    attained during inundation events. This fact has
                               simplified assumptions and scenarios. These studies    severe implications for the resulting hazard, and
                               show that the flood protection standards assumed       its simulation requires an improved representation
                               in the modelling process have a huge effect on the
                                                                                      of the relevant processes in hydrological models.
                               overall modelled risks. This finding illustrates the
                                                                                      In addition, new research suggests that natural
                               potential benefits of adaptation, but also shows
                               that uncertainty in flood protection standards can     ecosystems should be incorporated as important
                               strongly affect model outcomes. In particular, flood   means of protection against floods, for both river
                               protection measures will modify the magnitude and      flooding (Stürck, Poortinga, and Verburg 2013) and
                               frequency along the drainage network and locally       coastal flooding (Arkema et al. 2013).



Figure 03—31 
Historical tropical
cyclone tracks for
the period 1981–2000
(top) and tropical-
cyclone-like vortices
extracted from a 20-
year simulation using
a general circulation
model (bottom).

Source:
Geoscience Australia.

Note: TC = tropical cyclone.
                                                                                                                   CHAPTER


                                                                                                                   03
3-24. Delivering Risk Information for a Future Climate in
	
the Pacific85
 W. C. Arthur, H. M. Woolf (Geoscience Australia); P. Dailey (AIR Worldwide)

Tropical cyclones are the most common disaster           such as the state of Florida, a modest 1 percent
in the Pacific, and among the most destructive. In       increase in wind speeds can result in a 5 percent to
December 2012, Cyclone Evan caused over US$200           10 percent increase in loss to residential property.
million in damage in Samoa, nearly 30 percent            Quantifying the change impact thus supports
of Samoan GDP. Niue suffered losses of US$85             evidence-based decision making on adaptation to
million following Cyclone Heta in 2004—over              future climate risk.
five times its GDP. As recently as January 2014,
                                                         The quantitative, locally specific information needed
Cyclone Ian caused significant damage throughout
                                                         to guide adaptation decisions at the national or
Tonga, resulting in the first payout of the Pacific
                                                         community level can best be generated by adopting
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot system operated
                                                         a multidisciplinary approach. Climate model
by the World Bank (see section 3-19 above for more
                                                         simulations alone are insufficient, since they deal
information).86
                                                         with extreme events that are by their nature rare
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on              and unlikely to be generated in a limited set of
Climate Change (IPCC), intense tropical cyclone          general circulation model (GCM) runs. Moreover,
activity in the Pacific basin will likely increase       features having the greatest impact are highly
in the future (IPCC 2013). But such general              localized and hence impossible to resolve in a global
statements about global tropical cyclone activity        model. The analysis described here joined climate
provide little guidance on how impacts may change        GCMs forced by emission scenarios to catastrophe
locally or even regionally, and thus do little to help   modelling methods—a hybrid approach that drew
communities and nations prepare appropriate              on the respective strengths of climate science and
adaptation measures.                                     risk management.

The study described here87 assesses climate change       Using catastrophe models, it is possible to estimate
in terms of impact on the human population and           the financial impacts caused by tropical cyclones
its assets, expressed in terms of financial loss. An     at a local scale. Catastrophic risk models do not
impact focus is relevant to adaptation because           have the computational overhead of a GCM, and
changes in hazard do not necessarily result in a         so can be run in a probabilistic framework using a
proportional change in impact. This is because           catalog of events (built from statistics about past
impacts are driven by exposure and vulnerability         cyclones, including intensity, frequency, and tracks)
as well as by hazard. For example, a small shift in      that represents the likely actual distribution of
hazard in a densely populated area may have more         loss-causing cyclones. By analyzing the projections
significant consequences than a bigger change in an      from GCMs, it is possible to determine how the
unpopulated area. Analogously, a dense population        distributions of loss-causing cyclones may change;
that has a low vulnerability to a particular hazard      and by adjusting the catastrophe model’s hazard
might not need to adapt significantly to a change in     catalog to be consistent with the GCM projections,
hazard. Even in regions with high tropical cyclone       it is possible in turn to produce objective projections
risk and correspondingly stringent building codes,       of hazard, damage, and loss.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                       185
186
                                                              CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                                The project described here analyzed current                       and Adaptation Planning (PACCSAP) program.89
                                and future cyclone hazard and risk for 15 Pacific                 Figure 3-31 shows sample track data from GCMs and
                                Island countries involved with PCRAFI (whose                      the comparison to historical tropical cyclones.
                                aims are described in section 3-19). It combined
                                                                                                  The analysis focused on the RCP8.5 scenario (the
                                data produced through PCRAFI with information
                                on tropical cyclone activity in the Pacific region                most extreme Representative Concentration

                                extracted from model runs produced for the IPCC                   Pathway, or RCP, projection), under which annual
                                Fifth Assessment Report.                                          mean global temperature anomalies reach +4°C by
                                                                                                  2100 (IPCC 2013). However, the approach described
                                  Approach. Over 20 modelling groups have
                                ///             ///




                                                                                                  here is applicable to any scenario where climate
                                conducted modelling experiments that contribute                   model data are available. Two time periods were
                                toward the fifth phase of the Coupled Model                       analyzed: 1981–2000, representing current climate
                                Intercomparison Project (CMIP5), based on                         conditions, and 2081–2100, representing future
                                the latest emission scenarios used in the Fifth                   climate conditions under this scenario.
                                Assessment Report of the IPCC (Taylor, Stouffer,
                                and Meehl 2012). With the goal of identifying and                 The climate-conditioned catalogs were validated
                                tracking tropical-cyclone-like vortices (TCLVs),     88           by a cross-discipline group of scientists within and
                                      five models from the CMIP5 collection were                  outside the project teams at Geoscience Australia
                                analyzed by Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific                   and AIR Worldwide. Statistical and physical checks
                                and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) as                   assured that the distribution of storm track,
                                part of the Pacific-Australia Climate Change Science              intensity, evolution, wind speed, storm surge, and


Table 03—12                                                                        CURRENT          FUTURE                              RELATIVE
Changes in Key                                        FIELD         DOMAIN                                             CHANGE
                                                                                   CLIMATE          CLIMATE                            CHANGE (%)
Tropical Cyclone–                       Annual frequency               NH                  16.1        17.9               1.81              11.2
related Parameters                     (tropical cyclones/
                                                                       SH                  11.6        11.3              -0.34              -2.9
for the Five-                                 year)
member Ensemble                                                        NH                  14          13.4              -0.64              -4.6
                                       Genesis latitude (°N)
                                                                       SH                 -13.8        -13.2             0.53               -3.9
Source: Arthur and
                                                                       NH                 159.7       170.4              10.77               6.7
Woolf 2013.                           Genesis longitude (°E)
                                                                       SH                 157.3       160.4               3.12               2

Note: Bold, italicized values            Mean latitude of              NH                 18.5         18.1              -0.37               -2
indicate that change in the             maximum sustained
                                                                       SH                 -18.6        -19               -0.34               1.8
ensemble mean is greater                    wind (°N)
than the inter-model                    Mean latitude of               NH                 18.9         18.7              -0.18              -0.9
standard deviation. NH =              minimum pressure (°N)            SH                  -19         -19.1             -0.14               0.7
Northern Hemisphere; SH =
                                      Mean minimum central             NH                 963.2       965.7              2.46                0.3
Southern Hemisphere.
                                         pressure (hPa)                SH                 968.5       969.5              0.98                0.1

                                          Mean maximum                 NH                 41.2         39.4               -1.8              -4.4
                                       sustained wind (m/s)            SH                 38.5         37.4               -1.1              -2.9
                                CMIP5 - Northern Hemisphere                             CMIP5 - Southern Hemisphere
                   0.25                                                          0.25
                                                                                                                                           Figure 03—32 
                                                                                                                                           Ensemble mean
                   0.20                                                          0.20
                                                                                                                                           proportion of
                                                                                                                                           cyclones for current
      PROPORTION




                   0.15                                                          0.15
                                                                                                                                           and future climate
                                                                                                                                           in the Northern
                   0.10                                                          0.10
                                                                                                                                           Hemisphere (left) and
                                                                                                                                           Southern Hemisphere
                   0.05                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                           (right).

                   0.00                                                          0.00                                                      Source: Arthur and
                                TD   TS   TC1   TC2   TC3       TC4       TC5            TD       TS      TC1   TC2   TC3   TC4     TC5
                                                                                                                                           Woolf 2013.

                                                            1981 - 2000         2050          2081-2100
                                                                                                                                           Note: Classification is based
                                                                                                                                           on the Saffir-Simpson
                                                                                                                                           hurricane wind scale. Values
                                                                                                                                           for 2050 were determined
                                                                                                                                           using a linear interpolation
other dynamical parameters properly correlated                                    cyclone category 5). Table 3-13 shows that mean
                                                                                                                                           between the midpoint of the
in space and time with the changes informed by                                    maximum sustained winds will decrease in both            1981–2000 and 2081–2100
the climate model projections. The experimental                                   hemispheres, but as the changes in wind speeds at        periods. TD = tropical
framework was designed to incorporate peer                                        both ends of the distribution largely balance, the       depression; TS = tropical
review at all stages of the project and to include                                mean intensity does not change significantly in          storm; TC = tropical cyclone.

vetting of the results. This approach has been used                               either hemisphere.
successfully to model hazard and loss for future
                                                                                  The interaction of changes in frequency and
climate conditions in other studies, such as Dailey et
                                                                                  intensity distributions brings about nonlinear
al. (2003) and Arthur and Woolf (2014).
                                                                                  changes in the corresponding hazard levels. For
  Results. Table 3-13 presents the change in cyclone
///                       ///                                                     example, it is possible that a reduction in frequency,
hazard for the five-model ensemble mean. The                                      coupled with an increase in the share of intense
matrix contains current, future, change, and relative                             tropical cyclones, could increase the probability
change values for seven parameters that inform                                    that the most extreme winds would occur—and as a
the resampling of the 10,000-year synthetic event                                 result, increase the likelihood of experiencing larger
catalog. Of all the parameters, only one—genesis                                  losses. Return period losses for current conditions
longitude in the Northern Hemisphere domain—                                      and for the five future scenarios over the whole
shows a significant change—that is, for only this                                 Pacific region show that for two scenarios, losses
parameter is the ensemble mean change greater than                                will significantly increase (figure 3-33). However,
the inter-model standard deviation.                                               local losses may differ from the regional trends.

Figure 3-32 shows the changes in tropical cyclone                                 The 250-year return period losses are presented
intensity distribution between current and future                                 in figure 3-34, based on the ensemble mean for the
time periods for the mean of all climate models.                                  current climate. Across the entire Pacific region,
There is a shift in the distribution, with fewer                                  a 250-year return period loss is around 9 percent
midrange events (tropical cyclone categories 1–4),                                of GDP. However, examining individual countries
more weak events (tropical depressions and tropical                               produces a wide range of results. The 250-year loss
storms) and more very intense events (tropical                                    is nearly 280 percent of GDP for Niue, is 99 percent




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                                      187
188
                                                              CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES



                                                     Regional End-of-Century CMP5 Agg GroundUp EP Curves
Figure 03—33 
Individual regional                                2000
                                                              CURRENT CLIMATE
end-of-century                                     1800       FUTURE SCENARIOS
exceedance
probability curves for                             1600

ensemble members                                   1400
                              LOSS (MILLION US$)

(blue) compared
to the current                                     1200

climate exceedance                                 1000
probability curve
(green).                                           800


Source: Air Worldwide.                             600

Note: Each curve represents                        400
the loss across all asset
                                                    200
types arising from tropical
cyclone impacts.                                     0

                                                          0   25   50    75      100    125         150           175   200     225    250

                                                                                 RETURN PERIOD (YRS)




                              of GDP for the Federated States of Micronesia, and              the changes in loss be considered significant under
                              is 79 percent of GDP for the Marshall Islands.                  this metric. This result suggests the spectrum of
                                                                                              changes in tropical cyclone activity that can be
                              Figure 3-35 shows that 250 year return period losses
                                                                                              drawn from the climate model projections.
                              increase in most countries under future climate
                              conditions; however their significance depends on                 Discussion. The change in wind risk in the future
                                                                                              ///           ///




                              the GDP. The biggest increases are seen in Vanuatu              modelled climate is neither simple nor uniform
                              (11 percent), Niue (29 percent); and Samoa (35                  across the region. Determining appropriate
                              percent); there is a decrease in Nauru and Kiribati.            adaptation measures requires quantitative
                              The changes in tropical cyclone intensity or                    information beyond generic “up or down”
                              frequency are not nearly as large as these changes              statements. Changing intensity and frequency can
                              in loss. The nonlinear nature of the vulnerability              balance out in a complex interaction. This means
                              models leads to major increases in loss levels for              the average peak intensity may remain constant
                              only minor increases in the hazard level.                       or decline, while long return period wind speeds
                                                                                              increase due to a rise in the relative proportion of
                              However, of all the projected changes in loss, only
                                                                                              very intense tropical cyclones.
                              the change in 250-year return period loss for Samoa
                              (total losses) could be considered statistically                The analysis here has focused on regional (basin-
                              significant. The mean change in loss across the five            wide) changes in key tropical cyclone parameters.
                              models exceeds the standard deviation of those                  However, tropical cyclone–related risk depends
                              changes for this location. For no other country can             on changes in tropical cyclone activity at the
                                                    Figure 03—34 
                                                    Ensemble mean
                                                    250-year losses
                                                    across the Pacific as
                                                    a proportion of Pacific
                                                    Island countries’ GDP
                                                    for current climate
                                                    conditions (1981–
                                                    2000).

                                                    Source: Geoscience
                                                    Australia.




                                                    Figure 03—35 
                                                    Ensemble mean
                                                    change in 250-year
                                                    return period loss.

                                                    Source: Geoscience
                                                    Australia.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                 189
190
                             CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      country scale, and on actions taken at the national        significant. Given that over 20 modelling groups
      and community level. It is highly likely that some         conducted RCP8.5 experiments, using an ensemble
      countries will experience changes in tropical              of only five may in itself lead to skewed results.
      cyclones that are at odds with the basin-wide              Careful selection of the members, based on
      changes. Adaptation options need to recognize              quantitative measures of performance in the region,
      the localized nature of the changing hazard and            would minimize the risk of biased results. More-
      risk, and be tailored to suit the local capacity for       reliable results are more likely to be accepted, and
      implementing possible options.
                                                                 hence more likely to prompt action.
      The results of this study demonstrate that assessing
                                                                 Assessing results from multiple climate models
      the impact of climate change on hazard alone is
                                                                 also encourages stakeholders to consider a range
      not sufficient. The large increase in risk in many
                                                                 of potential outcomes for which they could
      regions, compared to the relatively small changes in
                                                                 prepare adaptation options. While the ensemble
      hazard, highlights the significance of exposure and
                                                                 mean can provide greater confidence than any
      vulnerability. The nonlinear nature of vulnerability
                                                                 individual model result, using a worst-case result
      means losses can increase dramatically as a
      result of only small changes in hazard. This is an         that provides an upper limit of the potential
      important finding because it suggests that the most        impacts may be desirable in some applications. This
      effective way to reduce financial risk is to reduce        conservative approach would be appropriate, for
      vulnerability. At the country scale, little can be done    example, for standards for building design, given
      to minimize changes in hazard, and exposure to             the expected lifetime of built assets, especially large
      tropical cyclones is likely to continue to increase        infrastructure (e.g., hospitals or port facilities). For
      as populations grow. By improving the resilience of        longer planning timelines, the expense and time
      exposed assets (reducing vulnerability), risks can         needed to modify the asset as projections of risk
      be significantly lowered. Some examples include            change make it harder to change adaptation options.
      preemptive vegetation reduction to minimize                At shorter timelines (e.g., annual crop planting), risk
      chance of tree crops suffering damage in a tropical        reduction options can be more readily evaluated,
      cyclone, improved site selection for vulnerable crops      making a mean estimate of risk more suitable for
      and other land-use planning measures, or changes
                                                                 consideration.
      in and/or more stringent enforcement of local
      building standards.                                        Finally, it should be noted that this study did not
                                                                 consider projections of future exposure. It is widely
      Using an ensemble of climate models for this work
                                                                 acknowledged that increased exposure has been the
      makes it possible to understand the robustness
                                                                 most significant driver of increased disaster losses
      of the projected changes. Analyzing loss changes
                                                                 over the past decades (Barthel and Neumayer 2012).
      derived from a single climate model could be
                                                                 Thus future studies of the kind described here would
      misleading if it were an outlier compared to the
      ensemble. A consistent trend across several models         benefit from considering exposure projections,

      would give end-users much greater confidence in            although the complex nature of exposure modelling
      the robustness of the results, even if the mean result     is likely to add significantly to the uncertainty in the
      is not statistically significant. As it is, our analysis   results. For policy makers, decisions about climate
      found several models with statistically significant        change adaptation (particularly decisions related to
      changes in tropical cyclone frequency, while               assets with a long lifetime) may need to be made in
      the ensemble mean change was not statistically             the absence of unambiguous evidence.
                                                                                                                CHAPTER


                                                                                                                03
3-25. A Framework for Modelling Future Urban Disaster
	
Risk90
 David Lallemant, Steven Wong, Anne Kiremidjian (Stanford University)

This case study proposes a framework to understand      Intense competition for land in urban environments,
and model the drivers of new risk creation, with a      driven mostly by accessibility to livelihood, means
particular focus on dynamic urban environments.         that hazardous areas such as floodplains and steep
Such a framework will help policy makers to             slopes will be settled.
understand and predict risk as it relates to dynamic
changes in urban environments—such as increases         Cities shift the economic balance of risk mitigation,
in population, specific urban growth patterns over      since expected losses are so high (Lall and
an evolving multi-hazard landscape, and evolving        Deichmann 2012; World Bank 2010b). This suggests
vulnerability—and in turn help them promote             a great opportunity for city officials and policy
resilient and sustainable future cities.                makers to implement risk mitigation policies and
                                                        projects. Because cities are growing, officials also
By 2030, the global population will reach 9
                                                        have a unique chance to affect the distribution and
billion, of which 60 percent will reside in cities
                                                        quality of future constructions, so that all new city
(United Nations 2007). To put these numbers
                                                        growth is resilient.
in perspective, twice as many people will live in
cities in 2030 as there were total people living in     To capitalize on these opportunities, policy
1970. This population shift has made cities the         makers need urban risk assessment models that
major source of global risk, in large part because      take projections of future risk into account.
of the increase in exposure linked to increases in      Current probabilistic risk assessment models use
population in hazard-prone areas (Bilham 2009).
                                                        static—current—conditions for hazard, exposure,
Cities often emerge in locations with favorable
                                                        and vulnerability. They therefore have the effect
economic conditions (coastal zones, river crossings,
                                                        of underestimating risk, and they also constrict
fertile volcanic soils, valleys), but these often
                                                        policy makers to a hopeless catch-up mode: since
correlate with increased hazard probability (floods,
                                                        conditions are always evolving past the latest data,
hurricanes, volcanoes, earthquakes). Furthermore,
                                                        their scope of action is limited to mitigating risk
since urbanization typically has occurred during a
                                                        to existing assets, rather than proactively seeking
time frame that is very short as compared to the
                                                        to reduce future risk. The model proposed here, by
return period of damaging natural hazards, there has
been little learning from past disasters, and hazards   contrast, is a dynamic urban risk analysis framework

that in the past affected villages and towns will now   that accounts for time-dependent changes in
be affecting large urban agglomerations.                exposure and vulnerability in order to project risk
                                                        into the future.
Evidence suggests that the risk linked with such
increases in exposure at the macro scale (increases     By focusing on modelling future risk, the framework
in population in hazard-prone areas) is significantly   enables the investigation of risk consequences
exacerbated by trends in distribution of this new       of various policy and planning decisions. It can
urban population within the urban boundary.             therefore readily inform risk-sensitive urban and




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                    191
192
                                                                  CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                                        regional policy and planning to promote resilient                        in its present state. This approach is a significant
                                        communities worldwide.                                                   limitation for assessing risk in rapidly changing
                                                                                                                 environments, in particular cities. The proposed
                                          Dynamic urban risk framework. Probabilistic
                                                                                                                 approach builds on current practices by integrating
                                        ///                                        ///




                                        disaster risk assessment consists of taking
                                                                                                                 urban growth models to forecast exposure. The
                                        the convolution of the hazard, exposure, and
                                                                                                                 resulting risk assessment is more accurate and
                                        vulnerability. Hazard refers to the potential
                                                                                                                 enables policy makers to take preventive measures
                                        occurrence of an event that may have adverse
                                                                                                                 to reduce future risk.
                                        impacts on vulnerable and exposed elements
                                        (people, infrastructure, the environment, etc.).                         The simplest method for modelling future exposure
                                        Exposure describes the elements that are impacted                        is to project exposure trends based on past data.
                                        by the hazard due to their spatial and temporal                          Census data for population or building inventory
                                        overlap. Vulnerability describes the propensity to                       at a minimum of two separate dates can be used
Figure 03—36                            suffer adverse effects from exposure to particular                       to develop projections for the future. Auxiliary
The three                               hazard intensity. These definitions make clear that                      data—such as general migration rate, natural
components of                           the fundamental components of risk are not fixed                         population growth, and economic growth—can
risk and their                          in time, particularly in rapidly changing urban                          further be used to improve these projections.
time dependence.                        environments (see figure 3-36).                                          Alternatively, agent-based models can be developed
                                                                                                                 and calibrated to simulate patterns of urban growth,
Source: Lallemant et al.                  Dynamic exposure modelling. Current risk
                                                                                                                 creating numerous alternatives of future urban form
                                        ///                                ///




2014.                                   assessment methodologies characterize exposure
                                                                                                                 (Batty 2007).




 Risk                      Hazard                                                Exposure                                           Vulnerability
                           Time-dependent hazards                                Time-dependent exposure                            Time-dependent vulnerability
                           • Large earthquakes do not occur                      • Population growth and migration                  • The vulnerability of buildings
                            following a Poission process.                         are rapidly changing the global                    changes in time due to
                            The occurrence of an event is                         landscape of risk exposure.                        deteriorations, retrofits, and
                            dependent on the time since the                      • Cities in particular are sites of                 alterations.
                            last event, consistent with elastic                   very rapid exposure change,                       • Most buildings in the world’s
                            rebound thoery of earthquakes.                        often reflecting significant                       growing cities are note static,
                           • Similarly, hydrometeorological                       migration into and within cities.                  but are continually being
                            hazards (e.g. floods and                             •Urban land markets often                           expanding upward or outward.
                            hurricanes) have recently received                    create pressures to settle on                      These practices have significant
                            a lot attention as research is                        increasingly hazardous land,                       impact on building vulnerability.
                            predicting increasing rate and                        includding steep slope, flood-                    • New construction practices
                            intensity of extreme weather                          planes and reclaimed land.                         further result in changes
                            events.                                                                                                  in vulnerability of the built
                                                                                                                                     environment.
                                                                                                                      Figure 03—37 
                                                                                                                      Incrementally
                                                                                                                      expanding buildings
                                                                                                                      and corresponding
                                                                                                                      changes
                                                                                                                      in vulnerability.
          Regional End-of-Century CMP5 Agg GroundUp EP Curves                                                         Note: The top panel
                                                                                                                      illustrates incremental
                                                                                          Building
               of Collapse




                       1.00
                        1.00
                                                                                                                      building construction typical
                                                                                          Stage
   PROBABILITY OF COLLAPSE




                                                                                                                      of cities throughout the
                                                                                                                      world; the bottom panel
                       0.75
                        0.75                                                                    Base
                                                                                           BUILDING   Case
                                                                                                    STAGE
                                                                                                                      illustrates the increase in
                                                                                                 Base Case
                                                                                                                      vulnerability in hypothetical
                       0.50
                        0.50                                                                     Expansion
                                                                                                 Expansion 1      1   fragility curves as floors are
  Probability




                                                                                                 Expansion 2          added and discontinuous
                       0.25
                        0.25                                                                     Expansion
                                                                                                 Expansion 3      2   expansions occur.


                       0.00
                        0.00                                                                      Expansion 3
                               0
                               0        1
                                        1            2
                                                     2          3
                                                                3                4
                                                                                 4
                                   Peak   GROUND Acceleration
                                        Ground
                                     PEAK                       (PGA)
                                                 ACCELERATION (PGA)




                                                          Indeed, the informal sector builds an estimated
  Dynamic vulnerability modelling. Current
                                                          70 percent of all urban housing in developing
///                                         ///




risk assessment models implicitly assume that
                                                          countries (Goethert 2010). This process starts
vulnerability is constant over time. Increase in
                                                          with a simple shelter and, given enough resources
vulnerability of structures with deterioration has
                                                          and time, transforms incrementally to multi-story
been the subject of increasing study (Frangopol,
                                                          homes and rental units. However, no robust studies
Lin, and Estes 1997; Ghosh et al. 2013; Rokneddin
                                                          have investigated the effect of these incremental
et al. 2013). Recent work by Anirudh Rao provides
                                                          expansions on vulnerability, particularly to
a time-dependent framework for modelling
                                                          seismic hazards.
structural deterioration of individual bridges
and their resulting increased seismic risk.91 The         Using seismic risk as a case study, the proposed
framework proposed here builds on this research to        framework defines typical stages within building
incorporate time-dependent fragility into large-          evolution, along with associated earthquake fragility
scale risk assessment models, and looks at other          curves reflecting the changes in vulnerability
common drivers influencing fragility. In particular       induced by each building expansion (see figure 3-37).
it investigates incremental construction as a             Earthquake fragility curves describe the probability
significant cause of changes in vulnerability, and also   of experiencing or exceeding a particular level of
looks at the role of changing building practices and      damage when subjected to a specific ground motion
structural deterioration.                                 intensity, usually measured in terms of peak ground
                                                          motion acceleration or spectral acceleration.
In rapidly urbanizing areas, the pay-as-you-go
                                                          Alternatively, instead of linking building expansions
process of informal building construction and
                                                          to new fragility curves, these increments can be
expansion is the de facto pattern of growth.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                  193
194
                                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




                          treated as additional vulnerability indicators in          This simplified application of the framework uses
                          multivariate fragility models.                             very limited data and simple models. The results
                                                                                     themselves are therefore not aimed at accuracy
                            Simplified case study of Kathmandu, Nepal.
                                                                                     of risk forecasting but are simply intended to
                          ///                                                  ///




                          The framework described above was applied in
                                                                                     demonstrate the importance of including urban
                          order to forecast the earthquake risk of Kathmandu,
                                                                                     dynamics in risk assessment of cities. A discussion
                          Nepal. Since the main interest is to capture
                                                                                     is included explaining how the model could be made
                          changing risk driven by time-dependent exposure
                                                                                     more complex to better reflect the uncertainties and
                          and vulnerability, the study describes the risk at
                                                                                     real urban dynamics.
                          different time periods based on a single earthquake
                          scenario: a reproduction of the 8.1 magnitude Bihar        The seismic hazard was developed by simulating
                          earthquake of 1934.                                        2,500 equally likely scenarios of the 1934 Bihar



Figure 03—38 
Number of buildings
sustaining heavy
damage or collapse
from a single ground
motion field, at six
different time periods.

Note: PGA = peak ground
acceleration.
                                                                                                                            CHAPTER


                                                                                                                             03
                   µ=48,200                                                                             1991              Figure 03—39 
                                                                                                        2001              Full distribution of the
                           µ=76,200                                                                     2011              number of buildings
                                                                                                                          sustaining heavy
                                                                                                        2015
                                        µ=127,500                                                                         damage or collapse,
                                                                                                        2020
                                                                                                                          for six different
FREQUENCY




                                               µ=154,600                                                2025              time frames.

                                                           µ=193,600                                                      Source: Lallemant et al.
                                                                                                                          2014.
                                                                    µ=238,400




            0    50,000       100,000      150,000        200,000   250,000      300,000      350,000       400,000


                  NUMBER OF BUILDINGS SUSTAINING HEAVY DAMAGE OR COLLAPSE
                                      1934 BIHAR EARTHQUAKE SCENARIO



earthquake (spatially correlated ground motion                 wards, as well as the distribution/redistribution
intensity fields) using the OpenQuake analysis                 of vulnerable building types. However, the values
engine (GEM 2013).92 Six exposure models were                  predicted are an example from a single ground
used, corresponding to years 1991, 2001, 2011 (from            motion simulation (shown in bottom left of figure
the ward-level census), and 2015, 2020, and 2025
                                                               3-38), and very different results would be generated
(projected based on quadratic fit to past census
                                                               from a different simulation.
data). Vulnerability curves used are those derived
from Arya (2000), who has developed many                       The east side of the city sustains heavier damage in
vulnerability curves for typical buildings in the area.        large part as a result of higher ground motions from

For simplicity, rates and distribution of “heavy               this specific simulation. In order to characterize the
damage or collapse” are used as metrics to measure             full distribution of heavy building damage for the
time-varying risk. Figure 3-38 shows the distribution          entire Kathmandu municipality, the process above
of the number of heavily damaged or collapsed                  is repeated for every ground motion field simulation
buildings for each of the exposure models, based on            (n = 2,500). The total number of heavily damaged
a single ground motion field simulation.                       or collapsed buildings is computed for every ground

The results clearly show significant changes in                motion field simulation. We can then compute the

risk driven by urban growth patterns and changes               expected (mean) risk due to changing exposure and
in primary construction type. The changing risk                vulnerability, as well as the full empirical probability
reflects both the high growth rates of specific                distribution of damage.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                     195
196
                                                                                                                       CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




Figure 03—40 




                                                             Number of buildings sustaining heavy damage
Expected number of


                           NUMBER OF BUILDINGS SUSTAINING HEAVY DAMAGE
buildings sustaining                                                                              400,000
                                                                                                  400,000
heavy damage
or collapse as a
function of time, with                                                                             300,000
                                                                                                   300,000
confidence interval.

Source: Lallemant et al.
2014.                                                                                              200,000
                                                                                                   200,000




                                                                                                   100,000
                                                                                                   100,000




                                                                                                           00
                                                                                                                1990
                                                                                                                1990    1995
                                                                                                                         1995   2000
                                                                                                                                2000   2005
                                                                                                                                       2005   2010
                                                                                                                                              2010       2015
                                                                                                                                                         2015        2020
                                                                                                                                                                     2020        2025
                                                                                                                                                                                 2025        2030
                                                                                                                                                                                             2030
                                                                                                                                              Year
                                                                                                                                              YEAR




                                                                The results shown in figures 3-39 and 3-40                                      to existing buildings is a ubiquitous practice and is
                                                                demonstrate that changes in exposure and                                        not accompanied with proper seismic strengthening.
                                                                vulnerability in Kathmandu drive a significant                                  Conversely, models could be developed reflecting
                                                                increase in risk. The expected number of buildings                              potential vulnerability reduction policies, such as
                                                                sustaining heavy damage or collapsing (mean                                     improvements in construction practices, building
                                                                values shown in figure 3-39) nearly doubles every                               height restrictions, or risk-sensitive zoning, among
                                                                10 years. Furthermore, the spread of the probability
                                                                                                                                                others. Finally, the effects of urban dynamics on
                                                                distribution of damage also increases. This increase
                                                                                                                                                exposure to secondary seismic hazards, in particular
                                                                is most likely the result of increased concentration
                                                                                                                                                liquefaction and landslides, could also be modelled.
                                                                of exposure.
                                                                                                                                                The proposed framework for assessing risk as it
                                                                Given additional data, this preliminary study of
                                                                                                                                                changes in time includes dynamic exposure and
                                                                Kathmandu could be extended to more accurately
                                                                                                                                                vulnerability models in order to forecast future
                                                                capture the urban dynamics. Instead of using the
                                                                                                                                                losses. The basic framework can be applied for
                                                                constant compound growth model over entire
                                                                wards, different population growth patterns                                     various levels of data availability and resolution.

                                                                could be explored. In addition, the model could                                 By focusing on modelling future risk, the
                                                                directly incorporate changing vulnerability due                                 framework enables the further investigation of risk
                                                                to incremental construction. The failure to do so                               consequences from various policy and planning
                                                                tends to underestimate damage, since incremental                                decisions. It therefore can readily serve to inform
                                                                construction typically leads to increased                                       risk-sensitive urban and regional policy and planning
                                                                vulnerability. In Kathmandu, the addition of floors                             to promote resilient communities.
CHAPTER


03
198
                                                           CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      	Endnotes                                                                 the Western Visayas region of the Philippines (see Bautista
                                                                                et al. 2012).

          21 See the institutions’ websites at www.codeforresilience.
                                                                                    31 For more information, see Geoscience Australia, “New
      <sup>   </sup>




      org and http://www.rhok.org/.
                                                                                <sup>   </sup>




                                                                                Building Assessment Tool Supports Better Risk Analysis,”

          22 Parts of this paper also appear in Soden, Budhathoki,
      <sup>                     </sup>
                                                                                February 12, 2014, http://www.ga.gov.au/about-us/

      and Palen (2014).                                                         news-media/news-2014/new-building-assessment-tool-
                                                                                supports-better-risk-analysis.html.
          23 In the 20th century alone, over 11,000 people lost
      <sup>                      </sup>




      their lives to earthquakes in Nepal. The 1934 Bihar-Nepal                     32 This paper draws in part on Petiteville, Bally, and Seguin
                                                                                <sup>                     </sup>




      earthquake destroyed 20 percent of Kathmandu’s building                   (2012).
      stock and damaged 40 percent. Geohazards International,
                                                                                    33 Institutions include the Arab Centre for the Studies
      “Kathnandu Valley Earthquake Risk Management,” http://
                                                                                <sup>                      </sup>




                                                                                of Arid Zones and Drylands, Beijing Normal University,
      geohaz.org/projects/kathmandu.html.
                                                                                Centro Internazionale in Monitoraggio Ambientale (CIMA)
          24 Funding for this research is provided by the Global
      <sup>                          </sup>
                                                                                Foundation, Geoscience Australia, Global Volcano Model,
      Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. For more                    Joint Research Centre of the European Commission,
      information on VGI, see http://crowdgov.wordpress.com/.                   Kokusai Kogyo, the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute,
                                                                                International Centre for Numerical Methods in Engineering
          25 This opinion is attributed to Schulyer Erle in Tim Waters,
      <sup>                     </sup>




                                                                                (CIMNE), University of Geneva, Famine Early Warning
      “OpenStreetMap Project & Haiti Earthquake Case Study,                     Systems Network (FEWS-NET), Global Earthquake Model
      slide presentation, 2010, http://pt.slideshare.net/chippy/                Foundation, the United Nations Environment Programme–
      openstreetmap-case-study-haiti-crisis-response.                           Global Resource Information Database (UNEP-GRID), and
                                                                                the World Agency for Planetary Monitoring and Earthquake
          26 Tim Waters, “OpenStreetMap Project & Haiti Earthquake
                                                                                Risk Reduction (WAPMEER).
      <sup>                              </sup>




      Case Study, slide presentation, 2010, http://pt.slideshare.
      net/chippy/openstreetmap-case-study-haiti-crisis-                             34 The full technical description of the approach can be
                                                                                <sup>                              </sup>




      response.
                                                                                found in Herold and Rudari (2013). 

          27 This point was made by Jeffrey Johnson, Where 2.0
                                                                                    35 Two publications are planned under this effort:
      <sup>            </sup>




                                                                                <sup>                     </sup>




      conference, March 30–April 1, 2010, San Jose, CA, http://
                                                                                “Probabilistic Volcanic Ash Hazard Analysis (PVAHA) I:
      hot.openstreetmap.org/updates/2013-12-17_imagery_for_
                                                                                Adapting a Seismologically Based Technique for Regional
      haiyan.
                                                                                Scale Volcanic Ash Hazard Assessment,” by A. N. Bear-
                                                                                Crozier and colleagues; and “Probabilistic Volcanic Ash
          28 Geoscience Australia holds a Creative Commons
      <sup>                               </sup>




                                                                                Hazard Assessment (PVAHA) II: Asia-Pacific Modelling
      Attribution 3.0 Australia license for the material in this
      section. All terms of the license apply for reuse of text and             Results,” by Victoria Miller and colleagues.

      graphics. Jones, Van Putten, and Jakab publish with the
                                                                                    36 The International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk
      permission of the CEO, Geoscience Australia.
                                                                                <sup>                              </sup>




                                                                                Management (ICHARM) operates under the auspices

          29 GMMA RAP was a component of BRACE (Building the
      <sup>                          </sup>
                                                                                of UNESCO and the Public Works Research Institute,
      Resilience and Awareness of Metro Manila Communities                      Japan. The authors would like to express their sincere
      to Natural Disaster and Climate Change Impacts), an                       appreciation to the following for their valuable inputs:
      Australian aid program in the Philippines initiated in 2010               Dr. Satoru Nishikawa (special representative of the
      that sought to reduce the vulnerability and enhance the                   Secretary-General for DRR on the Post-2015 Framework
      resilience of Metro Manila and selected neighboring areas                 for DRR and the Global Platform); Mr. Yusuke Amano
      to the impacts of natural disasters and climate change. As                (Water and Disaster Management Bureau, Japan); and
      a component of the BRACE program, GMMA RAP is also                        Dr. Yuki Matsuoka (UNISDR Hyogo Office). We are also
      known as the Enhancing Risk Analysis Capacities for Flood,                indebted to the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical
      Tropical Cyclone Severe Wind, and Earthquake for Greater                  and Astronomical Services Administration and the Asian
      Metro Manila Area program.                                                Disaster Preparedness Center for providing their data
                                                                                and comments.
          30 This project was the joint Geoscience Australia/
      <sup>                                       </sup>




      PHIVOLCS (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and                             37 For the sake of brevity, the discussion here will focus on
                                                                                <sup>            </sup>




      Seismology) pilot study of earthquake risk in Iloilo City, in             the risk of fatality-causing floods.
                                                                                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                  03
    38 Such a conceptual approach uses hazard, exposure, and
<sup>              </sup>                                           47 This module, called CRISIS, was developed at the
                                                                <sup>                     </sup>




vulnerability indices to assign data to various categories.     Engineering Institute of the National University of Mexico
For each category, a score is derived by arithmetic             by M. Ordaz, A. Aguilar, and J. Arboleda.
computations, such as by using the weighted rank sum
method. A conceptual risk index is finally presented on a 0         48 World Bank, Asian Development Bank, UN System,
                                                                <sup>                                            </sup>




to 1 scale by summing the scores.                               “Tsunami: Impact and Recovery, Joint Needs Assessment,
                                                                2005.”
    39 Only the effectiveness of the levee with respect
<sup>            </sup>




to overflow is considered. Breaching of levees is not               49 The outputs of this phase included a synthesis report,
                                                                <sup>                                           </sup>




considered in this analysis. This may underestimate the         a report on methodologies, 10 detailed island reports,

calculated inundation extend and the water depths of the        and a technical specification report on databases. All
                                                                are accessible at the Maldives Department of National
flood when levees are included in the calculation.
                                                                Planning website, http://planning.gov.mv/en/content/
    40 Geoscience Australia holds a Creative Commons
<sup>                          </sup>
                                                                view/306/93/.
Attribution 3.0 Australia license for the material in this
                                                                    50 This phase produced social and economic vulnerability
section. All terms of the license apply for reuse of text and
                                                                <sup>                                       </sup>




                                                                assessment reports as follows: a synthesis report, a
graphics. Jones, Griffin, Robinson, and Cummins publish
                                                                methodological description, and 10 detailed island reports.
with the permission of the CEO, Geoscience Australia.
                                                                All are accessible at the Maldives Department of National
The authors gratefully acknowledge Guy Janssen, whose           Planning website, http://planning.gov.mv/en/content/
independent review of the Indonesian Earthquake Hazard          view/306/93/.
Project identified and articulated many of the factors for
                                                                    51 The cost-benefit report is accessible at http://www.
success discussed in this paper.
                                                                <sup>   </sup>




                                                                preventionweb.net/english/professional/publications/v.
    41 For more information, see http://aid.dfat.gov.au/
<sup>   </sup>
                                                                php?id=14437.
countries/eastasia/indonesia/ and http://www.aifdr.org/.
                                                                    52 These data were from the National Statistics Office 2008
                                                                <sup>                         </sup>




The AIFDR is managed by Australian and Indonesian co-           population and housing census.
directors, and AIFDR work programs and funding decisions
                                                                    53 Note that for the purposes of analysis flood defenses
are jointly developed by the Australian Department of
                                                                <sup>                              </sup>




                                                                were assumed to be not effective due to insufficient
Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) and Badan Nasional
                                                                maintenance.
Penanggulangan Bencana (BNPB; Indonesian National
Agency for Disaster Management)
                                                                    54 Material in this section is based on the World Bank–
                                                                <sup>                                   </sup>




                                                                commissioned Shire Integrated Flood Risk Management
    42 The agencies are the BNPB; Badan Geologi (Geological
<sup>            </sup>




                                                                Program Final Report: Volume 1; the report was completed
Agency of Indonesia); Badan Meteorologi, Klimatologi, dan
                                                                in 2012 by Atkins.
Geofisika (Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology
and Geophysics); Lembaga Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia
                                                                    55 For this determination, the 1-in-100-year scenario with
                                                                <sup>                          </sup>




(Indonesian Institute of Sciences); and Institut Teknologi
                                                                climate change was used.
Bandung (Bandung Institute of Technology).
                                                                    56 The figure is as of March 1, 2014.
                                                                <sup>                                  </sup>




    43 GMMA RAP is also known as the Enhancing Risk Analysis
<sup>              </sup>




Capacities for Flood, Tropical Cyclone Severe Wind, and             57 This involved data from 1,076 existing boreholes and 48
                                                                <sup>            </sup>




Earthquake for Greater Metro Manila Area program.               new drillings undertaken under the project.

    44 Geoscience Australia, “International Work Helps Build
<sup>                     </sup>



                                                                    58 See Pektas and Gulkan (2004).
                                                                <sup>                                   </sup>




Safer Communities in the Philippines,” http://www.ga.gov.
au/about-us/news-media/news-2014/international-work-                59 ISMEP is a €1.5 billion project running from 2006 to
                                                                <sup>                                  </sup>




helps-build-safer-communities-in-the-philippines.html.          2018. It is funded by the World Bank, European Investment
                                                                Bank, European Council Development Bank, and Islamic
    45 The event occurred 95km south of Aqaba.
<sup>            </sup>
                                                                Development Bank.

    46 The software development and the risk assessment
<sup>                     </sup>
                                                                    60 ISMEP Magazine, May 2012, http://issuu.com/
                                                                <sup>                                               </sup>




exercises were undertaken by ERN-AL consortium.                 guvenliyasam/docs/ismep_dergi_en5/9?e=0/6534273.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                     199
200
                                                   CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




          61 This assumed the same level of seismicity across
      <sup>   </sup>                                                         70 See Scolobig et al. (2013).
                                                                         <sup>                                   </sup>




      the country.
                                                                             71 Geoscience Australia holds a Creative Commons
                                                                         <sup>   </sup>




          62 This section is drawn from the World Bank report
      <sup>                     </sup>


                                                                         Attribution 3.0 Australia license for the material in this
      entitled Building Morocco’s Risk Resilience: Inputs into an        section. All terms of the license apply for reuse of text
      Integrated Risk Management Strategy (Washington, DC:               and graphics.
      World Bank, 2013), which summarizes technical assistance
      work performed by the World Bank and funded by GFDRR                   72 Data are from the Data dan Informasi Bencana Indonesia
                                                                         <sup>                      </sup>




      and the Swiss Development Cooperation in the period                (Disaster Data and Information Indonesia) database, BNPB
      2008–2013.                                                         (Indonesian National Disaster Management Agency), 2009,
                                                                         http://dibi.bnpb.go.id.
          63 EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster
      <sup>                      </sup>




      Database, www.emdat.be, Université Catholique de                       73 The evaluation’s theoretical framework was the
                                                                         <sup>                       </sup>




      Louvain, Brussels (Belgium).                                       Transtheoretical Model for Behavior Change (Prochaska,
                                                                         Norcross, and DiClemente 1994). The five steps identified in
          64 Abdelhamid Ben Abdelfadel and Fatima Driouech,
      <sup>                               </sup>




                                                                         the framework are resistance, contemplation, preparation,
      “Climate Change and Its Impacts on Water Resources in              action, and maintenance.
      the Maghreb Region,” http://www.arabwatercouncil.org/
      administrator/Modules/Events/IWRA%20Morocco%20                         74 Geoscience Australia holds a Creative Commons
                                                                         <sup>                      </sup>




      Paper.pdf.                                                         Attribution 3.0 Australia license for the material in this
                                                                         section. All terms of the license apply for reuse of text
          65 The MnhPRA technical contractor was RMSI Ltd.
      <sup>                     </sup>




                                                                         and graphics.

          66 This account of PCRAFI is based on World Bank project
      <sup>                              </sup>




                                                                             75 Contribution from Dr. Agus Wibowo, Head of Data
                                                                         <sup>                      </sup>




      documents, including World Bank, “Pacific Catastrophic             Division, Center for Data, Information and Public Relations,
      Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative: Better Risk
                                                                         Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana (BNPB).
      Information for Smarter Investments—Catastrophic Risk
      Assessment Methodology,” Washington, DC, 2013, https://                76 Contribution from Geoscience Australia staff members
                                                                         <sup>                          </sup>




      www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/files/publication/PCRAFI_            Kristy van Putten, Charlotte Morgan, and David Robinson.
      Catastrophe_Risk_Assessment_Methodology.pdf.
                                                                             77 The Australian government agencies involved in
                                                                         <sup>             </sup>




          67 Timor-Leste is technically not in the Pacific but was
      <sup>            </sup>




                                                                         developing InaSAFE include the Department of Foreign
      included in the PCRAFI program.                                    Affairs and Trade–Development Corporation and
                                                                         Geoscience Australia through the Australia-Indonesia
          68 World Bank, “Tonga to Receive US$1.27 Million Payout for
                                                                         Facility for Disaster Reduction. The World Bank’s
      <sup>                               </sup>




      Cyclone Response,” press release, http://www.worldbank.
                                                                         participation was supported by AusAid’s East Asia and
      org/en/news/press-release/2014/01/23/tonga-to-receive-
                                                                         Pacific Infrastructure for Growth Trust Fund.
      payout-for-cyclone-response.

                                                                             78 The “rookies” were chosen by Black Duck, a software
          69 This case study presents the results of interdisciplinary
                                                                         <sup>                               </sup>




                                                                         and consulting company. See Klint Finley, “Microsoft, Yahoo
      <sup>                          </sup>




      research undertaken within the framework of the MATRIX
                                                                         Among Open Source ‘Rookies of the Year,’” Wired, http://
      (New Multi-HAzard and MulTi-RIsK Assessment MethodS
                                                                         www.wired.com/wiredenterprise/2013/01/open-source-
      for Europe) project. The research was supported by the
                                                                         rookies-of-year/.
      European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
      through the grant to the budget of the MATRIX project
                                                                             79 For more information, see the project website at http://
                                                                         <sup>                           </sup>




      (New methodologies for multihazard and multi-risk
                                                                         noah.dost.gov.ph/.
      assessment methods for Europe [FP7/2007-2013]) under
      grant agreement no. 265138. The paper reflects the                     80 Kundzewicz et al. (2014), based on MunichRe’s
                                                                         <sup>                                            </sup>




      authors’ views and not those of the European Community.            NatCatSERVICE data.
      Neither the European Community nor any member of the
      MATRIX Consortium is liable for any use of the information             81 For more details, see Pappenberger et al. (2012);
                                                                         <sup>            </sup>




      in this paper. We wish to thank all who offered professional       Jongman, Ward, and Aerts (2012); Dilley et al. (2005a);
      advice and collaboration. We are especially grateful to            UNISDR (2009b); Hirabayashi et al. (2013); Ward et al.
      the practitioners who discussed with us the challenges of          (2013b); Winsemius et al. (2013); Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes
      multi-risk assessment.                                             (2014).
                                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                    03
    82 See the Global Flood Working Group portal at http://
<sup>                      </sup>




portal.gdacs.org/Expert-working-groups/Global-Flood-
                                                                    References
Working-Group.
                                                                    Abbs, D. 2012. “The Impact of Climate Change on the
                                                                       Climatology of Tropical Cyclones in the Australian
    83 EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster
<sup>                       </sup>




                                                                       Region.” CSIRO Climate Adaptation Flagship Working
Database, www.emdat.be, Université catholique de
                                                                       Paper No. 11, CSIRO, Canberra.
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

                                                                    Abbs, D. J., S. Ayral, E. Campbell, J. L. McGregor, K. C.
    84 The quotation is from D. Wielinga, senior disaster risk
<sup>                               </sup>




                                                                       Nguyen, M. Palmer, A. S. Rafter, I. G. Watterson, and
management specialist, World Bank Africa Region; see
GFDRR, “GFDRR Connects Science with Policy to Help                     B. C. Bates. 2006. Projections of Extreme Rainfall and

Address Flood Risk in Nigeria,” https://www.gfdrr.org/                 Cyclones: Final Report to the Australian Greenhouse

node/27850.                                                            Office. Canberra: CSIRO.


    85 Geoscience Australia holds a Creative Commons
<sup>                      </sup>
                                                                    ADRC (Asian Disaster Reduction Center). 2006. “Report
Attribution 3.0 Australia license for the material in this             on Survey on Tsunami Awareness in Indonesia: Banda
section. All terms of the license apply for reuse of text              Aceh and Aceh Besar Area of Aceh Province.” ADRC.
and graphics.                                                          http://www.adrc.asia/publications/Indonesia_Survey/
                                                                       Banda%20Aceh/en/index.html.
    86 World Bank, “Tonga to Receive US$1.27 Million Payout for
<sup>                               </sup>




Cyclone Response,” press release, http://www.worldbank.             Ahmad Al Waked. 2011. “Evolution of the Impact of an
org/en/news/press-release/2014/01/23/tonga-to-receive-                 Earthquake on Aqaba and Jordan Economy and Public
payout-for-cyclone-response.                                           Finances.” In Disaster Risk Assessment for Aqaba. UNDP
                                                                       and ASEZA. http://www.preventionweb.net/files/31205_
    87 Analysis benefited from funding provided under a
<sup>            </sup>




                                                                       aqabasraeisei1.pdf.
grant from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
and Recovery.                                                       Amarasinghe, S. 2007. “Identifying Vulnerability Using
                                                                       Semi-structured Interviews.” In Rapid Vulnerability
    88 The identification and tracking algorithm used was
                                                                       Assessment in Sri Lanka: Post-Tsunami Study of Two
<sup>                                </sup>




based on the works of Nguyen and Walsh (2001), Walsh
                                                                       Cities: Galle and Batticaloa. SOURCE Publication No. 7,
and Syktus (2003), and Abbs et al. (2006), and applies
                                                                       47–53. http://ihdp.unu.edu/file/get/3992.pdf.
eight criteria to identify a tropical cyclone. Further details
of the method can be found in Abbs (2012).                          Annaka, T., K. Satake, T. Sakakiyama, K. Yanagisawa, and
                                                                       N. Shuto. 2007. “Logic-tree Approach for Probabilistic
    89 The five models were ACCESS 1.0, Can ESM, CSIRO
                                                                       Tsunami Hazard Analysis and Its Applications to the
<sup>                              </sup>




Mk3.6.0, IPSL CM5A, and NorESM-1M. More information is
                                                                       Japanese Coasts.” Pure and Applied Geophysics 164:
available about the PACCSAP program on the Australian
                                                                       577–92.
Department of the Environment website, http://www.
climatechange.gov.au/climate-change/grants/pacific-
                                                                    Aon Benfield. 2012. Annual Global Climate and
australia-climate-change-science-and-adaptation-
                                                                       Catastrophe Report: Impact Forecasting, 2011.
planning-program.
                                                                       http://thoughtleadership.aonbenfield.com/
                                                                       Documents/20120110_if_annual_global_climate_cat_
    90 This case study draws on D. Lallemant, S. Wong, K.
<sup>                                   </sup>




Morales, and A. Kiremidjian, “A Framework and Case Study               report.pdf.

for Dynamic Urban Risk Assessment” (paper presented at
                                                                    Arkema, K. K., G. Guannel, G. Verutes, S. A. Wood, A. Guerry,
the 10th National Conference in Earthquake Engineering,
                                                                       M. Ruckelshaus, P. Kareiva, M. Lacayo, and J. M. Silver.
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute, Anchorage, AK,
                                                                       2013. “Coastal Habitats Shield People and Property from
July 2014).
                                                                       Sea-level Rise and Storms.” Nature Climate Change 3:
    91 Rao’s Ph.D. thesis, entitled “Structural Deterioration and
<sup>   </sup>
                                                                       913–18. doi:10.1038/nclimate1944.
Time-Dependent Seismic Risk Analysis,” is being completed
                                                                    Ambraseys, Nicholas. 2009. Earthquakes in the
at the Blume Earthquake Center, Stanford University.
                                                                       Mediterranean and Middle East: A Multidisciplinary Study
    92 OpenQuake 2013 release, Global Earthquake Model,
<sup>                     </sup>
                                                                       of Seismicity up to 1900. Cambridge and New York:
http://www.globalquakemodel.org/openquake/.                            Cambridge University Press.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                       201
202
                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      Arnell, N. W., and B. Lloyd-Hughes. 2014. “The Global-          Bautista, M. L. P., B. C. Bautista, I. C. Narag, A. G. Lanuza, J.
         scale Impacts of Climate Change on Water Resources              B. Deocampo, K. L. Papiona, R. A. Atando, R. U. Solidum,
         and Flooding under New Climate and Socio-economic               T. A. Allen, M. Jakab, H. Ryu, M. Edwards, K. Nadimpalli,
         Scenarios.” Climatic Change 122: 127–40. doi:10.1007/           M. Leonard, and M. A. Dunford. 2012. “Strengthening
         s10584-013-0948-4.                                              Natural Hazard Risk Assessment Capacity in the
                                                                         Philippines: An Earthquake Impact Pilot Study for Iloilo
      Arnold, Margaret, Maxx Dilley, Uwe Deichmann, Robert               City, Western Visayas.” Record 2012/070, Geoscience
         S. Chen, and Arthur L. Lerner-Lam. 2005. Natural                Australia, Canberra. http://www.ga.gov.au/metadata-
         Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis. Washington,          gateway/metadata/record/gcat_74132.
         DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and
         Development/World Bank and Columbia University.              Bear-Crozier, A. N., N. Kartadinata, A. Heriwaseso, and
                                                                         O. Nielsen. 2012. “Development of Python-Fall3D: A
      Arthur, W. C., and H. M. Woolf. 2013. “Assessment of Tropical      Modified Procedure for Modelling Volcanic Ash Dispersal
         Cyclone Risk in the Pacific Region: Analysis of Changes         in the Asia-Pacific.” Natural Hazards 64 (1): 821–38.
         in Key Tropical Cyclone Parameters.” Record 2013/23,
         Geoscience Australia, Canberra.                              Bear-Crozier, A., and A. Simpson. 2011. “Development and
                                                                         Implementation of Volcanic Ash Modelling in West Java:
      Arya, A. S. 2000. “Non-engineered Construction in                  Completion Report for AusAID.” Geoscience Australia
         Developing Countries—An Approach toward Earthquake              Professional Opinion 2011/04, Canberra.
         Risk Prediction.” Bulletin of the New Zealand Society for
         Earthquake Engineering 33 (3): 187–208.                      Beaulieu, A., D. Begin, and D. Genest. 2010. “Community
                                                                         Mapping and Government Mapping: Potential
      ASEP (Association of Structural Engineers of the                   Collaboration?” Symposium of ISPRS Commission I,
         Philippines). 2010. National Structural Code of the             Calgary, Canada, June 16–18. http://www.isprs.org/
         Philippines, Volume 1: Buildings, Towers, and Other             proceedings/xxxviii/part1/10/10_01_Paper_163.pdf.
         Vertical Structures. ASEP: Quezon City, Philippines.
                                                                      Bilham, R. 2009. “The Seismic Future of Cities.” Bulletin of
      Atkins. 2012. Shire Integrated Flood Risk Management               Earthquake Engineering 7 (4): 839–87.
         Program Final Report: Volume 1.
                                                                      BNPB (National Disaster Management Agency) and
      Badilla, R. A., R. M. Barde, G. Davies, A. C. Duran, J. C.         Bappenas (National Development Planning Agency),
         Felizardo, E. C. Hernandez, M. G. Ordonez, and R. S.            with provincial and district/city governments of West
         Umali. 2014. “Enhancing Risk Analysis Capacities for            Sumatra and Jambi. 2009. “West Sumatra and Jambi
         Flood, Tropical Cyclone Severe Wind, and Earthquake for         Natural Disasters: Damage, Loss and Preliminary Needs
         the Greater Metro Manila Area. Component 3: Flood Risk          Assessment.” https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr.org/
         Analysis.” CSCAND Technical Report for DFAT.                    files/documents/GFDRR_Indonesia_DLNA.2009.EN_.
                                                                         pdf.
      Barredo, J. I. 2009. “Normalised Flood Losses in Europe:
         1970–2006.” Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences        Bouwer, L. M. 2011. “Have Disaster Losses Increased
         9: 97-104. doi:10.5194/nhess-9-97-2009.                         Due to Anthropogenic Climate Change?” Bulletin
                                                                         of the American Meteorological Society 92: 39-46.
      Barthel, F., and E. Neumayer. 2012. “A Trend Analysis of           doi:10.1175/2010BAMS3092.1.
         Normalized Insured Damage from Natural Disasters.”
         Climatic Change 113: 215–37.                                 Burbidge, D., P. Cummins, R. Mleczko, and H. Thio. 2008. “A
                                                                         Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Assessment for Western
      Batty, M. 2007. Cities and Complexity: Understanding               Australia.” Pure and Applied Geophysics 165: 2059–88.
         Cities with Cellular Automata, Agent-Based Models, and
         Fractals. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                          Burbidge, D., P. R. Cummins, R. Mleczko, and H. K. Thio.
                                                                         2009. “A Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Assessment
      Bautista, M. L. P., B. Bautista, I. C. Narag, A. D. Aquino,        for Western Australia.” In Tsunami Science Four Years
         K. Papiona, A. L. Delos Santos, J. Nadua, J. P. Deximo,         after the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, edited by Phil R.
         M. Jakab, and M. A. Dunford. 2014. “Enhancing Risk              Cummins, Laura S. L. Kong, and Kenji Satake, 2059–88.
         Analysis Capacities for Flood, Tropical Cyclone Severe          Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser.
         Wind, and Earthquake for the Greater Metro Manila Area
         Component 2—Exposure Information Development.”               Chapman, K. 2012. “Community Mapping for Exposure in
         CSCAND Technical Report for DFAT.                               Indonesia.” Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team. http://
                                                                                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                    03
   hot.openstreetmap.org/sites/default/files/CM4E-Indo-          Desramaut, N. 2013. “Functional Vulnerability: Report on
   en.pdf.                                                          the Functional Vulnerability Assessment of a System
                                                                    Prone to Multiple Hazards.” Technical Report D4.3,
Chapman, K., A. Wibowo, and Nurwadjedi. 2013. “Filling              MATRIX project.
   the Data Gap with Participatory Mapping for Effective
   Disaster Preparedness.” Paper presented at the Disaster       Dilley, M., R. S. Chen, U. Deichmann, A. Lerner-Lam, M.
   Risk Management in East Asia and the Pacific Distance            Arnold, J. Agwe, P. Buys, O. Kjekstad, B. Lyon, and G.

   Learning Seminar Series, Jakarta, June 18. http://www.           Yetman. 2005a. Natural Disaster Hotspots. A Global
                                                                    Risk Analysis. Washington, DC: International Bank for
   jointokyo.org/files/cms/news/pdf/(Final)_Session_2_
                                                                    Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
   Summary.pdf.
                                                                    Columbia University.
CIMNE (Centro Internacional de Métodos Numéricos
                                                                 ———. 2005b. Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global
   en Ingeniería) et al. 2013. “Probabilistic Modeling of
                                                                    Risk Analysis. Synthesis Report. Washington,
   Natural Risks at the Global Level: Global Risk Model.”
                                                                    DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Background Paper prepared for the 2013 Global
                                                                    Development/World Bank.
   Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR,
   Geneva. www.preventionweb.net/gar.                            Erdik, M. 2013. “Earthquake Risk in Turkey.” Science 341:
                                                                    724–25.
Cornell, C. A. 1968. “Engineering Seismic Risk Analysis.”
   Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America 58:          Erian, Wadid, Bassem Katlan, Bassem Ouldbedy, Haider
   1583–1606.                                                       Awad, Ebrahim Zaghtity, and Sanaa Ibrahim. 2012.
                                                                    “Agriculture Drought in Africa and Mediterranean.”
Council of European Union. 2009. “Council Conclusions on            Background paper prepared for the 2013 Global
   a Community Framework on Disaster Prevention within              Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR,
   the EU.” Minutes of the 2979th Justice and Home Affairs          Geneva. www.preventionweb.net/gar.
   Council Meeting, Brussels, November 30.
                                                                 European Commission. 2010a. “The EU Internal Security
Cummins, P., and M. Leonard, M. 2004. “Small Threat but             Strategy in Action: Five Steps towards a More Secure
   Warning Sounded for Tsunami Research.” AusGeo News               Europe.” Communication from the Commission to the
   75: 4–7. September.                                              European Parliament and the Council, COM(2010) 673
                                                                    final, European Commission, Brussels.
Cummins, P. R., D. R. Burbidge, R. Mleczko, D. H.
   Natawidjaja, and H. Latief. 2009. Probabilistic               ———. 2010b. “Risk Assessment and Mapping Guidelines
   Assessment of Tsunami Hazard in the Indian Ocean.                for Disaster Management.” Commission Staff Working

   Canberra: Geoscience Australia.                                  Paper, SEC(2010) 1626 final, European Commission,
                                                                    Brussels.
Cyranoski, D. 2011. “Japan Faces Up to Failure of Its
                                                                 FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2003.
   Earthquake Preparations.” Nature 471: 556–57.
                                                                    Multi-hazard Loss Estimation Methodology. Earthquake
Dailey, P., M. Huddleston, S. Brown, and D. Fasking. 2009.          Model. HAZUS-MH 2.1. Technical Manual. Washington,

   “The Financial Risks of Climate Change.” ABI Research            DC: FEMA.

   Paper 19, Association of British Insurerers. http://static.
                                                                 Feyen, L., R. Dankers, K. Bódis, P. Salamon, and J. I. Barredo.
   weadapt.org/knowledge-base/files/1040/504a19b1e3d0
                                                                    2012. “Fluvial Flood Risk in Europe in Present and Future
   efinancial-risks-of-climate-change-pdf.pdf.
                                                                    Climates.” Climatic Change 112: 47–62. doi:10.1007/
                                                                    s10584-011-0339-7.
Daniell, J. E., B. Khazai, F. Wenzel, and A. Vervaeck. 2011.
   “The CATDAT Damaging Earthquakes Database.” Natural           Frangopol, D. M., K.-Y. Lin, and A. C. Estes. 1997. “Reliability
   Hazards and Earth Systems Sciences 11: 2235–51.                  of Reinforced Concrete Girders under Corrosion Attack.”
   doi:10.5194/nhess-11-2235-2011.                                  Journal of Structural Engineering 123 (3): 286–97.

De Bono, A. 2013. “The Global Exposure Database for GAR          Fraser, A., and D. Vincent Lima. 2012. “Survey Results
   2013.” Background paper prepared for the 2013 Global             Report: Regional Technical Assistance Initiative on
   Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR,            Climate Adaptation Planning in LAC Cities.” Latin
   Geneva. www.preventionweb.net/gar.                               America and Caribbean Regional Urban, Water,




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                       203
204
                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




         and Disaster Risk Management Unit, World Bank,                Government of Malawi. 2010. “National Disaster Risk
         Washington, DC.                                                  Reduction Framework 2010–2015.”

      Gadjah Mada University and HOT (Humanitarian                     ———. 2011. “National Disaster Risk Management Policy.”
         OpenStreetMap Team). 2012. “Evaluation of                        Department of Disaster Management Affairs.
         OpenStreetMap Data in Indonesia: Final Report.”
                                                                       Government of Morocco. 2012. “Evaluating Direct and
         http://openstreetmap.or.id/docs/Final_Report-OSM_
                                                                          Indirect Economic Impacts of Natural Disasters: The
         Evaluation_in_Indonesia_2012.pdf.
                                                                          Development of an Input-Output and a CGE Models

      Gall, M., K. A. Borden, C. T. Emrich, and S. L. Cutter. 2011.       for Morocco.”

         “The Unsustainable Trend of Natural Hazard Losses in
                                                                       Hallegatte, S., C. Green, R. J. Nicholls, and J. Corfee-
         the United States.” Sustainability 3: 2157–81. doi:10.3390/
                                                                          Morlot. 2013. “Future Flood Losses in Major Coastal
         su3112157.
                                                                          Cities.” Nature Climate Change 3: 802–6. doi:10.1038/
                                                                          nclimate1979.
      Garcia-Aristizabal, A., W. Marzocchi, and A. Di Ruocco. 2013.
         “Probabilistic Framework for Multi-hazard Assessment.”        Herold, C., and F. Mouton. 2011. “Global Flood Hazard
         Technical Report D3.4, MATRIX project.                           Mapping Using Statistical Peak Flow Estimates.”
                                                                          Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions 8:
      Gaume, E., V. Bain, P. Bernardara, O. Newinger, M. Barbuc,
                                                                          305–63. doi:10.5194/hessd-8-305-2011.
         A. Bateman, L. Blaškovičová, G. Blöschl, M. Borga, A.
         Dumitrescu, I. Daliakopoulos, J. Garcia, A. Irimescu, S.      Herold, C., and R. Rudari. 2013. “Improvement of the Global
         Kohnova, A. Koutroulis, L. Marchi, S. Matreata, V. Medina,       Flood Model for the GAR 2013 and 2015.” Background
         E. Preciso, D. Sempere-Torres, G. Stancalie, J. Szolgay, I.      paper prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report
         Tsanis, D. Velasco, and A. Viglione. 2009. “A Compilation        on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR, Geneva. www.
         of Data on European Flash Floods.” Journal of Hydrology          preventionweb.net/gar.
         367 (1): 70–78. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2008.12.028.
                                                                       Hirabayashi, Y., M. Roobavannan, K. Sujan, K. Lisako, Y. Dai,
      Geller, R. J. 2011. “Shake Up Time for Japanese Seismology.”        W. Satoshi, K. Hyungjun, and K. Shinjiro. 2013. “Global
         Nature 472: 407–9.                                               Flood Risk under Climate Change.” Nature Climate
                                                                          Change 3: 816–21. doi:10.1038/nclimate1911.
      GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
         Recovery). 2014. Open Data for Resilience Initiative Field    ICHARM (International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk

         Guide. Washington, DC: World Bank.                               Management). 2013. Technical Assistance for Supporting
                                                                          Investments in Water-related Disaster Management:
      Ghosh, Jayadipta, Keivan Rokneddin, Jamie E. Padgett,               Main Volume. Manila: Asian Development Bank. http://
         and Leonardo Dueñas–Osorio. 2013. “Seismic Reliability           www.adb.org/projects/documents/supporting-
         Assessment of Aging Highway Bridge Networks with                 investments-water-related-disaster-management-tacr.
         Field Instrumentation Data and Correlated Failures. I:
                                                                       IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2012.
         Methodology.” Earthquake Spectra. doi:http://dx.doi.
                                                                          Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to
         org/10.1193/040512eqs155m.
                                                                          Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A special report
                                                                          of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental
      Goethert, R. 2010. “Incremental Housing.” Monday
                                                                          Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge and New York:
         Developments. September. http://monthlydevelopments.
                                                                          Cambridge University Press.
         org/sites/monthlydevelopments/files/MD_Sept_10_
         small.pdf.
                                                                       ———. 2013. “Summary for Policymakers.” In Climate Change
                                                                          2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
      Gonzalez, F., E. Geist, B. Jaffe, U. Kanoglu, H. Mofjeld, C.
                                                                          Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
         Synolakis, V. Titov, D. Arcas, D. Bellomo, D. Carlton, T.
                                                                          Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by
         Horning, J. Johnson, J. Newman, T. Parsons, R. Peters,
                                                                          T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen,
         C. Peterson, G. Priest, A. Venturato, J. Weber, F. Wong,
                                                                          J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. M. Midgley.
         and A. Yalciner. 2009. “Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard
                                                                          Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
         Assessment at Seaside, Oregon, for Near- and Far-field
         Seismic Sources.” Journal of Geophysical Research 114:        Jankaew, K., B. F. Atwater, Y. Sawai, M. Choowong, T.
         C11023.                                                          Charoentitirat, M. E. Martin, and A. Prendergast. 2008.
                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                 03
   “Medieval Forewarning of the 2004 Indian Ocean                 Kagan, Y. Y., and D. D. Jackson. 2013. “Tohoku Earthquake:
   Tsunami in Thailand.” Nature 455: 1228–31.                       A Surprise?” Bulletin of the Seismological Society of
                                                                    America 103 (2B): 1181–94. doi:10.1785/0120120110.
Janssen, G., and D. L. Holden. 2011. External Independent
   Evaluation of AIFDR ‘Build Back Better’ Campaign: Final        Kundzewicz, Z. W., S. Kanae, S. I. Seneviratne, J. Handmer,
   Evaluation Report. Jakarta: Australia-Indonesia Facility         N. Nicholls, P. Peduzzi, R. Mechler, L. M. Bouwer, N.
   for Disaster Reduction.                                          Arnell, K. Mach, R. Muir-Wood, G. R. Brakenridge,
                                                                    W. Kron, G. Benito, Y. Honda, K. Takahashi, and B.
———. 2013. Rumah Aman Gempa Andalan Masyarakat                      Sherstyukov. 2014. “Flood Risk and Climate Change:
   (RAGAM): Independent Completion Report. Jakarta:                 Global and Regional Perspectives.” Hydrological
   Australia-Indonesia Facility for Disaster Reduction.             Sciences Journal 59 (1). doi:10.1080/02626667.2013.857
                                                                    411.
Jayanthi, H., and G. J. Husak. 2012. “A Probabilistic Approach
   to Assess Agricultural Drought Risk.” Background               Kundzewicz, Z. W., I. Pińskwar, and G. R. Brakenridge.

   paper prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report             2013. “Large Floods in Europe, 1985–2009.” Hydrological
                                                                    Sciences Journal 58: 1–7. doi:10.1080/02626667.2012.74
   on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR, Geneva. www.
                                                                    5082.
   preventionweb.net/gar.

                                                                  Kwak, Y., K. Takeuchi, K. Fukami, and J. Magome. 2012. “A
Jayasinghem, T., and J. Birkmann. 2007. “Vulnerability
                                                                    New Approach to Flood Risk Assessment in Asia-Pacific
   Comparison between Galle and Batticaloa based on
                                                                    Region Based on MRI-AGCM Outputs.” Hydrological
   the Household Survey using Questionnaires.” In Rapid
                                                                    Research Letters 6: 70–75.
   Vulnerability Assessment in Sri Lanka: Post-Tsunami
   Study of Two Cities: Galle and Batticaloa. SOURCE              Lall, S. V., and U. Deichmann. 2009. “Density and Disasters:
   Publication No. 7, 39–47.                                        Economics of Urban Hazard Risk.” Policy Research
                                                                    Working Paper 5161, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Jenkins, S., C. Magill, K. McAneney, and R. Blong. 2012a.
   “Regional Ash Fall Hazard I: A Probabilistic Assessment        ———. 2012. “Density and Disasters: Economics of Urban
   Methodology.” Bulletin of Volcanology 74: 1699–1712.             Hazard Risk.” World Bank Research Observer 27 (1):
                                                                    74–105.
Jenkins, S., K. McAneney, C. Magill, and R. Blong. 2012b.
   “Regional Ash Fall Hazard II: Asia-Pacific Modelling           Lallemant, D., S. Wong, K. Morales, and A. Kiremidjian.
   Results and Implications.” Bulletin of Volcanology 74:           2014. “A Framework and Case Study for Dynamic Urban
   1713–27.                                                         Risk Assessment.” Paper presented at the 10th National
                                                                    Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Anchorage, AK,
JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency). 2011. “The           July.
   Study on Integrated Water Resources Management
                                                                  Lansang, M., and R. Dennis. 2004. “Building Capacity in
   for Poverty Alleviation and Economic Development in
                                                                    Health Research in the Developing World.” Bulletin of the
   the Pampanga River Basin.” National Water Resources
                                                                    World Health Organisation 82: 764–70.
   Board, Philippines.

                                                                  Løvholt, F., D. Kühn, H. Bungum, C. B. Harbitz, and S.
———. 2013. “Project for the Comprehensive Flood
                                                                    Glimsdal. 2012. “Historical Tsunamis and Present
   Management Plan for the Chao Phraya River Basin.”
                                                                    Tsunami Hazard in Eastern Indonesia and the
   Thailand.
                                                                    Philippines.” Journal of Geophysical Research–Solid
                                                                    Earth. doi:10.1029/2012JB009425.
Jongman B., S. Hochrainer-Stigler, L. Feyen, J. C. J. H. Aerts,
   R. Mechler, W. J. W. Botzen, L. M. Bouwer, G. Pflug,
                                                                  Marzocchi, W., A. Garcia-Aristizabal, P. Gasparini, M. L.
   R. Rojas, and P. J. Ward. 2014. “Increasing Stress on            Mastellone, and A. Di Ruocco. 2012. “Basic Principles of
   Disaster Risk Finance Due to Large Floods.” Nature               Multi-risk Assessment: A Case Study in Italy.” Natural
   Climate Change. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2124.          Hazards 62 (2): 551–73.

Jongman, B., P. J. Ward, and J. C. J. H. Aerts. 2012. “Global     McCloskey, J., D. Lange, F. Tilmann, S. S. Nalbant, A.
   Exposure to River and Coastal Flooding—Long Term                 F. Bell, D. H. Natawidjaja, and A. Rietbrock. 2010.
   Trends and Changes.” Global Environmental Change 22:             “The September 2009 Padang Earthquake.” Nature
   823–35. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.07.004.                     Geoscience 3 (2): 70–71.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                    205
206
                               CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      McKee, T. B., N. J. Doesken, and J. Kleist. 1993. “The          Ordaz, M., F. Martinelli, A. Aguilar, J. Arboleda, C. Meletti, and
        Relationship of Drought Frequency and Duration of                V. D’Amico. “2012 CRISIS 2012, Program for Computing
        Time Scales.” Paper presented at Eighth Conference on            Seismic Hazard.” Instituto de Ingeniería, Universidad
        Applied Climatology, American Meteorological Society,            Nacional Autónoma de México.
        Anaheim CA, January 17–23.
                                                                      ORNL (Oak Ridge National Laboratory). 2007. “LandScanTM
      MLIT (Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport                  Global Population Distribution Data (Raster dataset).”
        and Tourism). 2006. Basic Plan for the Tone River                Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of
        Improvement. Tokyo: MLIT.                                        Energy. www.ornl.gov/sci/landscan/index.shtml.


      Monfort, D., and S. Lecacheux. 2013. “West Indies Test Site.”   Pacheco, B. M., J. Y. Hernandez Jr., E. A. J. Tingatinga, P. P.
        Technical Report D7.4, MATRIX project.                           M. Castro, F. J. Germar, U. P. Ignacio, M. C. L. Pascua,
                                                                         L. R. E. Tan, I. B. O. Villalba, D. H. M. Aquino, R. E. U.
      MunichRe. 2013. “Significant Natural Catastrophes                  Longalong, R. N. Macuha, W. L. Mata, R. M. Suiza, and M.
        1980–2012, 10 Deadliest Worldwide Events.” Geo Risks             A. H. Zarco. 2013. “Development of Vulnerability Curves
        Research, NatCatSERVICE. https://www.munichre.                   of Key Building Types in the Greater Metro Manila Area,
        com/site/corporate/get/documents_E-1233315815/                   Philippines.” Institute of Civil Engineering, University of
        mr/assetpool.shared/Documents/0_Corporate%20                     the Philippines Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines.
        Website/_NatCatService/Focus_Analyses/1980-2012-
                                                                      Pacific Consultants International, OYO Cooperation, JICA,
        geophysical-events-worldwide-en.pdf.
                                                                         and IMM. 2002. “The Study on a Disaster Prevention
      Nadim, F., and T. Glade. 2006. “On Tsunami Risk                    / Mitigation Basic Plan in Istanbul including Seismic
        Assessment for the West Coast of Thailand.” ECI                  Microzonation in the Republic of Turkey.” http://www.ibb.
        Symposium Series 7, Engineering Conferences                      gov.tr/tr-TR/SubSites/DepremSite/PublishingImages/
        International, New York. http://dc.engconfintl.org/cgi/          JICA_ENG.pdf.
        viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&context=geohazards.
                                                                      Pappenberger, F., E. Dutra, F. Wetterhall, and H. L. Cloke.

      Neumayer, E., and F. Barthel. 2011. “Normalizing Economic          2012. “Deriving Global Flood Hazard Maps of Fluvial

        Loss from Natural Disasters: A Global Analysis.” Global          Floods through a Physical Model Cascade.” Hydrology

        Environmental Change 21 (1): 13–24. doi:10.1016/j.               and Earth System Sciences 16: 4143–56. doi:10.5194/
                                                                         hess-16-4143-2012.
        gloenvcha.2010.10.004.

                                                                      Parsons, T., and E. Geist. 2009. “Tsunami Probability in the
      NGI (Norwegian Technological Institute). 2013. “Landslide
                                                                         Caribbean Region.” Pure and Applied Geophysics 165:
        Hazard and Risk Assessment in El Salvador.” Background
                                                                         2089–2116.
        paper prepared for the 2013 Global Assessment Report
        on Disaster Risk Reduction, UNISDR, Geneva. www.
                                                                      Parsons, Tom, Shinji Toda, Ross S. Stein, Aykut Barka,
        preventionweb.net/gar.
                                                                         and James H. Dieterich. 2000. “Heightened Odds of
                                                                         Large Earthquakes Near Istanbul: An Interaction Based
      Nguyen, K. C., and K. J. E. Walsh. 2001. “Interannual,
                                                                         Probability Calculation.” Science 288: 661–65.
        Decadal, and Transient Greenhouse Simulation of
        Tropical Cyclone-like Vortices in a Regional Climate          Pektas, Mesut, and Polat Gulkan. 2004. “A Metropolitan
        Model of the South Pacific.” Journal of Climate 14:              Municipality Prepares for the Worst: Istanbul Earthquake
        3043–54.                                                         Master Plan.” Paper presented at 13th World Conference
                                                                         on Earthquake Engineering, Vancouver, August 1–6.
      Nicholls, R. J., S. Hanson, C. Herweijer, N. Patmore, S.
        Hallegatte, J. Corfee-Morlot, J. Chateau, and R. Muir         PBL (Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency).
        Wood. 2008. “Ranking Port Cities with High Exposure              2014. Towards a World of Cities in 2050: An Outlook on
        and Vulnerability to Climate Extremes: Exposure                  Water-related Challenges. PBL background report for
        Estimates.” OECD Working Paper No. 1, OECD Publishing,           UN Habitat Global Report. The Hague: PBL Netherlands
        Paris.                                                           Environmental Assessment Agency.

      OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and                Peduzzi, P., B. Chatenoux, H. Dao, A. De Bono, U.
        Development). 2012. OECD Environmental Outlook                   Deichmann, G. Giuliani, C. Herold, B. Kalsnes, S. Kluser,
        to 2050. Paris: OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.                  F. Løvholt, B. Lyon, A. Maskrey, F. Mouton, F. Nadim, and
        org/10.1787/9789264122246-en.                                    H. Smebye. 2009. “The Global Risk Analysis for the 2009
                                                                                                                                 CHAPTER


                                                                                                                                 03
  Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.”         Scolobig, A., C. Vichon, N. Komendantova, M. Bengoubou-
  Universite de Geneve Publication. http://www-fourier.            Valerius, and A. Patt. 2013. “Social and Institutional
  ujf-grenoble.fr/~mouton/Publis_HDR_applis/Peduzzi-               Barriers to Effective Multi-hazard and Multi-risk
  The_Global_Risk_Analysis_for_the_2009_GAR-149.                   Decision-making Governance.” Technical Report D6.3,
  pdf.                                                             MATRIX project.

Petiteville, Ivan, Philippe Bally, and Guy Seguin. 2012.        SCS (Soil Conservation Service). 1986. “Urban Hydrology for
  “Satellite Earth Observation for Risk Management.” In            Small Watersheds.” Technical Release TR-55, USDA, Soil
  The Earth Observation Handbook, edited by S. Ward.               Conservation Service, Hydrology Unit.
  European Space Agency. www.eohandbook.com.
                                                                Sengara, W., M. Suarjana, D. Beetham, N. Corby, M.
PHIVOLCS (Philippine Institute of Volcanology and                  Edwards, M. Griffith, M. Wehner, and R. Weller. 2010.
  Seismology), JICA (Japan International Cooperation               “The 30th September 2009 West Sumatra Earthquake:
  Agency), and MMDA (Metropolitan Manila Development               Padang Region Damage Survey.” Record 2010/44,
  Authority). 2004. “Earthquake Impact Reduction Study             Geoscience Australia, Canberra.
  for Metropolitan Manila, Republic of the Philippines”
  (MMEIRS).                                                     Sengara, W., M. Suarjana, M. Edwards, H. Ryu, W.
                                                                   Rahmanusyairi, I. Adiputra, I. I. Wahdiny, A. Utami,
Prochaska, J. O., J. C. Norcross, and C. C. DiClemente. 1994.      A. Mariany, M. A. Yulman, and B. Novianto. 2013.
  Changing for Good: The Revolutionary Program that                Research on Earthquake Damage Models for Buildings
  Explains the Six Stages of Changes and Teaches You               in Indonesia. Bandung: Research Centre of Disaster
  How to Free Yourself from Bad Habits. New York: W.               Mitigation, Bandung Institute of Technology.
  Morrow.
                                                                Setiadi, N. J. 2014. “Assessing People´s Early Warning
RMSI. 2011. “Malawi: Economic Vulnerability and Disaster
                                                                   Response Capability to Inform Urban Planning
  Risk Assessment.” www.masdap.mw/documents/145/
                                                                   Interventions to Reduce Vulnerability to Tsunamis: Case
  download‎.
                                                                   Study of Padang City, Indonesia.” PhD dissertation,
                                                                   Rheinische Friedrich‐Wilhelms‐Universität zu Bonn.
Robinson, D., T. Dhu, and J. Schneider. 2006. “Practical
  Probabilistic Seismic Risk Analysis: A Demonstration
                                                                Setiadi, N., H. Taubenböck, S. Raupp, and J. Birkmann. 2010.
  of Capability.” Seismological Research Letters 77 (4):
                                                                   “Integrating Socio-Economic Data in Spatial Analysis:
  453–59.
                                                                   An Exposure Analysis Method for Planning Urban Risk

Rojas, R., L. Feyen, and P. Watkiss. 2013. “Climate Change         Mitigation.” Paper presented at REAL CORP 2010, Vienna,

  and River Floods in the European Union: Socio-                   May 18–20. http://programm.corp.at/cdrom2010/

  Economic Consequences and the Costs and Benefits of              papers2010/CORP2010_80.pdf.

  Adaptation.” Global Environmental Change 23: 1737–51.
                                                                Seto, K. C., B. Güneralp, and L. R. Hutyra. 2012. “Global
  doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.08.006.
                                                                   Forecasts of Urban Expansion to 2030 and Direct
Rokneddin, Keivan, Jayadipta Ghosh, Leonardo Dueñas–               Impacts on Biodiversity and Carbon Pools.” Proceedings
  Osorio, and Jamie E. Padgett. 2013. “Seismic Reliability         of the National Academy of Sciences 109: 16083–16088.
  Assessment of Aging Highway Bridge Networks with                 doi:10.1073/pnas.1211658109.
  Field Instrumentation Data and Correlated Failures.
                                                                Shela, Osborne, Gaye Thompson, Paul Jere, and George
  II: Application.” Earthquake Spectra. doi:http://dx.doi.
                                                                   Annandale. 2008. “Analysis of Lower Shire Floods &
  org/10.1193/040612EQS160M.
                                                                   a Flood Risk Reduction and Recovery Programme
Satake, K., and B. F. Atwater. 2007. “Long-Term                    Proposal for the Lower Shire Valley.” Government of
  Perspectives on Giant Earthquakes and Tsunamis                   Malawi, Department of Disaster Management Affairs,
  at Subduction Zones.” Annual Review of Earth and                 Office of the President and Cabinet.
  Planetary Sciences 35: 349–74.
                                                                Sieh, K., D. H. Natawidjaja, A. J. Meltzner, C. C. Shen, H.
Schneider, A., M. A. Friedl, and D. Potere. 2009. “A New           Cheng, K. Li, B. W. Suwargadi, J. Galetzka, B. Philibosian,
  Map of Global Urban Extent from MODIS Satellite                  and R. L. Edwards. 2008. “Earthquake Supercycles
  Data.” Environmental Research Letters 4 (4): 044003.             Inferred from Sea-Level Changes Recorded in the Corals
  doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/4/044003.                                of West Sumatra.” Science 322 (5908): 1674–78.




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                                   207
208
                                CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES




      Simpson, A. L., and T. Dhu. 2009. “Enhancing Natural             Tsunami Pilot Study Working Group. 2006. “Seaside,
         Hazard Risk Assessment Capacity in the CSCAND                    Oregon Tsunami Pilot Study—Modernization of FEMA
         Agencies in the Philippines: An Options Paper.”                  Flood Hazard Maps.” NOAA OAR Special Report. NOAA/
         Geoscience Australia Professional Opinion 2009/004,              OAR/PMEL, Seattle.
         Canberra.
                                                                       UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) and
      Soden, R., N. Budhathoki, and L. Palen. 2014. “Resilience           RMSI. 2006. “Developing a Disaster Risk Profile for
         Building and the Crisis Informatics Agenda: Lessons              Maldives.” http://www.preventionweb.net/files/11145_
         Learned from Open Cities Kathmandu.” Proceedings                 MaldivesDisasterRiskProfileFinalRep.pdf.
         of Information Systems for Crisis Response and
                                                                       UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004.
         Management Conference, State College, PA.
                                                                          Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development.

      Sørensen, M., A. Babeyko, S. Wiemer, and G. Grünthal. 2012.         New York: United Nations.

         “Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard in the Mediterranean Sea.”
                                                                       UN-HABITAT. 2010. “Estado de Las Ciudades de America
         Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 117 (B1):
                                                                          Latina y El Caribe.” Regional Office for Latin America
         2156–2202.
                                                                          and the Caribbean, United Nations Human Settlement
                                                                          Programme, Rio de Janeiro.
      Stein, S., and E. Okal. 2007. “Ultralong Period Seismic Study
         of the December 2004 Indian Ocean Earthquake and
                                                                       UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction).
         Implications for Regional Tectonics and the Subduction           2005a. “10 Preliminary Lessons Learned from the Indian
         Process.” Bulletin of the Seismological Society of               Ocean Tsunami of 26 December 2004.” http://www.
         America 97 (1A): 279–95.                                         unisdr.org/files/5605_ISDR10lessonslearned.pdf.

      Stürck, J., A. Poortinga, and P. H. Verburg. 2014. “Mapping      ———. 2005b. 2005 Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015:
         Ecosystem Services: The Supply and Demand of Flood               Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
         Regulation Services in Europe.” Ecological Indicators 38:        Disasters. Geneva: UNISDR. www.unisdr.org/wcdr.
         198a–211. doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2013.11.010.
                                                                       ———. 2009. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
      Takeuchi, K., T. Ao, and H. Ishidaira. 1999. “Introduction of       Reduction: Risk and Poverty in a Changing Climate.
         Block-wise Use of TOPMODEL and Muskingum-Cunge                   Geneva: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar.
         Method for the Hydro-environmental Simulation of a
         Large Ungauged Basin.” Hydrological Sciences Journal          ———. 2011. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk

         44 (4): 633–46.                                                  Reduction 2011: Revealing Risk, Redefining Development.
                                                                          Geneva: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar.
      Taubenböck, H., J. Post, A. Roth, G. Strunz, R. Kief, S.
                                                                       ———. 2013a. Global Assessment Report 2013 Annex 1.
         Dech, and F. Ismail. 2008. “Multi-scale Assessment of
                                                                          Geneva: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar.
         Population Distribution Utilizing Remotely Sensed Data:
         The Case Study of Padang, West Sumatra, Indonesia.”
                                                                       ———. 2013b. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
         Paper presented at International Conference on Tsunami
                                                                          Reduction 2013: From Shared Risk to Shared Value.
         Warning, Bali, Indonesia, November 12–14.
                                                                          Geneva: UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/gar.

      Taylor, K. E., R. J. Stouffer, and G. A. Meehl. 2012. “An        United Nations. 2007. World Urbanization Prospects.
         Overview of CMIP5 and the Experiment Design.” Bulletin           http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/
         of the American Meteorological Society 93: 485–98.               wup2007/2007WUP_Highlights_web.pdf.

      Thio, H. K., P. Somerville, and J. Polet. 2010. “Probabilistic   Walsh, K. J. E., and J. I. Syktus. 2003. “Simulations of
         Tsunami Hazard in California.” PEER Report 2010/108,             Observed Interannual Variability of Tropical Cyclone
         Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center,                  Formation East of Australia.” Atmospheric Science
         University of California, Berkeley.                              Letters 4: 28–40.

      Thomas, C., and D. Burbidge. 2009. “A Probabilistic              WAPMERR (World Agency for Planetary Monitoring and
         Assessment of Tsunami Hazard of Southwest Pacific                Earthquake Risk Reduction). 2013. “Approximate Model
         Nations.” Geoscience Australia Professional Opinion              for Worldwide Building Stock in Three Size Categories of
         2009/02, Canberra.                                               Settlements.” Background paper prepared for the 2013
                                                                                                                             CHAPTER


                                                                                                                             03
   Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction,             Strategy Development, Final Report.” Prepared by RMSI
   UNISDR, Geneva. www.preventionweb.net/gar.                       Ltd. for the International Bank for Reconstruction and
                                                                    Development, Washington, DC.
Ward, P. J., W. Beets, L. M. Bouwer, J. C. J. H. Aerts, and
   H. Renssen. 2010. “Sensitivity of River Discharge to           Yamin, Luis Eduardo, Francis Ghesquiere, Omar Darío
   ENSO.” Geophysical Research Letters 37: L12402.                  Cardona, and Mario Gustavo Ordaz. 2013. Probabilistic
   doi:10.1029/2010GL043215.                                        Modelling for Disaster Risk Management: The Case
                                                                    of Bogota, Colombia (in Spanish). Washington, DC:
Ward, P. J., M. Dettinger, B. Jongman, M. Kummu, F.                 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
   Sperna Weiland, and H. Winsemius. 2013a. “Flood Risk             and World Bank.
   Assessment at the Global Scale—The Role of Climate
   Variability.” Paper presented at EGU General Assembly,
   Vienna, Austria, April 7–12.

Ward, P. J., S. Eisner, M. Flörke, M. D. Dettinger, and M.
   Kummu. 2014. “Annual Flood Sensitivities to El Niño
   Southern Oscillation at the Global Scale.” Hydrology and
   Earth System Sciences 18: 47–66. doi:10.5194/hess-18-
   47-2014.

Ward, P. J., B. Jongman, F. Sperna Weiland, A. Bouwman, R.
   Van Beek, M. Bierkens, W. Ligtvoet, and H. Winsemius.
   2013b. “Assessing Flood Risk at the Global Scale: Model
   Setup, Results, and Sensitivity.” Environmental Research
   Letters 8: 044019. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/044019.

Winsemius, H. C., R. Van Beek, B. Jongman, P. J. Ward,
   and A. Bouwman. 2013. “A Framework for Global River
   Flood Risk Assessments.” Hydrology and Earth System
   Sciences 17 (5): 1871–92. doi:10.5194/hess-17-1871-2013.

Wisner, B., P. Blaikie, T. Cannon, and I. Davis. 2004. At Risk:
   Natural Hazards, People’s Vulnerability and Disasters.
   2nd ed. New York: Routledge.

World Bank. 2010a. Emerging Stronger from the Crisis.
   Vol. 1 of World Bank East Asia and Pacific Update
   2010. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
   handle/10986/2455.

———. 2010b. Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters: The
   Economics of Effective Prevention. Washington, DC:
   World Bank.

———. 2012a. Bangladesh: Towards Accelerated, Inclusive,
   and Sustainable Growth—Opportunities and Challenges.
   Vol. 2. Washington, DC: Poverty Reduction and Economic
   Management Sector Unit, South Asia Region, World
   Bank.

———. 2012b. “Consultancy for Prioritization of High Seismic
   Risk Provinces and Public Buildings in Turkey, by
   Proto Engineering.”

———. 2013. “Risk Assessment Report, Morocco Natural
   Hazards Probabilistic Risk Assessment and National




CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING EMERGING BEST PRACTICES
                                                                                                                               209
210
      ﻿
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               04
U N D E R S TA N D I N G R I S K I N A N E V O LV I N G W O R L D




RECOMMENDATIONS


T    his publication has highlighted the remarkable
     progress made in understanding, quantifying,
and communicating risk since 2005, when the
                                                      greater transparency and accountability in the risk
                                                      assessment process. We stress, however, that the
                                                      best outcomes are likely to be achieved when those
Hyogo Framework for Action was endorsed. The          investing in risk information and those carrying
array of projects and experiences described here      out the risk analysis work in concert and share a
for 40 countries demonstrates that no single          common understanding of the undertaking.
approach to risk assessment is right in every
case, and that the best risk assessments are those    1. Clearly define the purpose of the
                                                      	
tailored to the context and identified need. At the   risk assessment before analysis
same time, the recurrence of certain themes across    starts.
the various projects makes it possible to start
                                                      Too many risk assessments are implemented
framing best practices and suggests some concrete
                                                      precipitously. These risk assessments—initiated
recommendations for the next 10 years of risk
                                                      without first defining a question to be answered and
assessment practice.
                                                      a specific end-user—often become scientific and
The recommendations we offer here draw on             engineering exercises that upon completion must
submissions to this publication as well as on         find a use case and a purpose. Properly targeted
discussions with both users and developers of         assessments, on the other hand, suit their intended
risk information. For users of risk information—      purpose and are not over-engineered or over-
disaster risk management (DRM) practitioners,         resourced. If a community seeks to understand the
government officials, donors, and nongovernmental     hazards it faces and to develop plans for evacuation,
organizations (NGOs)—our key recommendations          then mapping of exposure and natural hazards is a
are designed to ensure that any investment            valid approach, but a different approach would be
in risk assessment promotes more resilient            needed for financial planning or retrofitting design.
development and communities. For developers of        Similarly, collecting detailed site-level construction
risk information, we see an opportunity to promote    information on selected buildings may be




                                                                                                                   211
212
                                                                                     R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S




      appropriate for the design of retrofitting measures,         project supplied the evidence for an earthquake
      but this approach is not practical for a national-level      risk management master plan and served as
      risk assessment.                                             the basis for an operational framework for
                                                                   earthquake risk reduction.
      Where risk assessments have been commissioned
      in response to a clear and specific request for
      information, they have tended to be effective in
      reducing fiscal or physical risk. Among the well-         2. Promote and enable ownership
                                                                	
      targeted risk assessments described in part 3 of this     of the risk assessment process and
      publication, we note here the following:                  efforts to mitigate risk.
      •	 The Pacific Catastrophic Risk Assessment
                                                                A sense of ownership is critical to ensuring that
         and Risk Financing Initiative (PCRAFI)
                                                                knowledge created through a risk assessment
         (section 3-19). PCRAFI was designed to inform
                                                                is promulgated and acted upon. Countries,
         risk financing and insurance options, and
                                                                communities, and individuals must feel they have a
         ultimately to transfer risk to the international
                                                                stake in and connection to risk information if that
         financial market. Given this purpose, the analysis
                                                                information is to be used, especially by government.
         had to conform to standards acceptable to
                                                                In many countries, if risk information is not seen as
         the financial market. The first payout of the
                                                                authoritative—if it is not understood to originate
         Pacific catastrophe risk pool in 2014 in Tonga
                                                                from government-mandated agencies—it will not be
         is testament to the success of this project. An
         additional benefit of the project is that the data     used in decision making.

         and analysis generated have been made available
                                                                Risk information can be generated anywhere. Risk
         to all stakeholders to use for other purposes
                                                                assessment specialists in London, for example,
         (for example, to determine how cyclone risk will
                                                                can generate risk information on flood in Pakistan.
         change as climate change effects are increasingly
                                                                But extensive experience suggests that unless the
         felt; see section 3-24).
                                                                Pakistan authorities have been actively engaged in
      •	 The assessment of seismic risk to Costa                the assessment process, the information produced,
         Rican water and sanitation systems                     no matter how accurate or sophisticated, will
         (section 3-12). Costa Rican water and sanitation       have limited or no uptake and use. Engagement
         officials seeking to ensure continuation of            with official government stakeholders and local
         services following an earthquake created the           specialists—at the start of a risk assessment,
         demand for this project. The development of the        through its implementation, and finally to its
         objectives, collection of data, and presentation of    conclusion—is critical for the success of a DRM
         results were all aimed toward a very specific goal,    effort.
         and as a consequence resources and ultimately
         results were used efficiently.                         Fortunately, as many of the projects described in
                                                                part 3 make clear, the importance of ownership is
      •	 Urban seismic risk mapping to inform                   increasingly being recognized:
         DRM plans in Aqaba, Jordan (section 3-10).
         This project was initiated to manage the urban         •	 In Jordan, local scientific and government
         development expected in response to Aqaba’s               groups partnered with international and other
         being declared a special economic zone. The               development agencies to integrate seismic risk
                                                                                                                CHAPTER


                                                                                                                04
   reduction considerations into Aqaba’s economic      between the government of Australia and various
   development (see section 3-10).                     scientific/technical agencies in Asia and the Pacific
                                                       (section 3-9), and between the World Bank and
•	 In Malawi, the government partnered with the
                                                       countries in Latin America and the Caribbean
   World Bank and Global Facility for Disaster
                                                       (section 3-12)—have also been an important means
   Reduction and Recovery to assess flood risk
                                                       of promoting ownership. A number of elements go
   in the Shire River Valley as part of an effort to
                                                       into assuring the success of these partnerships: high
   reduce entrenched poverty and make the valley a
                                                       levels of trust developed over long periods of time;
   national economic hub (see section 3-14).
                                                       a focus on work that builds on existing capabilities
•	 In Peru, Technical Assistance Projects fostered a   and interests; and the involvement of credible,
   hands-on approach to generating, understanding,     capable, and committed experts who understand the
   managing, and using risk information, and thus      partner country’s systems and cultures, including
   promoted ownership of the process and the           its language.
   results of the assessment (see section 3-12).

The crucial role of ownership is also evident in the
                                                       3. Cultivate and promote the
                                                       	
increasing part played by volunteers in collecting
                                                       generation and use of open data.
fundamental data used in risk assessments (such
as through volunteered geospatial information, or      All the case studies featured in this publication make
crowdsourcing). Especially relevant case studies       clear that the creation and use of open data should
are described in sections 3-2, 3-3, and 3-4. This      be encouraged.
shift toward community participation reflects
communities’ sense that they can contribute to         A risk assessment that yields only a paper or
understanding and mitigating the risk they face.       PDF report is of limited use. Its relevance and
Experience shows that governments and decision         appropriateness are of short duration, and few
makers increasingly recognize the value and the        decision makers are likely to engage with it. A risk

potential of this approach, but consider it critical   assessment that shares with stakeholders the data

that the data are certified (for accuracy). In many    it has collected and improved, on the other hand,

cases governments would also like to harness           will have a much greater impact. The effort required

volunteer efforts toward particular needs—for          to collect exposure information is substantial, but

example, may wish to direct volunteers toward          fortunately, the data sets produced have relevance
                                                       and use for a range of DRM purposes as well as
collecting information about buildings’ attributes
                                                       for urban and local planning. If all the input data
(such as use, number of floors, vintage, and
                                                       sets and final results are made technically open,
structural materials) rather than focusing on
                                                       the broader community is able to engage through
buildings’ location and footprint. Universities
                                                       improvements in data and development of new
have shown themselves to be excellent partners
                                                       applications and information for community
in this type of volunteer data collection, and their
                                                       awareness; and the private sector is able to access
participation assists with ownership and helps to
                                                       data that can improve its resiliency. Data sharing
ensure data’s scientific validity.
                                                       can also redound to the advantage of those who
Partnerships designed to both produce risk             undertook the original assessment, because it
information and build capacity—such as those           allows new data to be exploited when they become




R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S
                                                                                                                    213
214
                                                                                      R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S




      available; this means that additional or new analysis     4. Make better communication of
                                                                	
      is less of a drain on resources and takes less time       risk information an urgent priority.
      than it otherwise would.
                                                                Clear communication throughout the risk
      With respect to creation of new open data, our            assessment process, from initiation through delivery
      short experience is only beginning to speak to the        of the results and the development of plans in
      immense potential of structured and unstructured          response, is critical for successfully mitigating
      volunteered geospatial information (section 3-3),         disaster risk.
      better access to remote sensing data over wider
                                                                A case study featured in section 3-21—“Build Back
      areas (boxes 2-2 and 2-3), better ways of exploiting
                                                                Better: Where Knowledge Is Not Enough”—is a
      and integrating new exposure data sets and models
                                                                must-read for all risk assessment practitioners and
      (“Exposure” in part 2), and release of technically
                                                                disaster risk managers who believe that exceptional
      open data sets by governments (section 3-3), the
                                                                communication of risk information is the key to
      private sector, and NGOs.
                                                                preparedness and risk reduction. A massive “Build
      It is clear from case studies and research that greater   Back Better” campaign led by the government of

      effort is needed to open up and improve damage            Indonesia in the aftermath of the 2009 Padang

      and loss data collections to make them meaningful         earthquake demonstrates conclusively that well-
                                                                targeted education and communication of risk
      and useful for understanding and quantifying risk.
                                                                information can increase awareness of natural
      An encouraging sign is a pilot being undertaken by
                                                                hazards and their potential impacts. Analysis also
      the Insurance Bureau of Canada that will give cities
                                                                shows, however, that progress from increased
      access to flood insurance claims data, alongside
                                                                awareness to substantive action is very difficult to
      municipal infrastructure data and current and future
                                                                achieve, even in a community that has witnessed
      climate data on flood93—a significant step toward
                                                                at first hand the devastation of an earthquake.
      better understanding and managing urban flood risk.
                                                                The study finds overall that homeowners can be
      Given the benefits it stands to gain, the global DRM      motivated to put risk knowledge into practice and
      community needs to be willing to press for greater        build more resilient homes if they are offered the
      access to fundamental data sets that quantify risk.       correct combination of timely information, technical
      Without access to higher-resolution digital elevation     training, community supervision, and financial and

      models, results for flood, tsunami, and storm             nonfinancial incentives and disincentives.

      surge inundation may be impossible to produce             Some of the improvements that can be made
      at the necessary resolution, or may be massively          in communicating risk at the subnational and
      inaccurate. Similar gaps in fundamental data exist        city levels are evident in the InaSAFE project in
      across all hazard areas, and these are hindering the      Indonesia (section 3-22). Among the key partners
      development of robust and accurate information. In        in InaSAFE’s development were Indonesian
      many cases the needed data already exist but are not      authorities, who realized the need for interactive
      accessible. If the DRM community comes together           risk communication tools that could robustly and
      and advocates for these data to become technically        simply answer “what if?” questions. InaSAFE is
      open, access is likely to improve and data gaps to        demand driven, included user participation in its
      be closed.                                                development, uses open data and an open model,
                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                               04
and offers extensive graphical displays (provided by      sets, and knowledge related to seismic risk
a GIS system) and an extensive training program.          (section 3-6).
Communication was frequent and wide-ranging
throughout the development of InaSAFE and              •	 The Willis Research Network initiative
continued during the collection of data, the use of       links more than 50 international research
the model, and the formation of response plans. The       institutions to the expertise of the financial and
software has won awards and is being used in other        insurance sector in order to support scientists’
countries, including the Philippines and Sri Lanka.       quantification of natural hazard risk (box 2-12).

To build on this progress in communicating risk,       •	 The Understanding Risk community
significant investment and innovation will be             of practice, made up of more than 3,000
needed in coming years.                                   practitioners from across all sectors in more
                                                          than 125 countries, is creating new partnerships
                                                          and catalyzing advances in understanding,
5. Foster multidisciplinary, multi-
	                                                         quantifying, and communicating natural hazard
institutional, and multi-sectoral                         risk (box 2-11).
collaborations at all levels, from
                                                       •	 The Bangladesh Urban Earthquake
international to community.
                                                          Resilience Project is a platform for addressing
Risk assessment is a multidisciplinary and multi-         urban risk that brings together officials in
institutional effort that requires collaborations at      planning, governance, public service, and
many levels, from international, to national and          construction code development as well as
subnational, down to the individual.                      scientists and engineers, and that fosters

Generating a usable risk assessment product               consensus on how to overcome institutional,
involves consultations among technical experts,           legislative, policy, and behavioral barriers to a
decision makers, and disaster managers, who must          more earthquake-resilient city (box 2-13).
reach agreement on the risk assessment’s purpose
                                                       One key task of these and similar collaborations is
and process. Collaboration among technical
                                                       reaching out to communities to build consensus,
disciplines, agencies, governments, NGOs, and
                                                       raise awareness, and promote action concerning the
virtual communities, as well as informal peer-
                                                       risks they face. Greater effort is needed to provide
to-peer exchanges and engagement with local
communities, will help an effort succeed.              national- and subnational-level information on risk
                                                       to community groups and NGOs working at the
This publication draws attention to a variety          community level. Too often, organizations working
of collaborations that aim to build better risk        within communities to increase preparedness
information:
                                                       and reduce risk lack access to this relevant risk
•	 The Global Earthquake Model brings together         information. Significant gains could arise from
   public institutions, private sector institutions    merging work being produced at national or
   (most notably insurance and reinsurance             subnational level with communities’ understanding
   agencies), NGOs, and the academic sector, all       of their risks and challenges—but this opportunity
   with the goal of improving access to tools, data    has as yet rarely been capitalized upon.




R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S
                                                                                                                   215
216
                                                                                     R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S




      	
      6. Consider the broader risk                             to act now to avoid or mitigate the risk they will face
      context. 	                                               in the future. Getting ahead of risk is particularly
                                                               important in rapidly urbanizing areas or where
      Rarely do countries, communities, or citizens face       climate change impacts will be felt the most.
      potential risks from only one hazard, or even from
      natural hazards alone. Our complex environments          The evolution of meteorological hazard arising from
      and social structures are such that multiple or          climate change will likely occur slowly. The same is
      connected risks—from financial hazards, multiple         true for changes in hazard due to sea-level rise (for
      or cascading natural hazards, and anthropogenic          example, with higher sea levels, inundation from
      hazards—are the norm. A risk assessment that             storm surge and tsunami events may reach further
      accounts for just one hazard may struggle with           inland). That said, it is possible today—with varying
      relevance and will not necessarily speak to a            levels of uncertainty—to estimate how climate
      decision maker who is responsible for broader risk       change may affect losses from meteorological
      management. Moreover, failure to consider the full       hazards such as cyclone; a case study described in
      risk environment can result in maladaptation: heavy      section 3-24 examines how tropical cyclone patterns,
      concrete structures that protect against cyclone         altered by climate change, affect losses in 15 Pacific
      wind, for example, may be deadly in an earthquake.       Island countries, assuming steady-state exposure.

      Experience shows that the benefits of a multi-hazard     Given the intensive data needs involved, there have
      risk approach include improvements in land-use           been few efforts to look at changing exposure and
      planning, better response capacity, greater risk         vulnerability, along with the resulting change in
      awareness, and increased ability to set priorities for   risk, in urban environments. While the contribution
      mitigation actions. Such an approach also highlights     of urbanization to greater exposure is widely
      the importance of partnerships generally and of          recognized, studies rarely consider how changes
      multidisciplinary, multi-institutional, and multi-       in urban construction practices affect building
      sectoral collaborations in particular. Examples          vulnerability—often for the worse. The case study
      of this approach showcased in this publication           of evolving seismic risk in Kathmandu offers an
      include projects in Maldives (section 3-13), Morocco     important example of this approach (section 3-25).
      (section 3-17), and Guadeloupe and Naples (section       The study shows that the incremental construction
      3-20).                                                   of houses in Kathmandu, where stories are added
                                                               to buildings informally over time, has increased
      Decision makers need to exercise particular caution
                                                               both exposure and vulnerability in the area. Using
      where risks in food security and the agricultural
                                                               a single-scenario earthquake event, a reproduction
      sector are concerned. Such risks should be
                                                               of the 8.1 magnitude Bihar earthquake of 1934, the
      considered at all times alongside flood and drought
                                                               analysis finds that the potential number of buildings
      analysis. Food security–related risks such as animal
                                                               sustaining heavy damage or collapse in this event
      and plant pests and diseases are important for many
      populations, yet they are not considered under the       has increased from ~50,000 in 1990 to ~125,000 in

      Hyogo Framework for Action.                              2010, and that it may be as high as 240,000 by 2020
                                                               if action is not taken.
      7. Keep abreast of evolving risk.
      	
                                                               Considering global changes in hazard and exposure
      Risk assessments must be dynamic because risks           for flood offers some sobering statistics for the
      themselves are always evolving. Assessments that         future: “middle-of-the-road” socioeconomic changes
      estimate evolving or future risk allow stakeholders      and climate change could increase riverine flood
risk for between 100 million and 580 million people     areas. Even small changes can become extremely
by 2050, depending on the climate scenario (see         important during flood and storm surge events.
section 3-23). At a city level, changes in exposure
and flood hazard for Dhaka, Bangladesh, were            8. Understand, quantify, and
found likely to increase the average annual loss by     communicate the uncertainties and
a factor of 20 to 40. Moreover, while both climate      limitations of risk information.
change and socioeconomic development were
                                                        Once risk information is produced, its users must
found to contribute importantly to this increase in
                                                        be made aware of its limitations and uncertainties,
risk, the individual contribution of socioeconomic
                                                        which can arise from uncertainties in the exposure
development is greater than that of climate change.
                                                        data, in knowledge of the hazard, and in knowledge
Coastal regions are especially dynamic, and—in light    of fragility and vulnerability functions. A failure
of future sea-level rise driven by local subsidence,    to understand or consider these can lead to
the thermal expansion of the oceans, and melting        flawed decision making and a potential increase
of continental ice—need special consideration.          in disaster risk. A risk model can produce a very
Changes in sea level can be particularly important      precise result—it may show, for example, that a
for relatively flat low-lying islands and coastlines,   1-in-100-year flood will affect 388,123 people—but
since a small change in sea level can affect huge       in reality the accuracy of the model and input data




R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S
                                                                                                              217
218
                                                                                    R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S




      may provide only an order of magnitude estimate.         assessments’ limitations. Several projects described
      Similarly, sharply delineated flood zones on a hazard    in this publication found that data limitations and
      map do not adequately reflect the uncertainty            assumptions made in the modelling process could
      associated with the estimate and could lead to           substantially change the end result:
      decisions such as locating critical facilities just
                                                               •	 Multiple tsunami hazard maps were produced
      outside the “flood line,” where the actual risk is the
                                                                  in Padang, Indonesia, by different institutions,
      same as if the facility was located inside the flood
                                                                  each offering plausible information for decision
      zone.
                                                                  makers, and each based on different approaches,
      If risk information is to be useful in making               assumptions, and data (see box 3-5).
      communities more resilient and better able to
      manage risk, then the specialists who produce it         •	 Depending on the choice of elevation data in

      must do more to clearly and simply communicate              modelling tsunami hazard, inundation levels

      its uncertainties and limitations. Fortunately, some        varied dramatically as a function of the digital

      recent projects suggest that progress is being made         elevation model used in the simulation (see box

      in this regard:                                             2-4).

      •	 In Kathmandu, assessment of damage to                 •	 Different seismic hazard results for ground
         buildings as risk evolves over times includes a          motion in Japan highlight the impact of the
         range of uncertainty (section 3-25).                     choice of attenuation function (see box 2-10).

      •	 In global risk models, the limitations for use        These examples make clear the need for credible,
         in national and subnational risk reduction are        scientific, and transparent modelling of risk.
         clearly articulated (sections 3-7, 3-8, and 3-23).    Every risk analysis should be accompanied by
                                                               modelling metadata that articulate the data sets
      •	 In Morocco, results of multi-hazard risk analysis     and modelling parameters used so that anyone can
         are communicated using a range of different           recreate identical results. In other words, we need
         approaches (section 3-17).                            to achieve an “academic level” of transparency. The
                                                               selection of modelling parameters also speaks to the
                                                               need for credible scientific and engineering inputs

      	9. Ensure that risk information is                      throughout the modelling process; in theory, anyone
      credible and transparent.                                can run a risk model, but in reality, the absence of
                                                               necessary scientific and engineering training can
      Risk information must be credible and transparent:       produce results that are fundamentally inaccurate
      scientifically and technically rigorous, open for        and misleading.
      review, and honest regarding its limitations and
      uncertainties.                                           	10. Encourage innovations in open
                                                               source software.
      A risk assessment must be perceived as credible
      for it to be worth acting upon. The best way to          It is clear that immense progress has been made in
      demonstrate credibility is to have transparent           the last 5 to 10 years in creating new open source
      data, models, and results open for review by             hazard and risk modelling software. More than
      independent, technically competent individuals.          80 open source software packages are currently
      Equally important is the clear articulation of the       available for flood, tsunami, cyclone (wind and
                                                                                                                               CHAPTER


                                                                                                                               04
surge), and earthquake, with at least 30 of these in                     and update code, and offer users easy access
wide use (see “Hazard and Risk Assessment Tools”                         to models.
in part 2). Moreover, significant progress has been
                                                        •	 Standard model outputs and data (e.g., event loss
made in improving open source geospatial tools,
such as QGIS and GeoNode, which are lowering the                         tables) should be made viewable at every stage

financial barriers to understanding risks at national                    of the analysis without significant increases in

and subnational levels.                                                  processing.

There is some tendency to assume that open source       •	 Tools should have the capability of using custom
software may be less robust than commercial                              exposure data and hence of handling both static
packages, may be less user-friendly, and may not                         risk and dynamic risk.
offer technical support. But this assumption has
                                                        •	 Software should host a greater range of
little basis. Some of the most widely used packages,
                                                                         vulnerability functions capable of calculating
such as InaSAFE and TCRM, provide interactive
                                                                         vulnerability (susceptibility to damage or loss)
help, and others, such as the Deltares-developed
                                                                         using either empirical methods (historical
packages, have impressive graphical user interfaces
                                                                         trending of data) or analytical methods
that offer point-and-click capabilities. Available
                                                                         (mathematical or mechanical approach).
software packages range from those that meet
                                                                         These should cover both physical and social
the needs of entry-level users to those that are
                                                                         vulnerability.
appropriate for advanced scientific and engineering
analysis. Some tools offer single hazard and risk       •	 Risk should be calculable not only for a building
analysis—probabilistic and deterministic—and                             or building type, but also for a diverse portfolio
some, such as RiskScape and CAPRA, offer multi-
                                                                         of buildings and infrastructure, or in terms of the
hazard capabilities.
                                                                         total economic loss for a city or region.
Increasing the uptake of open source modelling
                                                        A great challenge for the next five years—one
tools is an important challenge that will need to met
                                                        that has arisen rapidly along with innovative
in coming years. Among specific goals in this area
                                                        software models—involves “fitness-for-purpose,”
are the following:
                                                        interoperability, transparency, and standards.
•	 Access to software with user-friendly interfaces,    This challenge needs to be overcome in a way that
   simple single-click installation, and tutorials on   continues to catalyze innovation and yet also better
   software use should be increased.                    supports risk model users. But it is an institutional
                                                        challenge, and not a technical one, and it can be met
•	 Licensing restrictions on how software may be
                                                        if model developers agree on minimum standards
   used or altered should be easier to understand.
                                                        and build partnerships across institutions and
•	 Access to model source code—through wiki-            hazard types.
   type systems—should be increased in order to
   provide improved transparency in how results
   are calculated, allow for customization and          Endnotes
   optimization of code, enable production of better
                                                            93 Insurance Bureau of Canada, “Fighting Urban Flooding,”
                                                        <sup>   </sup>




   code through multiple independent reviews,           2014, http://www.ibc.ca/en/Natural_Disasters/Municipal_
   provide developers with an easy way to manage        Risk_Assessment_Tool.asp.




R E C O M M E N DAT I O N S
                                                                                                                                  219
220
      Photo Credits
      If not indicated otherwise, photos used in this publication
      have been sourced from the following locations with
      full rights:

      World Bank Flickr Website

      UN Flickr Website

      DFAT Flickr Website

      NASA Goddard MODIS Rapid Response Team

      Government of Malawi

      Global Earthquake Model

      Joaquin Toro, World Bank Group

      Francis Nkoko, World Bank Group

      John Crowley, GFDRR

      Emma Phillips, GFDRR

      David Lallemant, Stanford University

      Anne Sanquini, Stanford University




      All images in this publication require permission for reuse.
Across the globe, a consensus is emerging on the central importance of risk information
in disaster risk management. When risks are quantified and the potential impacts of haz-
ards are anticipated, governments, communities, and individuals are able to make more
informed decisions.


This publication highlights some of the influential efforts—by technical specialists, insti-
tutions, and governments around the world—to create and communicate risk information
quickly and at low cost, to improve the quality and transparency of risk information, and
to enable more local engagement in the production of authoritative risk information than
ever before. Case studies spanning 40 countries and contributed by more than 50 institu-
tions showcase emerging best practices, demonstrate how risk assessments are being used
to inform disaster risk management and broader development, and highlight lessons learned
through these efforts. Taken as a group, these case studies evidence the need for contin-
ued investment in accurate and useful risk information and provide recommendations for
the future.




ABOUT GFDRR The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) helps
high-risk, low-income developing counties better understand and reduce their vulnerabilities
to natural hazards, and adapt to climate change. Working with over 300 national, community
level, and international partners GFDRR provides grant financing, on-the-ground technical
assistance helping mainstream disaster mitigation policies into country level strategies, and
thought leadership on disaster and climate resilience issues through a range of knowledge
sharing activities. GFDRR is managed by the World Bank and funded by 21 donor partners.


                                 WWW.GFDRR.ORG
