                                                           92266

Integrated approaches to tackle under nutrition in Kenya




                     Final Report




                    September 2014




                           1
Concerns about under nutrition in Kenya.

Poor nutrition is a main cause of mortality especially among the vulnerable. About half
(45%) of all deaths among children under five are due to one or more forms of undernutrition
such as fetal growth restriction, stunting, underweight, wasting, vitamin A and zinc deficiencies
and sub-optimal breastfeeding. 1 Anemia and calcium deficiencies are also reported to be
important causes of maternal death (23% and 19% of total deaths, respectively). In addition,
children who are deprived of adequate nutrition in utero and in the first 24 months of life, but
have rapid growth after the age of two are more susceptible to chronic disease, which is
attributable to over a quarter of mortality in low income countries.2 In Kenya, 790,000 children
are estimated to die due to underweight and vitamin A deficiency between 2010 and 2030, if
they are not addressed.3

Equally important, poor nutrition affects economic development and poverty reduction.
Chronic undernutrition during the first 1,000 days from conception to the first 24 months of life
irreversibly impedes physical growth and cognitive development to reach individual genetic
potential. Therefore it limits schooling achievements, and reduces physical productivity,
resulting in decrease in income potential in the later life. Also, poor nutrition increases health
care and associated expenditures, contributing to poverty. According to the Copenhagen
Consensus 2012 4 , each dollar spent on reducing chronic undernutrition through a bundle of
interventions 5 could have at least a US$30 payoff. Global productivity losses due to poor
nutrition are estimated to be 8% of gross national product (GNP) over the twentieth century at
the global level while the estimation is reported to be higher at over 11% of GNP in Africa.6 The
economic costs of undernutrition in Kenya are also vast: unless immediately addressed, Kenya is
estimated to lose US$2.8 billion of its GDP annually as a result of stunting. An estimated KES
230 million will also be lost between 2010 and 2030, for example, due to cognitive
underperformance and loss of productivity resulting from iodine and iron deficiencies.7 If the
bundled interventions are implemented, Kenya is, however, estimated to benefit the increased
earnings at the ratio of between 24 and 76 to one.8


1
  Black et al (2013)
2
  REF -Barker at all, Prentice & Moore, Victora at al, etc
3
  PROFILES 2010 – quoted in Levitt et al (2013; Draft) Reducing chronic malnutrition in Kenya: a situational
analysis and recommendations for a multisectoral response
4
  Copenhagen Consensus 2012: http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/copenhagen-consensus-2012, accessed in
April 2014
Following the 2004 and 2008 Copenhagen Consensus projects which provided a clear list of priorities ranked
according to their costs and benefits and potential for combating ten of the world’s greatest challenges, the third
global Copenhagen Consensus was held in 2012 putting together an expert panel including four Nobel laureates to
analyze the costs and benefits of different approaches to tackling the world‘s biggest problems. The aim is to
provide an answer to the question: “If you had $75 billion for worthwhile causes, where should you start? The
Expert Panel identified the most cost effective ways of achieving good in the world across ten topic areas including
hunger and nutrition; conflict in fragile states, climate change.
5
  Includes provision of micronutrients and complementary foods (only when required), treatments for worms and
diarrheal diseases, and behavior change programs
6
  Horten and Steckel (2012)
7
  PROFILES 2010 – quoted in Levitt et al (2013)
8
  Copenhagen Consensus 2012

                                                          2
The seriousness of under nutrition in Kenya.

Kenya suffers from a high level of child undernutrition. More than two million children
under five are stunted (35%) and about a million children are underweight (16%, Figure 1).
Prevalence of stunting is similar to or even higher than those in neighboring countries with lower
per capita gross national income (GNI) such as Uganda and South Sudan (Figure 2).

Figure 1. Prevalence of undernutrition,                     Figure 2. Prevalence of stunting by GNI per
2008/9                                                      capita




Source: WHO Global Database on Child Source:                          WDI 2014; GNI- 2012, Stunting –
Growth and Malnutrition, accessed April 2014 latest

Prevalence of micronutrient deficiency is also very high even though no recent data are
available 9 . Two third of pre-school children and more than half of pregnant women were
anemic (




Figure 3). Vitamin A deficiency was also prevalent among the population, but especially high
among pre-school children. 10 Zinc deficiency among children under five was also quite high at
51% (data not shown).11



9
  Prevalence of child undernutrition and micronutrient deficiencies is much lower in the preliminary report of
National Micronutrient Survey (NMS) 2011. For example, prevalence of stunting and anemia among children is
26.3% and 32.5%, respectively. However, the figures in the report have not been confirmed by the MOH.
10
   WHO Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Information System (VMNIS). http://www.who.int/vmnis/database/en/.
Accessed on May 5, 2014
11
   Republic of Kenya (2011). National Food and Nutrition Security Policy

                                                        3
Figure 3. Prevalence of micronutrient deficiency




Source: WHO VMNIS, accessed April 2014


The Most affected by under nutrition.

Nutrition status differs significantly by demographic and socio-economic background such
as location of residence, wealth quintile, and region. For instance, while about a quarter of
children from the richest quintile are stunted, almost one in two children from the poorest
quintiles suffer from stunting (Figure 4). Prevalence of stunting also varies considerably by
location: less than 20% of children in Wajir and Garissa counties are stunted, but more than 40%
of children in Kitui, and Makueni counties are stunted (Figure 5). Boys are more likely to be
stunted than girls and prevalence of stunting sharply increases with age in the first two years of
life and stabilizes after 24 months (12% for children <6mo; 39% for children 6-23mo; and 38%
for children 24-59mo).

Figure 4. Prevalence of stunting by                 Figure 5. Prevalence of stunting by district
characteristics




                                                4
Source: KDHS 2008/9                                Source: MOH, 2013




The Situation in Kenya

Prevalence of child undernutrition has Figure 6. Trend in child nutrition status
stagnated for the last two decades, even
though Kenya has made notable
achievements in reducing child mortality
since 2003. Infant mortality rate (IMR) and
under five mortality rate (U5MR) have
reduced from 75 and 113 per 1,000 live births
in 2003 to 59 and 84 per 1,000 live births in
2008/2009,     respectively.       However,
prevalence of stunting, wasting, and
underweight has remained largely unchanged
during the same period (Figure 6). Thus,
Kenya is unlikely to meet the nutrition and
health Millennium Development Goals Source: Statcomplier, 2014
(MDGs) unless significant changes are made in the way the country addresses these challenges.

In addition, prevalence of child undernutrition among the marginalized stagnated or even
deteriorated, while that among the better off improved. For example, the proportion of
children stunted in urban areas was about 10% lower in 2008/09 than that in 2003, while there is
little change in rural areas. Prevalence of stunting among children from the top 60% of the
households was also lower in 2008/9 compared to 2003, whereas it was even higher among
children from the bottom 40% of the households.

Figure 7. Trend in prevalence of stunting by characteristics




                                               5
Source: Statcomplier, 2014




The (main) reasons as to why Kenya has such a high prevalence of undernutrition.

Causal pathways leading to            Figure 8. Causes of undernutrition
malnutrition lie on multiple
factors. According to a most
widely      used      malnutrition
framework         (Figure       8),
malnutrition results directly
from inadequate dietary intake
and high prevalence of diseases,
which      are     affected     by
inadequate access to food,
inadequate care of mothers and
children and insufficient health
services       and      unhealthy
environment at the household
level. Basic factors such as
broader political, economic,
institutional, socio-cultural, and
environmental factors influence
those underlying factors.

Kenya has also problems that         Source: Mason, J. adapted from UNICEF 2000
pervade all three levels of
causes. Prevalence of common
childhood illnesses such as fever and acute respiratory infections (ARI) was significantly lower
in 2008 compared to 2003, even though diarrhea and fever (proxy for malaria and other acute

                                                 6
infections) was still prevalent at 17% and 24%, respectively, in 2008. Also, less than a third of
children were fed appropriately (exclusive breastfeeding up to six months and adequate
complementary feeding between 6 and 23 months) during the critical period of first two years.
Many factors related to three underlying causes – access to foods, care for mothers and children,
and health services and healthy environment –improved, but marginally (Table 1). These factors
also varied quite a bit by household background (data not shown).

Table 1. Selected immediate and underlying factors affecting undernutrition in Kenya
                                               Selected indicators                                 2003 2008
Dietary          Exclusive breastfeeding (% C<6mo)                                                  12.7  31.9
intake/          Adequate complementary feeding (% C 6-23mo)                                           -  38.5
access to        Vitamin A supplementation (% C 6-59mo)                                             33.3  30.3
food             Foods rich in vitamin A (% C 6-35mo)                                               62.2  77.3
                 Adequately iodized salt in the house (% households)                                   -  97.7
Health           Prevalence of diarrhea (% C 0-59mo)                                                16.0  16.6
status           Prevalence of fever (% C 0-59mo)                                                   40.6  23.7
                 Prevalence of ARI (% C 0-59mo)                                                     18.4   7.6
Care for         Antenatal care 4+ (% W 15-49y)                                                     52.3  47.1
mothers &        - IFA supplementation (during pregnancy)                                           45.7  68.7
children         - IFA supplementation for 90+ days (during pregnancy)                               2.5   2.5
                 Delivery by a skilled provider (% W 15-49y)                                        41.6  43.8
                 Full vaccination (% C 12-23mo)                                                     56.8  77.4
                 Children with diarrhea given ORS or RHS (%)                                        29.2  71.5
                 Children with diarrhea given optimal feeding (%)§                                     -  42.6
                 Children given deworming medication in 6 months (% C 6-59mo)                          -  37.5
Health           Children with diarrhea taken to a health facility (%)                              29.7  48.6
services &       Children with ARI taken to a health facility (%)                                   49.1  55.9
healthy          Children with fever treated with an anti-malarial drug (%)                         26.2  23.2
environment      Improved toilet (% households)                                                     19.4  22.6
                 Improved water (% households)                                                      45.4  63.0
                 Improved hygiene practices (e.g., including hand washing with soap)*                  -   5.0
Selected         Food production index (2004-2006 = 100)**                                          86.5 111.5
basic            Depth of the food deficit (kcal/capita/day)**                                     236.0 181.0
determinant      Food supply (kcal/capita/day)**                                                   2,007 2,010
s                Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption                       12.2  10.7
                 (millions)***
                 GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)****                                     410.0    730.0
                 Urban population (% of total)****                                                   21.0     22.8
                 Gross attendance ratio for secondary school                                         22.7     44.6
                 Fertility rate, total (births per woman)                                             4.9      4.6
Source: KDHS 2003 & 2008/09, unless noted using Statcomplier; * Levitte et al (2013)
12
   ;**FAOSTAT & WDI; ** http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/SeriesDetail.aspx?srid=640; ****
WDI


12
  Levitt et al (2013; Draft) reducing chronic malnutrition in Kenya: a situational analysis and recommendations for
a multisectoral response.

                                                         7
§more, same or somewhat less food with ORT or increased fluids, or both; §§ normalized
average intensity of food deprivation of the undernourished, estimated as the difference between
the average dietary energy requirement and the average dietary energy consumption of the
undernourished population (food-deprived)


The most important factors (and/or urgent ones) that need to be addressed.

An integrated intervention addressing multiple key determinants is needed to realize
potential effects to sustain the good nutritional status. Limited data prevent from determining
precisely the degree of malnutrition attributable to each cause of malnutrition, if at all possible.
Figure 9 below shows the findings from an analysis13 to measure possible impact of a selected
group of activities related to three underlying causes of undernutrition at the national level.
According to the analysis, prevalence of stunting among children 6-23mo is 11% lower among
those with adequate access to improved water and sanitation, compared to those without. 14
Maternal and child health care (e.g., antenatal care, skilled delivery, and full immunization) and
adequate feeding also affected the stunting level by about 7% and 6%, respectively. 15 An
example of the possible integrated effect of multiple activities addressing underlying causes of
undernutrition on prevalence of stunting is also shown in Figure 10: proportion of children
stunted was 11% lower among children with adequate feeding and health care, compared to
those children without such feeding and care. Prevalence of stunting was in between when
children received either adequate feeding or adequate health care only. According to an
observational study of multi-sector intervention addressing household food security, child caring
practices, and infectious disease control in Sauri, Kenya, 25% reduction in prevalence of
stunting is likely related to ‘interaction between several drivers of changes.16 However, these
data show that, on top of ensuring adequate feeding and care, other measures have to be
identified and implemented for decreasing undernutrition to acceptable levels. Thus a sustained
intervention addressing multiple determinants of undernutrition is needed to bring down high
prevalence of undernutrition, especially stunting.

Figure 9. Stunting (6-23mo) by                                 Figure 10. Stunting (6-23mo) by feeding and
determinants17                                                 care




13
   Ibid.
14
   This analysis did not control for other determinants, thus the effects might be due to the related factors. Also the
limited number of children 6-23mo in the data set limits the full analysis.
15
   Due to data limitation, comparable multi-factor analyses was not carried out
16
   Reman et al (2011). Multisector intervention to accelerate reductions in child stunting; an observational study
from 9 sub-Saharan African countries. AJCN
17
   Ibid. Adequacy was defined as follow: environment: improved sanitation and water per the WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Program definition; feeding - the minimum acceptable diet using feeding frequency and food group
diversity measures, according to the respective age of the child; and health-related care – antenatal care, delivery by
a skilled provider, and full immunization.

                                                           8
Source: Levitt et al (2013)                         Source: Levitt et al (2013)

The careful identification of the underlying causes and their inter-relations will allow the
formulation and implementation of strategies to effectively and sustainably address
undernutrition. A set of integrated interventions should be context specific as coverage of basic
services as well as socio-cultural, economic and environmental background that affects caring
and feeding behaviors, and eventually nutrition status varies widely across the country. For
example, wealth is concentrated in Nairobi: nearly all people in Nairobi are in the top 40% of the
wealth index, while more than four in five people in North Eastern Province belong to the
bottom 40% of the wealth index. Essential services such as delivery by a skilled provider are also
concentrated in the better-off areas: almost 90% of births in Nairobi were delivered by a skilled
provider, while only a quarter of deliveries were attended by a skilled health worker in Western
Province. Infant and young child feeding and caring practices are, however, generally
inappropriate regardless of location (Table 2). Therefore, it is important to prioritize an
integrated set of activities to improve underlying and immediate causes of undernutrition,
especially stunting, based on the locality context, considering the limited (human, material, and
financial) resources available.

Table 2. Selected causes of undernutrition by province
                                                                             Children <5y
               Population in       Women 15-                     Children 6- with diarrhea
                the bottom         49y received Births assisted 23m received   received
                40% of the          secondary    by a skilled     adequate     adequate
Province       wealth index        education +     provider        feeding      feeding
Nairobi              0.0               68.1          88.9            50.9         33.1
Central            13.3                41.4          73.8            46.5         43.9
Coast              38.7                28.4          45.6            24.2         54.9
Eastern            39.0                28.4          43.1            45.5         48.1
Nyanza             46.0                33.2          45.5            31.2         43.6
Rift Valley        47.4                31.2          33.7            42.1         40.3
Western            50.9                27.9          25.8            40.4         32.5
North Eastern      81.5                 8.2          31.6            10.9         27.1
National           40.0                34.2          43.8            38.5         42.6
Source: KDHS2008/09

                                                9
Political and Institutional context to improve the situation.

Kenya’s commitment to nutrition stated in the national strategies is somewhat inconsistent,
but moving to the right direction. The Constitution of Kenya 2010(Art. 43, (c)) clearly
mentions the right of people ‘to be free from hunger and to have adequate food of acceptable
quality’ as well as that of children ‘to basic nutrition, shelter, and health care’. However, the
Vision 2030, the new long term national economic blueprint aiming at ‘transforming Kenya into
a middle income country providing a high quality life to all its citizens by year 2030’, is
somewhat silent about nutrition, even though there is a strong bi-directional relationship between
nutrition status and (equitable) economic growth. The first Medium Term Plan 2008-2012 had
also limited coverage of nutrition, focusing on mainly food security. The second MTP 2013-
2017, which prioritizes policies, programmes, and projects to reduce poverty and inequality
including meeting the remaining Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) targets, on the other
hand, highlights the importance of good nutrition to health and education and includes flagship
projects to improve nutrition in different sectors.

However, the rhetoric on nutrition has not been matched with adequate level of resources
and enough actions due possibly to limited understanding on the importance of nutrition
on health, education, and development and sectoral silos. The National Health Policy (NHP)
2012-2030 aims to ‘attain the highest possible health standards in a manner responsive to the
population needs’, but one of the biggest risk factors and contributors to mortality and morbidity
especially among children under five is not covered systematically in the Health Sector Strategic
and Investment Plan (HSSIP) 2013-2017. Instead, nutrition is identified as a social determinant
that the health sector seeks to “influence” among others such as water and sanitation, education
and agriculture, even though various preventive and curative nutrition interventions are
mentioned under different strategic objectives. Thus, the nutrition budget as a share of the total
health budget presented in the HSSIP is less than two percent.

The National Food and Nutrition Security Policy (FNSP) 2011, development of which was led
by the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), provides a framework to address strategic areas to
achieve good nutrition but mainly focusing on food security. Assuming that guaranteed food
security will automatically lead to adequate nutrition is one main fallacy undermining the
formulation of effective multisectoral nutrition interventions. Similarly, the main focus of the
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy 2010 is on market oriented production, rather than
nutrition-sensitive production. On the other hand, the National Nutrition Action Plan (NNAP)
2012-2017, developed by the former Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation (MOPHS), focuses
primarily on high impact nutrition interventions within the health sector. These policy and
strategy also do not address some of the key lessons learned from previous efforts (e.g., unclear
coordination mechanisms and commitment to fund implementation of the planned activities). For
example, the NNAP is short of strategic options other sectors can play (e.g., food diversification
by the agriculture sector, etc). Resource gap is also quite large even considering the fact that the
NNAP is intended to be a tool to mobilize resources and the majority of funding for nutrition has




                                                10
traditionally come from development partners (Figure 11).18 The budget estimated for nutrition
in the HSSIP 2013-2017 is only a third of financial resources needed to implement the NNAP
even though the Ministry of Health (MOH) is the leading agency for most activities proposed. In
addition, actual allocation is likely to be much less as there is a financing gap in the HSSIP and
the government’s commitment to scale up nutrition for the next five year across sectors is only
USD 70 million against USD 272 million needed in health sector alone. 19 While the county
governments are supposed to allocate budget to implement the nutrition actions at the county
level with devolution, they are unlikely to fill the funding gap as the share of development
expenditure allocated to even the overall health sector is only 12% on average. 20 Before
devolution, the nutrition funding allocated to districts by the Government was traditionally small
ranging from from KES 48,000 to KES120,000 KES per year in FY2011/2012.21

Figure 11. Nutrition funding by source




Source: GOK/UNICEF 2009/12 mid-term report quoted in
Wagah (2011)

In addition, the institutions responsible for nutrition action and coordination are too low in
the hierarchy without enough convening power or ad-hoc committees rather than being a
permanent institution with adequate (human and financial) resources to effectively and
efficiently lead the integrated multi-sectoral actions. For example, the MOH has a small unit22
under the Family Health Department to deal with the nutrition issues that directly and indirectly
affect nearly half of child mortality. Likewise, a small section of the Home Economics Unit is
responsible for nutrition in the MOA where a “food first (and only)” approach is dominant.23
Thus, they do not have enough convening power or authority to call for any action that is under
another Ministry. Although Kenya joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement in
September 2012 in the context of a renewed global commitment to eliminate all forms of
malnutrition and multiple inter-sectoral committees exist to coordinate responses to food and


18
   This unstable source of funding could explain why much of the activity in nutrition focuses on addressing the
immediate impacts of food insecurity, famine and other emergencies, with limited actions in medium and long term
development nutrition.
19
   KHSSIP 2013-2017
20
   CRA (2013). County Budgets: 2013 – 2014
21
   Wagah (2011) – CHECK FULL REF.
22
   Although the nutrition units in the MOPHS and MOMS have been merged in XXX, they seem to be still
functioning as two separate units with sub-optimal coordination (e.g., nutrition commodity information not readily
available from the former MOMS nutrition team, preparation of two separate proposals, etc)
23
   ACF-International (2013)

                                                        11
nutrition security issues, they “are sectoral and technical, and focus mainly on emergency.”24
Currently, there is also no evidence that the new coordinating mechanisms proposed in the FNSP
(i.e., the Food and Nutrition Security Secretariat and County Food Security Committees) are
fully functioning to ensure “integrated multi-sectoral responses to food and nutrition security
issues” to achieve its goals.25


What Kenya can do differently to address the situation in a devolved system.

In order to minimize challenge and maximize opportunities in addressing nutrition issues in a
devolved system, the Government of Kenya might want to consider the following options.

Intensify strategic communications to make nutrition an explicit development outcome of
the county. While nutrition has been on the national agenda, the main focus has been food
security and emergency nutrition responses rather than an integrated multisectoral response to
prevent undernutrition that can contribute to the country’s development. In order to achieve
better outcomes, the Government of Kenya needs to engage all stakeholders from individuals and
households to service providers to traditional leaders and decision makers at different levels to
create conditions favorable for social change. Concerted and continuous communication efforts
are needed: (i) to sensitize the importance of better nutrition on health, education and
development outcomes of the country (not just food security) and effective and efficient multi-
sectoral actions to prevent and treat undernutrition (given the limited resources available); (ii) to
increase leadership commitment in tackling undernutrition; (iii) to decide ambitious, but
achievable nutrition outcome(s) as national development goals; and (iv) to mobilize additional
resources for actions in all sectors and levels of the country in order to achieve better nutrition
outcomes. The appropriate communications modalities and techniques need to be adjusted to
deliver level appropriate, but consistent messages.

Focus on ‘priority’ target groups to produce best outcomes. The government is engaged in
multiple flagship initiatives to address development challenges of various sectors. It is therefore
unlikely that Kenya can address all the nutrition problems identified and implement proposed
strategies/actions in the NNAP at once. Thus, the Government needs to coordinate prioritization
of beneficiaries to focus on, and identify a set of cost-effective/efficient strategies and actions to
implement in a short term to achieve targeted high impact outcomes. While the stakeholders in
Kenya are well aware of the window of opportunity for preventing the irreversible physical and
mental consequences of undernutrition to be the first 1,000 days of life, programs still target
outside of this window of opportunity as interventions target already underweight children,
rather than focusing on prevention of undernutrition. The interventions after this age will not
have a significant impact on the productivity and economic growths due to largely irreversibly
stunted physical and cognitive development. Governments have to understand that lack of
effective measures to decrease chronic malnutrition renders them co-responsible for the under-
achievements in life of a significant part of their population.



24
     ibid
25
     FNSP (2011)

                                                 12
Develop a costed scale up plan to increase coverage of the most cost effective and context
specific interventions. Since the overall spending on nutrition is minimal and skewed to
emergency responses, coverage of the cost-effective interventions is relatively low. While
nutrition interventions are usually very cost-effective, some interventions are less cost-effective
than others. For example, community based nutrition programs for behavior change cost USD 53
to 153 per disability-adjusted life-year (DALY) saved, while it costs about 10 times more to save
one DALY through distribution of complementary foods (USD 500 – 1,000). 26 In order to
increase coverage of most effective nutrition interventions to prevent and improve
undernutrition, the Government of Kenya should develop a costed plan for “a limited set of cost-
effective interventions” that can be scaled up to achieve explicit nutrition outcomes. While it
might take some time to prepare such a plan, it can facilitate the government’s decision in
investing in nutrition as the economic analysis can also show the potential benefits and cost
effectiveness of various scenarios compared to the investment that the government needs to
make.

This plan would be best done at the county level as the devolved system can provide
opportunities to achieve better nutrition outcomes through the integrated and synergistic
approach of addressing key determinants of nutrition in various sectors at the same time.
Kenya’s recent devolution especially acceleration of the transfer of responsibilities to counties
presents many challenges. During the early stage of devolution, many counties, if not all, are
likely to face with multiple challenges due to sub-optimal institutional capacity in public
financial management, human resource (quantity and quality), high and urgent expectations of
equitable service delivery, etc. However, the devolved system can also be a unique opportunity
to integrate basic services to improve nutrition under the integrated strategy. The county
governments in the devolved setting can: (i) have context specific planning and implementation,
rather than implementing vertical programs engineered centrally; (ii) have autonomy over all
public services, making multi-sectoral coordination and collaboration easier (including setting up
a new office); and (iii) allocate budget directly for nutrition, rather than letting the multi-sectoral
team rely on a small portion of multiple sectoral budget items which may not be in sync with the
priority actions and make reallocation between actions difficult when needed. As long as there is
a strong and consistent political commitment, all of these conditions can make the county
governments address a combination of factors affecting undernutrition simultaneously in their
respective counties, while improving accountability as budget is directly linked to the nutrition
outcomes (rather than sectors).

Given the limited capacity especially at the management and leadership levels of the country
government in addressing undernutrition, the national government will need to support the
counties to come up with evidence-based integrated interventions that (i) are cost-effective
and (ii) promote synergies and sustainability at least in the early years of devolution. The health
sector can play a key role in this process as it frequently contacts the target group in the window
of opportunity and nutrition specific interventions are often implemented through the health
sector delivery mechanisms. In some counties, however, nutrition sensitive interventions such as
those addressing household food insecurity and poor sanitation infrastructure might be the key
drivers of reducing undernutrition. So it will be important to have flexibility in institutional
arrangements to meet the needs of different counties. The multi-sectoral technical team
26
     Horton et al (2010)

                                                  13
responsible for supporting the county governments will need to provide the overall management
training including Public Financial Management so that the counties will be able to prioritize
nutrition, if needed, at the county level.

Utilize all available cadres to maximize human resources to deliver nutrition services. The
county governments have a limited number of nutrition officers who can be mobilized to
implement nutrition interventions if decided to scale up rapidly. Also, given the current budget
constraints and higher need for certain cadres of professionals (e.g., doctors), it is unlikely that
the country governments will increase the number of nutrition officers significantly in the short
and medium term. Thus, the county governments need to utilize other cadres available. For
example, home economics officer, agriculture extension officers and community health nurses
already provide some nutrition education and promotion at the community level. In order to get
the full benefit, it will be important to work towards common goals based on consistent messages
that can be used across providers until nutrition becomes everybody’s business. Since many of
them may be already overworked for other tasks, it is important to clarify division of labor. It
will also be vital to involve positive deviants as providers (e.g, community health
workers/volunteers) in order to boost the confidence of the targeted families that they can
prevent and improve undernutrition in their specific context. Positive deviant families can also
help the targeted beneficiary see the outcomes of the improved nutritional status (e.g., children
not sick that often and even if ill, the severity and duration is less, etc) and thus build more
ownership of the interventions among them. In addition, the national government has a critical
role to play in terms of developing a strategy to harmonize the messages, updating training tools
and materials that can be used by different cadres, and providing trainer training for the county
governments. Given the sheer number of providers to be mobilized and trained as well as limited
number of staff even at the national government who can serve as master trainers, innovative
training methods (e.g., traditional in person training, followed by dissemination of updates and
service reminders by text messages, e-learning courses etc) will need to be used concurrently if
multiple counties decide to scale up nutrition specific and sensitive interventions.

Generate and utilize relevant evidence to adjust strategies and actions.            In order to
implement the context specific strategies and actions to improve nutrition, the importance of
generating relevant evidence and utilizing evidence to change the course of action cannot be
emphasized enough. This is especially relevant as Kenya moves to the devolved system as the
county specific data are limited. While the ongoing Demographic and Health Survey will provide
the county relevant information in the health sector that can help the county governments plan
and implement a set of nutrition specific interventions to address issues faced by each county,
this will not provide much information beyond health (and some early childhood education).
Therefore, it will be important to continuously generate information, while implementing
interventions, to make more appropriate decision and delivery of interventions more effective
and efficient.




                                                14
