                                                                    92264

Delivering Primary Health Services in Devolved Health Systems of Kenya



                    Challenges and Opportunities




                            Final Report




                           September 2014




                                                                         1
Renewed focus on Primary Health care

As Kenya is going through a transformational change with the devolution and government’s strong
commitment to provide Universal Health Coverage (UHC) for all Kenyans, it is time to introspect how
Kenya will put in place the building blocks required. We tried to reflect how Kenya can achieve this
noble goal building on its primary health service delivery system.

There is strong evidence that provision of primary health care is critical for achieving the health
outcomes. Selective scaling up of primary health care services was a common feature among 30 low and
middle income countries that achieved highest average yearly reduction of under-five mortality and high
coverage for skilled attendance at birth1. The family health program in Brazil helped to reduce Infant
mortality rates by 13% between1999-20042 . The experiences shared at the recent High Level Forum on
health in Kenya by Brazil also highlight the continued emphasis the country gives on primary health care
despite huge decline in maternal and child mortality rates. Brazil supplements such primary health care
facilities with a network of hospitals to provide referral care rather than every municipality having a
specialty hospital.

Primary health care is also found to be cost efficient and improve access to basic health services, which is
an important requirement for achieving UHC. A study in India has shown that an additional 2% increase
in resource allocation for primary health care was associated with an increase in patient load (63.5%), cost
effectiveness (50.8%), medicine supply (49.4%) and patient satisfaction (12.7%)3. The preliminary
results from the household healthcare utilization and expenditure in Kenya (2013) also show that
sustained focus on primary care in Kenya helped to double out-patient utilization in the past decade
(2003-2013). Per-capita outpatient visits have increased during this period from 1.7 to 3.1. More
importantly, the findings suggest that such services are more equitable and public sector facilities remain
a main source (66%).

What makes Kenya different

With a population of over 40 million people, Kenya is one of the most promising democracies in East
Africa and shares several common charters of its neighbors. Stubbornly high levels of maternal mortality
and stunting among children are continuing more or less at the same levels over the past two decades.
Non-communicable diseases in Kenya are beginning to rise and contribute to a significant part of hospital
admissions. Public expenditures on health remains low and further declined from 8 to less than 5 percent
due to crowding out by donors who are keen to support Kenya’s efforts to control priority communicable
diseases. High levels of out of pocket expenditure continue, which is inequitable and inefficient.


What makes Kenya different is the unique ability to innovate and try out homemade solutions that help
the poor and its openness to promote the private sector participation in delivery of public goods. M-pesa
while addressing the challenge of rural banking also provided platform for M-health. The health workers
in Kenya now use smart phones to report every week the data on communicable diseases. Kenya has a
thriving local pharmaceutical industry and often is the first port of call for providing referral care for

1
  Rhode et al (2008). Lancet 372: 950-961
2
  Macink et al (2007). Social Science and Medicine 65: 2070-2080
3
  Varatharajan et al (2004). Health Policy and Planning 19(1): 41-51.

                                                                                                          2
serious illnesses in the East African region. The faith based organizations are well integrated with public
health delivery systems, and government diligently seconded health staff and provided essential
commodities to complement public service delivery in remote rural areas. Private franchises are rapidly
increasing to provide quality health in rural Kenya. Both the Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA)
and the National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) partner with private sector to deliver essential
medicines and provide health services respectively. Finally, the new constitution of Kenya provides a
clear mandate for devolution and commitment to improve health of all Kenyans.

Despite its impressive growth in the services sector, Kenya faces a number of serious problems, including
widespread poverty and income inequality. While nearly half of Kenyans continue to be poor, large out
of pocket payments push more Kenyan families every day into poverty. The recent policy
pronouncements by the National government to eliminate payments at point of delivery for public
primary health care and free maternity services at all public facilities are in the right direction and meet
the priority needs of Kenyans. But the challenge remains in their effective implementation as Kenya still
struggles to provide access to basic health care services for its growing population, especially those living
in rural communities and the densely populated urban slums.


Kenya’s re-focuse on improving delivery of Primary Health Services

Effective delivery of primary health care services requires four important inputs. Availability of a
network of facilities and making the network functional with competent and motivated staff, supplies of
essential medicines and ensuring funds for operation and maintenance reach the facilities in time. The
separation of Ministry of Health and creation of the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation in 2007
provided renewed focus on primary health care in Kenya, which got further boost with the Economic
Stimulus Package.

The Government of Kenya introduced the Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF) launched in 2010 to
expand the supply of health care and strengthen primary health care. The HSSF aims to improve the
delivery of quality essential health services in an equitable and efficient manner as envisaged by Kenya
Vision 2030 (Kenya’s development program covering 2008 to 2030), the Kenya Health Policy framework
1994–2010, and the Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation Strategic Plan 2008–2012. This initiative
was a direct policy response by the Government of Kenya to the findings of the Public Expenditure
Tracking Survey of 2005, that little or no funds provided for the primary health facilities actually reach
them and, as a result, the delivery of health services is adversely affected.

The HSSF is an innovative financing approach to health services provision in Kenya. It is a revolving
fund that provides direct cash transfers to primary health care facilities that include dispensaries and
health centers. The local communities represented by the Health Facility Management Committee
(HFMC) manage the funds received and prioritize their use responsive to their health needs. The HSSF
mobilizes additional resources from the government and its development partners to improve service
delivery. It ensures expeditious and direct cash transfers to primary health facilities run by the
government and faith-based organizations, and supports an equitable distribution of resources. More
important, the HSSF empowers local communities to take charge of their health by actively involving
them through the HFMCs in the identification of their health priorities, and in planning and
implementation of initiatives responsive to the identified priorities. The program also has a strong focus

                                                                                                             3
on better accountability in the use of resources provided through both grants and those generated through
cost sharing. Thus, the HSSF is well aligned with the principles of devolution and access to services as
described in Kenya’s constitution, which expects the state to ensure reasonable access to its services to all
parts of the republic.

The HSSF program has been expanded to all Government primary health care facilities and is currently
covering 787 health centers and 2,427 dispensaries. As per the information provided by the HSSF
Secretariat, the fund that has so far been disbursed is K.Sh 1.695 billion (about US$20 million) and K.Sh
757 million. out of this was disbursed to GoK levels 2 and 3 facilities during FY2012-13. Some visible
improvements in the service delivery at the health facilities was noted by the independent Citizen’s
Report Card exercise undertaken by Family Care International (October 2012) in Kitui and Nakuru
        Figure 1. Availability of work plans and facility       Figure 2. A health facility board displaying expenses
                   management committee                                         and revenue sources



                 99.6%                           98.2%
                                      91.2%
      69.0%




      Public Dispensaries            Public Health Centers



        Work plan        Health Facility Management Committee

Counties. A majority of the 599 clients interviewed stated that the overall quality of service, waiting
time, cleanliness and the state of the health centers had improved compared to the past one year.

A recent public expenditure tracking survey covering randomly selected health facilities undertaken by
the Kenya Institute for Public




                                                                                                                   4
    Figure 3. Selection of Facility Management Committees
                                                               Policy and Research (KIPPRA) as a part of the
                                                               Public Expenditure Tracking and Service
                                                               Indicators Study for the MoH has shown that a
                                                               majority of the sampled public health centers
100%                                                           (95%) and over three fourths of the public
 80%                                                           dispensaries (75.7%) received HSSF grants and
                                                               92% and 69% of health centers and
 60%
                                                               dispensaries had annual operational plans in
 40%                                                           place (Figure 1). This trend could be due to the
 20%                                                           fact that the inclusion of public dispensaries
                                                               started only in 2012. All sampled public
  0%
                                                               dispensaries started receiving the HSSF grants
                                                               only in FY 2012-13. Most (98%) of the
           Election              Appointed by local leadership
                                                               primary health facilities had health facility
           Ministry's advice     No community members
                                                               management committees (HFMCs) in place
                                                               and over half of such committees were elected
 (Figure 3). The HFMCs in over 80% of sampled public primary health facilities met every quarter. Over
 three fourths of the facilities (77%) disclosed financial information to the public (Figure 2) and there is
 nearly 20% lesser probability of receiving funds if a facility failed to submit quarterly financial reports
 suggesting that the HSSF program has put in place some internal controls. However, the study identified
 the need to strengthen financial record keeping at the facility level. Over a quarter of dispensaries and
 about a tenth of the health centers did not have proper records.

The Pull System of Supplying Essential Medicines and Medical Supplies

The “pull system” is a demand-based approach for ensuring the reliable availability of health
commodities at all service delivery points within a health system. In Kenya, under the National Health
Sector Strategic Plan II (2005–2012) the government (Ministry of Health) has established virtual
“drawing rights” for health facilities to move toward the “pull” system of supply in which facilities order
their required supplies and commodities based on actual need rather than receiving centrally determined
numbers of medicine kits (referred to as the “push” system of supply).

Each public dispensary and health center has annual drawing rights established by the ministry through
the above-mentioned resource allocation criteria. In 2011–12, new resource allocation criteria for rural
health facilities were developed, and the allocation of drawing rights is done at two levels—national to
district and district to health facilities. National to district: Allocation criteria are based on district
workload, district population, number of dispensaries and health centers in the district, and the district
poverty index. Each component has individual weights. District to facility: The allocation criterion is
primarily based on the facility workload.

By 2013, all public primary health care facilities in Kenya were covered by the “pull system” of supply
with the facilities making orders based on their drawing rights. The Kenya Medical Supplies Authority
(KEMSA) supplied the facilities based on their orders placed using commodities procured under the GoK
funds provided under the Economic Stimulus Package and IDA through the Kenya Health Sector Support
Project (KHSSP). The MoH reimbursed KEMSA based on documented evidence of supply to primary


                                                                                                              5
health facilities (proof of deliveries) using GoK and DANIDA funding. The reimbursement to KEMSA
aims at establishing a pool of fund for supplying EMMS to primary health care facilities. Out of the total
invoices of K.Sh2.7 billion raised by KEMSA, the MoH has reimbursed K.Sh1.6 billion. A case study
undertaken by the World Bank assessed the effect of the reform process in improving the provision of
essential medicines to poor counties. This was done by regressing KEMSA supplies with district level
poverty data. The study has shown that per capita value of supplies made by KEMSA were marginally
higher in districts with highest proportion of the poor (75%) compared to districts where about a quarter
of the population was living below poverty line (K.Sh99 vs. K.Sh86). However, the study has shown that
it costs KEMSA more to ship supplies to poorer districts compared to better-off districts, probably due to
dispersed location of facilities in such districts. Finally, determining the drawing rights based on
utilization trends could be disadvantageous to poorer districts with dispersed populations having limited
transport access to fixed health facilities. While the study advises caution in drawing policy conclusions,
it provides some useful leads such as: (a) need for budgeting higher transport costs for poorer districts;
and (b) linking supply chain to community strategy in the poorer districts where communities are more
widely dispersed with limited transport to access fixed health facilities.

Reforms were also undertaken to improve Human Resources for Health (HRH) with the launching of a
new HRH strategic plan. A devolved recruitment was undertaken with the resources made available
through the government’s fiscal stimulus package. The districts were authorized to recruit the staff and
over 3000 nurses were recruited. In addition, contract staff provided by Development Partners has been
deployed to the most deprived, underserved provinces. Staff were also seconded to Faith based
Organizations (FBOs) by the Ministries of Health. The contract health workers have helped improve the
service coverage and quality of care. However, shortfalls remain among nurses, clinical officers, and
laboratory technicians in many deprived districts.

Thus, some sincere efforts were made by the Government of Kenya to improve the delivery of primary
health care services.


Kenya’s improvement on delivery of primary health services in a devolved health system

Several challenges in delivery of primary health care services still persist in Kenya. As done by several
other low and middle income countries, Kenya can get better value for money by first focusing on making
existing primary health facilities functional to deliver quality health services. While the county fact
sheets suggest that over a tenth of the existing primary health care facilities are non-functional, the real
situation appears to be worse. Further, there is lack of data on functionality of over one thousand primary
care facilities built under the Constituency Development Fund.




                                                                                                           6
    Figure 4. Distribution of counties by share of health facilities ready to offer Basic Emergency Obstetric Care




    100

      90

      80

      70

      60

      50

      40

      30

      20

      10

       0
                     Siaya




                                                        Mombasa




                                                                                    Nyamira


                                                                                              Garissa




                                                                                                                                          Trans-Nzoia


                                                                                                                                                         Mandera


                                                                                                                                                                   Kirinyaga



                                                                                                                                                                                 Busia
                                                                                                                                                                                         Kakamega




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vihiga
                                                                                                        Lamu




                                                                                                                                                                               Nakuru
                                                                                                                                                                               Baringo




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Isiolo



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Uasin Gishu



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Samburu



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kiambu



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kericho


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Narok
           Elgeyo-Marakwet
                               Nairobi




                                                                           Kisii




                                                                                                                        Kitui
                                                                                                                                Migori



                                                                                                                                         Tharaka Nithi


                                                                                                                                                                       Nandi




                                                                                                                                                                                                             West Pokot




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Marsabit


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Makueni



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nyeri
                                                                                                                                 Wajir




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tana River
                                                                                   Machakos
                  Muranga




                                         Taita Taveta


                                                         Turkana




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nyandarua


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bungoma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Laikipia


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kwale
                             Homa Bay




                                                                   Meru


                                                                          Embu




                                                                                                               Kisumu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kajiado
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kilifi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bomet
The recent policy to offer free maternity services at all public health facilities is a step in the right
direction to improve access to skilled care at child birth, which is known to reduce maternal deaths and
thereby achievement of MDG4. However, the Service Readiness Assessment Survey4 suggests wide
variation in proportion of health facilities offering basic emergency obstetric care5 across counties. Basic
emergency obstetric care is much easier to offer compared to comprehensive emergency obstetric care
which requires specialists, equipment, blood storage and an operation theatre.




4
  Ministry of Health (2013). Kenya Service Availability and Readiness Assessment Mapping.
5
  A facility that offers parental antibiotics and uterotonic drugs, parental anti-convalescents for eclampsia and pre-
eclampsia, manual removal of placenta, removal of retained products, assisted vaginal delivery and basic neonatal
resuscitation. Monitoring Emergency Obstetric Care –A hand book WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and AMDD -2009
ISBN 978 92 4 154773 4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7
       Figure 2. Know do gap by type of providers                     Figure 6. Reasons for authorized absence
     86%                                                                 Sick and maternity
                    81%                               82%                                        7.1%
                                                                                leave
                                      72%
                                                                        Traning and seminar
                                                                                                    10.1%
         54%                                                                attendance
                        47%              46%
                                                                             Official mission         19.8%
                                                          28%                Other approved
                                                                                                            51%
                                                                                absence

                                                                                   On strike    3.2%

     Doctors        Clinical          Nurses          Midwives                 Not specified    5.4%
                    Officers

               Correct Diagnosis       Full treatment                  Unapproved absence       3.4%




The recent public expenditure tracking survey6 has shown that Kenyan health providers have much better
knowledge compared to several other countries in the region (Figure 5). Nearly 80% of health staff could
correctly diagnose five common health conditions and are aware how to manage them. But, such
knowledge is not optimally getting translated into service delivery as only 40% of them were actually
offering full treatment. Similarly about a third of health staff are absent on a day of unannounced visit
and over 80% of such absences were authorized (Figure 6).

As it could be seen from the Figure 6, about 7% of the staff were sick or on maternity leave, nearly a tenth
were attending trainings or seminars and about a fifth were on official duty. However, there was no clear
reason for nearly half of the staff on authorized absence.

                                                            The same survey has shown that nearly two thirds of
       Figure 7: Drug Availability
                                            81% 77%         facilities had essential drugs and supply was
             68%                                            marginally better among facilities under pull system
       62%                   61%
                       48%                                  (Figure 7). Generally facilities had better availability
                                                            of essential medicines for childcare compared to
                                                            maternal care. However, the pull system seemed to
                                                            have helped to improve the supply of drugs for
       All drugs      Mothers drugs    Children's drugs
                                                            maternal care.
                     PUSH      PULL


6
    Health Service Delivery Indicators and Public Expenditure Tracking In Kenya, 2012 (Pets Plus)


                                                                                                                   8
A recent assessment of technical efficiency of health facilities 7suggests that generally public primary
health centers are more efficient in service delivery, but less than half of the dispensaries need to improve
their services.

Quick wins for improving delivery of primary health care services in devolved health systems:

      1. Make existing public primary health care facilities functional. The devolution provides a
          unique opportunity to strengthen primary healthcare service delivery. With counties now
          responsible for delivering primary health care services there is hope that some of the chronically
          persisting weaknesses to make the existing facilities operational will be addressed. By the end of
          the first year of devolution some of the initial gains made in improving delivery of primary
          healthcare services are clearly visible. For example, the Governor of Mandera has taken the
          initiative to make all 52 primary healthcare facilities in the county operational by recruiting staff.
          The Governor of Machakos is focusing on improving access to safe delivery services by
          providing maternity units to all primary health care facilities and positioning ambulances in each
          ward. Kakamega is giving strategic focus on improving maternal and new born health services.
          There are several ongoing initiatives in many counties, which are not yet systematically
          documented. Many counties have undertaken audits of human resources to weed out ghost
          workers. It is also expected that with the closer oversight, the absenteeism of health staff will
          reduce.
      2. Fill existing gaps to improve access to Basic Emergency Obstetric care. The first priority is
          to make primary health centers and dispensaries with maternity wards to offer basic emergency
          obstetric care before developing new infrastructure. The Governors and County Chief Executives
          of Health need to give priority attention to address the existing gaps including effectively
          coordinating support from partners in their respective counties to achieve this objective. Most
          primary health centers have 20-30 beds, which are grossly underutilized. Therefore the option of
          using some beds for servicing pregnant women as maternity waiting beds could be an option,
          especially in counties where road connectivity is poor and the newly purchased ambulances in
          some counties cannot reach many locations.
      3. Build on existing partnerships with FBOs and partner with the private sector. As explained
          earlier, there is already a strong partnership with FBOs, which complement public health
          facilities. Counties need to build on this well established relationship. Kenya has a vibrant
          private sector which is rapidly expanding to rural areas through franchised networks. It is
          important to effectively leverage such networks for public goods, especially for delivering
          reproductive maternal, newborn and child health services.
7
    Prof. Urbanus Kioko, The High Level Forum on Health, March 2014, Nairobi, Kenya

                                                                                                               9
4. Continue HSSF but shift emphasis on accountability to results. Performance accountability
   remains corner stone for the devolved health system in Kenya. This now needs to trickle down
   from top management to sub-county health teams and facility in charges. The experiences of the
   Results Based Financing pilot in Samburu shows that objective assessment of performance
   through regular supportive supervision enhances motivation of providers as well as supervisors
   and improves retention.
5. Rationalize Hospital infrastructure. Hospitals are expensive to build and maintain. Countries
   in central Asia and Brazil realized the importance of rationalizing hospital infrastructure and
   created hospital networks that optimize efficiency. Clusters of counties now need to collectively
   work together to develop a well networked hospitals which provide high quality referral back-up
   to primary care facilities.
6. Maintain commodity security. All counties have entered into a Memorandum of Understanding
   with KEMSA or Mission for Essential Drugs and Supplies (MEDS) an agency which does pooled
   procurement for FBOs. This will
   ensure better economies of scale and             Figure 8: County share of allocations
                                                   made to primary health facilities in Q3 of
   quality of essential medicines. The                  2011/12, 2012/13 and 2013/14
   KEMSA has now moved into a                25                                                        21
                                                                                                   19
   supermarket mode and entered into         20                                    16                16
   memoranda of understanding with           15    11                               10
                                             10                   8
   all 47 counties. An analysis of                                        5    6             6 6
                                                        4             3
                                              5             2                            1
   ordering patterns showed that 27 out
                                              0
   of 44 counties, which ordered from               <30%          30-40%      40-50%     50-60%    60%+
   the KEMSA in the 1st quarter of
                                                                2011/12       2012/13    2013/14
   2013/2014 ordered 50% or more of
   supplies made to primary health
   care facilities (Figure 8). While this is a positive trend, more careful security is required by the
   MoH to carefully track these trends and also compliance with essential drug list.




                                                                                                            10
