                                                             92268

Sustainable Health Systems and Fair Financing for achieving Universal
                     Health Coverage in Kenya




       A framework for support from the World Bank Group




                          September 2014




                               1
     Background:

     a) Country context

     1.     Kenya with an estimated population of about 43 million is going through transformational
     changes with its new constitution. The Kenyan economy grew steadily from 5.1% in 2003 to 7.0% in
     2007, but declined to a low of 1.5% in 2008 largely due to the post-election violence and the global
     economic crisis. Kenya has maintained a stable macroeconomic environment despite challenges of
     financing the new devolved system of governance. The economy is projected to have grown by 5% in
     2013, and it is expected to grow by 5.1% in 2014. Medium term prospects are stronger, with the
     growth in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) projected to improve to around 6%.

     2.     According to the recent World Bank’s economic update, Kenya has made some notable progress
     during the past half century. Kenyans are living two decades longer, fertility and infant mortality have
     been cut into half, and school enrolment at primary and secondary level has more than doubled. GDP
     per capita has increased eightfold and Kenya’s financial sector is now the third largest, after South
     Africa’s and Nigeria’s, in sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya now needs to reflect how such overall country
     progress helped to transform the lives of the majority of Kenyans. Nearly four in 10 Kenyans still live
     in poverty, maternal mortality is among the highest in Africa, secondary school enrolment is low and
     learning achievement levels are well below their potential. GDP growth, while solid, has yet to reach
     the takeoff level necessary to transform Kenya into a modern market economy and change the lives of
     ordinary Kenyans.

     3.      Table 1 summarizes key demographic, economic and social development indicators as measured
     in different time periods.

     Table 1: Demographic, Economic and Social Development Indicators1,2,3,4

                            Indicator                                         Status                   Year                    Trend
      Total population(millions)                                               43.1                    2012
      Fertility rate                                                            4.6                    2008
      Life Expectancy at Birth                                                  61                     2012
      Gross Domestic Product (GDP)(US$ billions)                               40.7                    2012
      GDP per capita (US$)                                                    942.5                    2012
      GDP growth rate                                                          4.6%                    2012
      Poverty head count                                                      45.9%                    2006
      Gini Index                                                              0.477                    2007
      Life Expectancy at Birth                                                  62                     2012
      Under five mortality                                                      74                     2008
      Infant Mortality Rate                                                     52                     2008
      Prevalence of HIV (15-49 years)                                           5.6                    2008
      % of births assisted by skilled health worker                           43.8%                    2008
      % of pregnant women making>= 4 antenatal visits                         47.1%                    2008
     b) New Constitution and devolution

     4.      Kenya’s new constitution is most progressive and widely perceived by Kenyans from all walks
     of life as a new and positive beginning. The devolution envisaged by the constitution aims to reduce
     longstanding spatial inequalities and make access to essential services a basic right to Kenyan citizens.
     A devolved government makes eminent sense given Kenya’s socio-cultural diversity and past
1
  World Bank Development Indicators.
2
  Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, ICF Macro (2010): Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2008-09.
3
  Ndirangu L. and Mathenge M (2010). Decomposition of regional inequality in rural Kenya. CSAE Conference Paper, March, Nairobi.
4
  Kenya National Bureau of Statistics - Ministry of Planning and National development (2006). Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 2005-
2006.
                                                                      2
     experience with political use of central power. The equitable share formula addresses long term
     disparities at the subnational level by providing higher per capita shares to historically marginalized
     (Arid and semi-Arid) compared to historically privileged Counties.

     5.     According to the report “Devolution without Disruption” jointly prepared by the World Bank
     and the Austrian Aid, devolved government presents an opportunity to address the diversity of local
     needs, choices and constraints. Kenya is a very diverse country with ten major and more than thirty
     minor ethnic Groups. The needs are very different between the arid and semi-arid north, the highlands,
     the rural northern Rift Valley, the urban centers of Mombasa, Nairobi, and Kisumu, the Coast, and
     Western Kenya.

     6.      Counties will be better placed than the national government to deliver social services, because
     they have specific challenges and the local knowledge to address them. For instance, in the case of
     health, lagging counties still need to catch-up in providing basic health services, while the leading urban
     counties will be faced with new emerging challenges with non-communicable diseases such as diabetes,
     hypertension, and cancer. With these stark differences across counties, it makes little sense to provide
     the same mix of services across the country. With a constitutional guarantee of unconditional transfers
     from the center, Kenya’s counties will have the means and the autonomy to begin to address local
     needs, and their citizens will have more opportunities to hold them accountable for their performance.

     7.       Kenya’s devolution is very ambitious, and therefore commensurately risky. First, it is a massive
     undertaking from a logistical point of view, and secondly there are diverging views on how far and how
     fast it should be implemented. On one side, it has the potential to redress perceived ethnic and political
     bias by giving local communities far greater control over resources and decisions about service
     delivery. On the other, devolution could potentially undermine national unity and reverse some of the
     gains made in the delivery of services that are essential for the welfare of the entire population, as well
     as for the health of its growing economy.

     8.     Equal distribution of wealth across Kenya may be desirable politically, but it is impossible
     economically. The very strong urbanization trend has not spared Kenya. With a few exceptions,
     counties will be too small to generate the economies of scale. Moreover, no matter what remote
     counties do to attract them, most investors will chose to locate their operations in Kenya’s big cities.
     The next two years therefore will be critical as the foundations of the devolution architecture get laid
     and will crystallize.

     9.      Kenya’s devolution is not only a critical milestone in this country’s history; it is also remarkable
     in global terms. Many countries―both rich and poor―have transferred power and resources to lower
     levels of government. Few have done so to entirely new subnational units, which they have had to
     establish from scratch. The country will undergo a dual transition: a transfer of power and resources
     from the center to the subnational level and a simultaneous reorganization of local government, with the
     consolidation of existing local administration.

     c) Commitment to achieve Universal Health Coverage

     10.    Universal Health Coverage (UHC) currently dominates the global health agenda. Since the 58th
     World Health Assembly, governments, international organizations, funders and others have engaged in
     debates on how countries can move rapidly towards UHC5. UHC requires the entire population to
     access quality healthcare services when needed and without incurring financial catastrophe. Thus, it
     has two main goals: financial risk protection and access to needed care. Making progress towards these
     goals requires high levels of income and risk cross-subsidization.

5
  World Health Organisation (2010). The World Health Report: health systems financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva: World Health
Organisation.
                                                                    3
     11.    UHC features prominently in Kenyan health policy over the past decade and is among the
     flagship initiatives identified by the current government. The UHC is identified as one of the pillars
     that will support the country’s transition to a middle income status as envisaged by Kenya’s Vision
     2030. Kenya’s Second Medium Term Plan (2012-17) listed several steps to attain UHC. The key
     milestones are summarized as follows:

     •    Development of a Social Health Insurance (SHI) bill in 2004/2005. The SHI bill drew attention
          both locally and internationally but was met with resistance from various stakeholders including
          some political leaders, employers and employees, private healthcare providers and private insurance
          companies. The bill was passed in parliament, but could not get the presidential assent due to a mix
          of technical and political reasons. Discussions were again initiated in 2007 and a draft health
          financing strategy developed in 20086. The process again stalled and got reactivated in 2013, when
          the Ministry of Health (MoH) requested support from the Providing for Health (P4H) network to
          review their draft strategy and suggest the way forward. A 2014 draft policy options paper will
          inform the finalization of the health financing strategy. However, lack of an overarching health
          financing strategy still remains a constraint for embarking on the much needed reforms for attaining
          UHC.

     •    User fees removal at dispensaries and health centers in 2004. The Government removed user fee
          in dispensaries and health centers, and replaced them with a registration fee of Kenya shillings
          (KES) 10 and 20 respectively (commonly known as 10/20 policy). Pregnant women, children
          under five, the poor and selected conditions/services like malaria and tuberculosis were exempted
          from any payment. An evaluation of the 10/20 policy, six months after implementation recorded a
          70% increase in utilization. The large increase, however, was not sustained, although in general
          utilization remained 30% higher than prior to user fees removal7. A follow up assessment of the
          policy three years after implementation showed that facilities had reversed back to the varying user
          fees due to many challenges related to lack of full and timely compensation for lost revenue, drug
          shortages, poor policy design and implementation challenges8.

     •    Direct cash transfers to primary health care facilities in 2010. The Government of Kenya
          introduced the Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF) with support from the World Bank and
          DANIDA. This initiative builds on the findings of the successive public expenditure tracking
          surveys that non salary recurrent costs meant for the primary healthcare facilities do not actually
          reach the facilities. Under the HSSF, primary care facilities received funds directly to their bank
          accounts without going through the district treasury. The funds are managed by Health Facility
          Management Committees (HFMC) consisting of community members and the officer in charge of
          the facility. The system was to obviate the funding predictability gaps of the old system, and to
          empower the community to actively participate in the management of primary health care services.
          Preliminary evaluation of the HSSF indicated that these funds contributed to service delivery
          improvements through supporting the purchase of drugs, employing support staff, renovating
          buildings and paying for utilities like water and electricity9. The HSSF still continues to function
          under the devolved system and efforts are underway to realign it with the new constitutionally
          sanctioned structures.


6
  Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation and Ministry of Medical Services (2009). Health Care Financing Policy and Strategy: Systems change for
universal coverage.
7
  Ministry of Health (2005). Rural Health Faciltieis unit cost/cost sharing review study and the impact of the 10:20 policy.
8
  Chuma J, Musimbi J, Okungu V, Goodman C, Molyneux C (2009). Reducing user fees for primary health care in Kenya: Policy on paper or policy
in practice? International Journal of Equity in Health, 8:15.

9
  Apwora A, Kabare M, Molyneux S, Goodman C (2010). Direct facility funding as a response to user fee reduction: implementation and perceived
impact among Kenyan health centres and dispensaries. Health policy and planning, 25(5): 406-418.

                                                                       4
 •   Civil servants health insurance scheme in 2012. This scheme provides coverage for all civil
     servants and the military. It provides comprehensive cover for outpatient and inpatient services for
     civil servants and their dependents. Contributions to the civil servants scheme - administered
     through the National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF), are based on medical allowances that were
     previously paid to staff on a monthly basis, and amount to a total of KES 4.5 billion per year. For
     the first time, provision of outpatient services on a capitation basis was introduced in this scheme.
     However, there is no formal assessment of its efficiency.

 •   User fees removal for primary healthcare in June 2013. The Jubilee government abolished all user
     fees in dispensaries and health centers again and established a new mechanism to compensate
     facilities for their lost revenue. Under the new policy, dispensaries and health centers are
     compensated for lost revenue estimated using their previous collection levels. In 2013 the
     government committed KES 700 million for compensation of lost revenues. The implications of
     the new policy on utilization and service provision have not yet been documented.

 •   Free maternity care in public health facilities in 2013. The government announced a policy to
     remove fees for maternal health services in all public health facilities, and committed KES 3.8
     billion to fund it in FY 2013-14. All public health facilities are compensated for any lost revenue
     arising from free delivery at a standardized rate of KES 2,500 for dispensaries and health centers;
     KES 5000 for level 4 and 5 hospitals and KES 17, 000 for Level 6 hospitals. The implications of
     this policy for access to skilled health workers have not been systematically assessed, although
     anecdotal information suggests that many more mothers are now delivering in health facilities
     following the free deliveries policy.

 •   Health Insurance Subsidy for the Poor (HISP) Program in 2014. The pilot phase of this
     countrywide initiative was recently launched covering about 500 households in each of the 47
     counties. The households, selected from a list of orphans and vulnerable children, are issued with a
     NHIF card, which allows them to access outpatient and inpatient services in accredited public and
     private health facilities. The HISP program is supported by the World Bank Group and will operate
     for two years. The Kenyan government has already indicated commitment to continue it and
     expand coverage to the poorest population after the pilot. Several County governments are also
     showing commitment to UHC, with some counties allocating part of their budget to purchase health
     insurance for poor households. An impact evaluation will be undertaken by the WBG during 2015,
     which will inform the necessary design changes for its nationwide introduction. Other partners,
     especially Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the German Development Bank
     (KfW) are keen to join this initiative.

 12.     While, the NHIF remains a key player for delivering UHC in Kenya, it faces several governance,
 institutional and operational challenges that could affect its performance. Furthermore, the efforts to
 reduce the very high administrative costs (over a third of the premiums paid) have not yet brought the
 desired results. This is partly due to non-revision of mandatory NHIF share to be paid by staff
 employed in the formal sector. Efforts to enhance the coverage for informal sector have not been very
 successful. A strategic review undertaken by the IFC informed the key challenges being faced by the
 NHIF and suggested a number of measures to address them. Subsequently, a task force constituted by
 the new Cabinet Secretary has proposed specific short term quick wins to improve efficiency and
 transparency and some longer term measures to improve coverage. Despite the cabinet endorsement to
 this approach, the progress on NIHF reforms remains tardy.

Situation Analysis:

a) Demographic and Geographic Transition


                                                  5
       13.    The ongoing demographic and political transitions in Kenya provide an important window of
       opportunity for promoting shared prosperity. Kenya’s population is projected to climb from 44 million
       today, to nearly 60 million during the next decade, and to almost 100 million by 2050 (Table 1).
       According to UN projections, Kenya’s population will grow by around 1 million per year - 3,000
       people every day - over the next 40 years. Kenya will be the world's 20th most populous nation by
       2050 and the 15th largest by 2100 (Annex 3 provides detailed projections). These projections,
       however, depend on government policies and the broader economic environment.

       14.    Until about 2000, Kenya’s population growth was driven by increasing numbers of children.
       This is no longer a driver for population growth with the number of births by a woman falling sharply,
       from 8.1 children in 1978 to 4.6 children in 2008, and projected to possibly reach below 3 children by
       2050. Based on these trends, the total number of children aged 0 to 14 is expected to increase by only
       40 percent by 2050, from 17.5 million to 24.5 million. But the total population will nonetheless more
       than double, due to several-fold increase of adult population.

       15.    Kenya is at the start of a “demographic transition” and the proportion of the working-age
       population will grow much faster than the young and elderly population groups that depend on them. A
       study by the World Bank10 suggests that the rapid population growth is contributed by two factors.
       Higher fertility is the main driver for population growth in previous decades. As a result, there are
       many more families today. Even though families are smaller, the total number of children continues to
       grow due to increased number of families. In addition, Kenyans are living longer. Life expectancy is
       projected to increase from 54 years today to 68 years by 2050. As a result of these trends, the fastest
       growing population groups are economically productive adults (15-64 years). From only 22 million
       working-age people today, by 2050 the country will have about 56 million working-age people.

       16.    Kenya will also benefit from the “geographic transition”. While rapid population growth
       remains a challenge in many poor countries, the debate has changed in recent years. The World
       Development Report for 2009, “Reshaping Economic Geography”, found a strong correlation between
       population density and economic development and concluded that no country has ever reached high
       income levels with low urbanization. Population growth with rural-urban migration creates larger
       urban agglomerations, which are critical for achieving sustained growth.

       17.    Kenya’s dynamic service industry, which typically has lower barriers of entry than agriculture or
       manufacturing, provides opportunities for young entrepreneurs. Further, larger groups of population
       living in close proximity allow for economies of scale. Companies can produce goods in larger
       numbers and more cheaply, serving a larger number of low-income customers. Over the past decade,
       Kenya has seen the emergence of a number of companies such as Safaricom, Equity Bank and BIDCO
       that have successfully targeted the large numbers of lower and lower-middle income groups,the
       “bottom of the pyramid”. Their business model is viable because they can serve a multi-million
       customer base, which has increased by 25% over the last 10 years and which continues to grow rapidly.

       18.     In light of these facts, it is clear that Kenya’s future patterns of fertility and urbanization offer a
       huge potential for contributing to shared prosperity. To effectively harness the opportunity created by
       its demographic dividend, Kenya needs to invest in enhancing human capital. The government needs to
       facilitate building skills and employment opportunities for youth to effectively offer needed services on
       a much larger scale and to a rapidly growing and urbanizing country.

     b) Disease burden: changing trends

       19.   The Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 (GBD 2010) by the Institute for Health Metrics and
       Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington suggests that in terms of the number of Years of

10
     Demographic Transition and Growth in Kenya, Wolfgang Fengler, April 2010
                                                                      6
        Life Lost (YLLs) due to premature death in Kenya, HIV/AIDS, lower respiratory infections, and
        malaria were the highest ranking causes. Out of the 25 most important causes of burden, as measured
        by Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs), lower respiratory infections showed the largest decrease,
        falling by 21% from 1990 to 2010. The leading risk factor in Kenya as % of DALY is childhood
        underweight (Figure 1).


                                     Figure 1: Disability Adjusted Live Years Lost -Kenya

                              Congenital
                             Anomolies, 1.7

                                 Road Traffic                                        Unipolar Depressive
                                 Accidents, 2              Violence, 1.6               Disorders, 1.5
                          Tuberculosis, 4.8
                        Diarrhoeal Diseases,
                                 6
                                                                                 HIV/AIDS, 24.2



                                                      Malaria, 7.2

                         Lower
                       respiratory
                          tract
                       infections,                                             Conditions arising
                           7.1                                                  during perinatal
                                                                                 period, 10.7




        20.      The recent estimates suggest that Communicable Diseases, maternal and perinatal conditions
        continue to be leading causes of the disease burden in Kenya, with HIV/AIDS dominating the disability
        adjusted life years lost, followed by conditions arising during perinatal period, lower respiratory tract
        infections and diarrheal diseases. However, hospital data suggest that Non-Communicable Diseases
        (NCDs) account for 50 – 70% of all hospital admissions and up to 50% of all inpatient mortality. The
        current total annual mortality is estimated at approximately 420,000 people, out of which 270,000
        (64%), 110,000 (26%) and 40,000 (10%) are due to communicable, NCDs and injuries respectively11.
        It is estimated that, by 2027, Kenyans are to suffer more from NCDs than communicable diseases even
        when injuries are excluded. Communicable diseases would decline to 140,000 (39%), and NCDs, and
        injuries to 170,000 (47%), and 60,000 (14%) respectively (Figure 2).




11
     Ministry of Health (2013). Kenya Health Policy 2012-2030.
                                                                           7
                           Figure 2: Cause specific mortality projections for Kenya: 2011-203012




     c) Performance of Kenya with comparable countries

        21.    Despite making progress in the control of Communicable Diseases, Kenya’s achievements in
        reduction of maternal and child mortality are much less remarkable compared to the countries in the
        East Africa Region. In fact in 1990, Kenya started with much lower estimated levels of child and
        maternal mortality. However, the other countries in the Eastern Africa region have made a more
        notable progress, especially in case of maternal mortality.
                   age-standardized rates of disability-
Ranking of leading age-                      disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) relative to comparator countries in 1990


       Figure 3: Trends in Maternal Mortality in East                         Figure 4: Trends in Child Mortality in Eastern Africa
                           Africa

                                                                              200
 1600
                                                                              180
 1400
                                                                              160
 1200
                                                                              140
 1000
                                                                              120
  800
                                                                              100
  600
                                                                               80
  400                                                                          60
  200                                                                          40
    0                                                                          20
                                                                                0
                                                                                        Kenya Rwanda Burundi Tanzania Uganda

               1990       1995      2000      2005       2013                              1990       2000       2012          MDG Target


        22.    A comparison of Kenya’s health sector overall achievements with selected middle income
        countries show that average life expectancy of a person born in Kenya in 2011 is equivalent to a person
        born in the late 1960s in China, while the total fertility rate of Kenya in 2011 is comparable to that of
        Brazil in the early 1970s. These comparisons can help putting into context Kenya’s Vision 2030

12
     Ministry of Health (2013). Kenya Health Policy 2012-2030.
                                                                       8
aspirations that include reaching the middle income status and possibly realizing that this is an
impossible target without sufficient and sustained human capital investments.

23.    These trends clearly highlight the urgent need to fast track strategies and evidence based
interventions for improving these important health outcomes. It is however paramount to note that it
requires multi-sectoral contributions to improve health outcomes, especially women’s education, food
security and adequate nutrition, water and sanitation, roads and transport.

      Figure 5: Life Expectancy in Kenya in 2011 is comparable to that of China in late 1960s




          Figure 6: Total Fertility in Kenya is comparable to that of Brazil in early 1970s




                                               9
     d) Geographic and economic inequalities in HNP
        outcomes                                                                 Figure 7: Distribution of U5MR by
                                                                                           Region (2008)
      24.    As highlighted earlier, Kenya has made
      better progress in improving child health
      outcomes compared to that of maternal health.
      The Under 5 Mortality Rates (U5MR) declined
      by 36% from 115 deaths per 1,000 live births in
      2003 to 74 2008, while Infant Mortality Rate has



                Figure 8: Skilled birth attendants
                         during delivery




                                                                    dropped by 32% from 77 deaths per 1,000 in 2003 to
                                                                    52 in 200813. Neonatal Mortality Rate declined more
                                                                    than 50% from 44 in 2003 to 21 in 2008. However,
                                                                    these improvements were not equitably distributed, and
                                                                    inequalities continue to exist by geographic location
                                                                    and wealth as shown in Figures (7 and 9).

                                                       25.         The observed regional disparities in both
                                                       IMR and U5MR to some extent also reflect the
                                                       distribution of poverty, mother’s education that
      determines the child caring practices, household food security and access to water and sanitation and
      the role of broader economic, nutrition and social determinants on child mortality.

                                                                26.         Less than half of pregnant women in
          120          Figure 9: Infant and U5MR
                          by Wealth Quintiles
                                                                Kenya are attended by a skilled health worker
          100                                                   during delivery.     There are however wide
                                                                regional variations. In 2008 in Western parts of
           80
                                                                the country only about 29%, compared to 89%
           60                                                   and 74% in Nairobi and Central provinces
           40
                                                                respectively (Figure 8). Even within these areas
                                                                there are socio-economic differentials, as people
           20                                                   living in informal settlements of Nairobi are
            0                                                   reported to have limited access to public
                     Lowest                 Highest             facilities and are often serviced by private
                                                                providers offering poor quality services due to
                              IMR UMR                           lack of qualified personnel, equipment and
                                                                supplies14 Urban-rural, wealth and regional
      differences persist in access to and utilization of maternity services provided by skilled health workers.


13
 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, ICF Macro (2010): Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2008-09.
14
 African Population and Health Research Centre (2009). The maternal health challenges in poor urban communities. Policy brief 12, APHRC,
Nairobi.
                                                                    10
                                   Figure 10: Percentage of births delivered in a health facility

                120
                                                                                                          96.2
                100
                                                81.2
                                                       75.5
                80
            %




                60
                                                                                                                                       44
                40
                      19.5                                             18.9                   18.1                              15.8
                20

                  0
                             Elgeyo…
                              Busia



                            Garissa




                         Kakamega




                         Kirinyaga




                           Mandera




                           Nyamira




                              Siaya




                             Vihiga
                            Baringo




                              Isiolo


                            Kericho
                            Kiambu




                              Lamu




                            Nakuru

                              Narok




                           Samburu




                       Uasin Gishu
                               Kitui




                           Makueni

                           Marsabit

                             Migori


                            Nairobi




                              Nyeri




                        West Pokot
                        Tana River




                              Wajir
                         Machakos
                          Bungoma




                             Kwale
                           Laikipia




                          Mombasa
                           Muranga




                        Nyandarua




                       Taita Taveta


                          Transzoia
                           Turkana
                              Embu

                         Homa Bay

                            Kajiado




                            Kisumu




                              Meru
                             Bomet




                              Kilifi

                               Kisii




                              Nandi




                      Tharaka-Nithi




                             Kenya
        27.    The share of health facility deliveries (a proxy indicator for skilled attendance at birth) across
        counties is presented in Figure 1015 . These data obtained from the Health Management Information
        System may not reflect the true population level situation, but it clearly shows wide disparities across
        counties. Almost all women in Nyeri County deliver at a health facility (94%) compared to only 15.8%
        in Wajir. Similar disparities are observed for chronic malnutrition (an accurate proxy for poverty) and
        underweight. However, there are minimal disparities across counties in the percentage of fully
        immunized children.

        28.    What is interesting is the huge missed opportunity to                                         Figure 11: Missed opportunities for
        provide maternal health services in Kenya. While nearly 92%                              100              providing Maternal Care
        of women sought antenatal care at least once during their
        pregnancy, only about half of them (47%) received the                                        90
        recommended 4 antenatal visits in their last pregnancy16.                                    80
        Finally, the share further drops to 44% for those who received
        services from skilled health workers during child birth.                                     70

                                                                                                     60
     e) Health expenditure trends and impact of devolution on public
        expenditure                                                                                  50

                                                                                                     40
        29.    A functional summary chart of health care financing in
        Kenya before devolution is shown in Figure 12. Although data                                 30
        on health care expenditure after devolution are not available,                               20
        one would expect a similar pattern of health financing sources,
        and wide variations between counties. With devolution,                                       10
        counties receive a global budget, from which they decide what                                 0
        share to allocate to the health sector. Clearly the share of                                       Any AN Care Received 4 Delivered by
        county budget allocated to health largely depends on each                                                      AN Checks a skilled
        county’s leadership perceived priorities.                                                                                  provider


        30.    The Total Health Expenditure (THE) in 2009/2010 was
        equivalent to about 4.6% of Total Government Expenditure, a figure well below the 6% average of the
        African region, while Total per Capita Health Expenditure amounted to US$42.2. There is very limited


15
     Ministry of Health (2013). County Fact sheets 2012-prepared by Health Policy Project-Kenya
16
     Kenya National Bureau of Sstatistics, ICF Macro (2010): Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2008-09.
                                                                      11
     pooling in Kenya. Its health care system is funded predominantly through Out-of-Pocket (OOP)
     payments, which amounted to 40% of THE in 2005 and 37% in 2009.

     31.    Government funds accounted for 29% of THE in 2005 and 29% in 2009. Donor funding is quite
     high, amounting to a 32% share of THE in 2005 and 35% in 2009/201017,18. Between 2001/2002 and
     2009/2010, the total contributions of donor funds to total health expenditure increased from 16% to
     35%. A large proportion of these funds (24%) went to funding HIV/AIDS related programs. Donor
     funds are largely fragmented and with the largest chunk out of budget, crowd out government funding,
     and have contingent liabilities when donor funds decrease.

                             Figure 12: A functional summary of health financing in Kenya
      Revenue
      collection            General taxation              Out-of-pocket payments                             Donors




                                                                                                                          Voluntary
                                                                                                                          insurance
                                                                             NHIF
          Pooling              Ministry of Health/County                                       No pooling
                                     governments




                                                                                                                          insurance
                                                                                                                          Voluntary
                                                                                    NHIF
       Purchasing            Ministry of Health/County governments
                                                                                                    Individual

                         Public Hospitals, Health Centres and               Private-for-profit                 Faith based
        Provision
                         dispensaries                                                                          facilities

     32.    The devolution had a major impact on overall health financing. During the FY 2012-13, about
     two thirds of the KES 87 billion health budget was transferred to the equitable share for the 47 counties.
     In addition, the national government allocated conditional grants to level 5 hospitals, which
     unfortunately did not fully match the actual need of these referral facilities serving a cluster of counties.

     33.     Devolved health budget is one of the important contributors of the equitable share amounting to
     over a third of the total allocation. As per the constitutional mandate, the national government cannot
     enforce sectoral ring fencing on the equitable share and the counties are free to spend the money as per
     their voted budgets. While many counties may actually enhance their contribution to the health sector,
     there are risks that some counties may not be able to provide adequate resources. Also, tracking
     allocations and expenditures on health could be challenging as many counties include health staff
     salaries, which contribute to the largest share of public expenditure on health under the county recurrent
     executive budget.

     34.    Finally, the systems for disbursement and reporting of newly introduced innovative approaches
     such as HSSF, user fee exemption for primary care, and free maternity care, all require a shared vision
     of objectives, approaches, and systems between the national and county governments. Conditional
     grants will need to be established for these priority initiatives for ensuring that all necessary resources
     are available in a timely manner at the point of service delivery. Counties play their oversight role by
     approving work plans, supporting their implementation, measuring results, and reporting expenditure.
     The national government ensures compliance with country policies, regulation, and global
     commitments made by Kenya.


17
   Government of Kenya, Health Systems 2020 Project (2009). Kenya National Health Accounts 2005/2006. Health Systems 20/20 project, Abt
Associates Inc, Bethesda, MD.
18
   Ministry of Medical services, Ministry of public Health (2012). Kenya National Health Accounts 2009/10. Health Systems 2020.

                                                                 12
     f) Value for money and efficiency in public expenditure – Allocative and Technical

       35.    Like most developing countries Kenya faces challenges in ensuring better value for resources
       provided to the health sector. Inefficiencies are both allocative, and technical.

       36.    A notable share of the health budget is still taken up by hospitals, thereby adversely affecting
       the primary health care, which delivers both preventive/promotive and curative interventions, such as
       immunization, prevention and treatment of communicable diseases, family planning and maternal and
       child health care. Systematic investments in primary healthcare have helped countries like Rwanda to
       achieve the maternal and child health MDGs. The health worker program in Ethiopia delivers a well-
       targeted 16 packages of evidence based health and nutrition services, and helped the country to achieve
       MDG for child health. Brazil has made systematic investments in its family health program to improve
       access to basic health services and continues to invest in primary care.

       37.     Human Resources, the most
       critical element of the country service                               Figure 13: Health worker per 10,000
       delivery system requires two thirds of                                            population
       public expenditure on health.         We                   60.0
       therefore focus on technical efficiency of
       human resources.                                           50.0
                                                                  40.0
       38.     The most important challenge the
                                                   30.0
       Kenyan health sector faces is the uneven
       distribution of scarce Human Resources 20.0
       in health.        The recent Service 10.0
       Availability and Readiness Assessment
       Mapping19 clearly highlight huge              0.0
       disparities. Figure 13 shows the national
       average stands at less than 20 health staff
       for 10,000 Kenyans and evidence the
       huge variations among a selection of counties.

       39.     Even the limited availability of Human Resources gets further affected by high levels of
       absenteeism. The recent public expenditure tracking survey has shown that at a day of unannounced
       visits, one third of the health staff were absent from their places of work. Over four fifths of such
       absences were said to be authorized. Interestingly for nearly half of staff on authorized absence, no
       specific reason was mentioned. The new county governments bring administration closer to people and
       hopefully the increased oversight will be able to reduce such challenges.

 Figure 14: Absenteeism of health staff
                                                               40.        The service delivery indicators surveys using
       37.6%                                              standardized approaches show that Kenya health providers have
                        36.1%
                                         30.0%
                                                          higher knowledge levels relative to their counterparts in other
                                                          countries in the region. However, when it comes to practice
                                                          only half of the Kenyan providers were applying their
                                                          knowledge. Kenya therefore needs to optimize this unique
                                                          advantage of highly competent providers by providing adequate
                                                          supportive supervision, right incentives and appropriate
                                                          operating environment.
      Doctors      Clinical Officers     Nurses


19
     Ministry of Health (2013). Kenya Service Availability and Readiness Assessment Mapping.
                                                                       13
        41.     A recent study supported by the WB
        covering a sample of 35 hospitals, 295 health Figure 14: Knowledge Practice gap among Kenyan
        centers and 33 dispensaries showed that                         Providers
        inefficiencies exist in both the public and
        private sectors, but the private sector is generally 86%
                                                                    81%                 82%
        more efficient in all levels of care with the
                                                                             72%
        exception of health centers. Key findings from
        this study were (Figure 15)20:                          54%
                                                                                                                   47%            46%
        •    Faith based hospitals are the most efficient
             compared to public and private-for-profit                                                 28%
             hospitals.
        •    Using their current resources, public referral
             hospitals can increase their outputs by 18%;
             district hospitals by 27%; health centers by
                                                                Doctors     Clinical    Nurses    Midwives
             20% and dispensaries by 53%.
                                                                            Officers
        •    Government health centers are more efficient              Correct Diagnosis    Full treatment
             than private health centers. Private health
             centers operate at an efficiency level of 50%, indicating that they can double their outputs without
             necessarily increasing the share of resources.
        •    FBO dispensaries can increase their outputs by 42%, while FBO hospitals are operating at close to
             maximum capacity (94%).

        42.     Despite limitations in data availability                            Figure 15: Efficiency levels in public and private
        and scope of the analysis, the findings of this                                                 facilities
        study clearly highlight that UHC initiatives
                                                                                                         100%          94%
        should be accompanied by efforts to                                                                          91%
        strengthen health systems and reduce                                                             90%
                                                                                                                                 80%
        inefficiencies. Such efforts should involve a                                                    80%       73%
        detailed assessment of the causes of
        inefficiencies, redistribution of resources                                                      70%                                      62%
                                                                                      Efficiency level




                                                                                                                                                    58%
        across geographical regions and levels of care                                                   60%
        where necessary and, most importantly, review                                                                               50%
                                                                                                                                               47%
                                                                                                         50%
        and revise management approaches and tools.
        It is however important not to lose the equity                                                   40%
        focus in public sector provision and link                                                        30%
        payments to performance. Both individual and
        institutional incentives to improve efficiency                                                   20%
        and contribute to better health outcomes need                                                    10%
        to be built into health financing arrangements
                                                                                                          0%
        alongside with ensuring that all other aspects                                                              District    Health Centres Dispensaries
        essential to well-functioning of service                                                                   Hospitals
        delivery points are adequately and sustainably
                                                                                                          Public         Private-for-profit     FBOs
        covered. Financial incentives alone have
        ephemeral effects in motivating sustained
        good performance.




20
     World Bank (2013). Health Sector Efficiency in Kenya: Implications for fiscal space

                                                                          14
World Bank Group support for Kenya

           a) Past operations and outcomes

           43.    The World Bank Group has a long term engagement with the Kenyan health sector which started
           with a series of population projects in early 1970s. These projects helped to strengthen the country
           primary health care services delivery. It was followed by operations to support health sector reforms
           and enhance efficiency of the national referral hospital. As the generalized HIV epidemic started
           unfolding the Bank supported operations to provide multi-sector response that operated under the direct
           oversight of the President’s office. Unfortunately, cases of fraud and corruption adversely affected the
           health sector Bank’s engagement in 2006. The Bank’s subsequent engagement therefore prioritizes very
           strong governance measures to accompany all its projects and programmes. The post-election violence
           in 2007 and the subsequent splitting into two Ministries of Health slowed down partner engagement in
           the health sector.

           44.    In 2009 the sector context improved and the Bank actively re-engaged itself when Ministries of
           Health were patently keen to roll out reforms to improve primary health service delivery and pilot
           health insurance subsidies for the poor. At the same time Kenya played a strong role in promoting
           regional operations under the leadership of the East African Community.

           b) Ongoing operations and experiences

           45.     The World Bank supports two active operations at the country level. The Total War Against
           HIV/AIDS (US$133.5 million) focused on a strong preventive response to HIV involving community
           based organizations, complementing with supply of essential commodities such as, anti -Tuberculosis
           medicines and Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) for supporting the Government of Kenya’s
           efforts to achieve universal coverage for malaria prevention in high endemic areas. The recent Kenya
           AIDS indicators survey21 has shown that this project has successfully achieved most of its development
           objectives. The Kenya Health Sector Support Project (US$ 156.8 million) supported two key reforms
           started by Government of Kenya which included the HSSF providing direct cash transfers to primary
           health care facilities to improve planning and delivery of services; and the introduction of an all levels
           pull delivery system for EMMS. The external evaluations suggest that both reforms have contributed to
           improved overall service delivery. In addition, pilots were undertaken to study the operational
           feasibility and impact of Results Based Financing (RBF) and social accountability. In December 2013,
           an additional financing of US$ 61 million - which includes US$ 41 million equivalent IDA and US$20
           million grant from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund - was provided for scaling-up of RBF,
           support and evaluate the introduction of HISP and join ongoing efforts to build capacity of county
           health systems.

           46.    In addition, two regional operations, the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking
           Project (Kenya share US$23.5 million) and the East Africa Medicine Regulatory Harmonization Project
           (Kenya share US$ 0.5 million) are supporting strengthening of core public health functions following a
           harmonized regional approach.

           c) Support from IFC

           47.    The IFC has established the Health in Africa division to nurture private sector growth and
           naturally Kenya with its thriving private sector was among the first countries to benefit from this input
           that came from the World Bank Group. The IFC also undertook the strategic review of the NHIF and


   21
        National AIDS and STI Control Program, Ministry of Health, Kenya (2013). Kenya AIDS Indicator Survey 2012: Nairobi, Kenya.

                                                                         15
also supported a comprehensive review of the existing regulatory framework for the health sector that
resulted in the preparation of a draft health law.

d) Key challenges

48.     The ongoing devolution provides a great opportunity to enhance health system accountability
and make providers more responsive to users. However, as envisaged, too rapid devolution and lack of
clarity in the division of labor among national and county governments are slowing down the recent
gains made by Kenya in improving utilization of health services.

49.    The first challenge of effective communication between the two levels of the government has
been to a large extent resolved now with the creation of the Intergovernmental Technical Committee for
Health and the County Executives for Health Forum. However, efforts are still required to enhance the
understanding of the health staff as well as citizens about the respective roles and responsibilities of
both levels of government (Table 2).

                        Table 2: Overview of devolution structures in Kenya
                    Structure                          Chair           Comments
   Summit                                      President
                                                                       County Governor
   Council of Governors                        Elected Governor        elected by all
                                                                       Governors
   Intergovernmental Technical Committee       Governor selected by
                                                                       Advisory functions
   (Health)                                    the Council of
                                                                       to the Council of
                                               Governors
                                                                       Governors
   Sector Intergovernmental Forum (Health)         Cabinet Secretary
                                                                            Created by an Act of
                                                   CE Forum Chair, Co-
                                                                            Parliament
                                                   chair
                                                   One County               All County
                                                   Executive selected       Executives of Health
                                                   from the County          select the five
                                                   Health Executives        member County
   County Health Executives Forum
                                                   Forum                    Health Executives
                                                                            Forum to
                                                                            collectively
                                                                            represent their
                                                                            interests.
   County Executives for Health                             NA
   County Chief Officers for Health                         NA
   County Health Management Teams                           NA              Technical
   Each County has its own organizational set               NA
   up


50.     The second challenge is transition of human resources from the national level to the county level
and addressing the concerns about staff who are non-existent or working elsewhere (aka ghost
workers). The MOH has taken over the responsibility to pay for the health staff during the first 6
months of FY 2013-14 and the national government successfully transitioned the pay roll to counties in
January 2014. In the meanwhile counties undertook human resource audits to fix the problem of “ghost
workers”. Some Governors such as in Mandera also played a proactive role in recruiting staff to make
their primary healthcare services functional.
                                                 16
   51.     The third challenge is ensuring sufficient and sustained supply of EMMS to all service delivery
   points. The role of the KEMSA has drastically changed with the decentralized allocation of resources
   for EMMS. A detailed note on efforts made during past five years to improve pharmaceutical supply
   chain is included in the Annex 2. The capacity built and systems developed by KEMSA to ensure
   quality, efficiency and governance helped to fit in to the new role. All counties have now entered into a
   Memorandum Of Understanding with KEMSA, which is now increasingly trying to respond to the
   needs and wants of 48 demanding masters who have other options. However, there is still concern
   about sustained supply of important program items such as vaccines, TB and anti-retroviral drugs,
   condoms, and other family planning commodities. Also, clarity is required about which level of
   government is responsible to fund the purchase of those inputs that have to be replaced periodically
   such as cold chain equipment, LLINs, etc.

   52.     The fourth challenge is reorganization of the MoH for its structures to be adjusted to fit its newly
   defined functions (Table 3). A long process brought the current set up. While this is a step in the right
   direction, it has to continue as it has an impact on the reforms progress and the wider engagement with
   development partners. It is critical for the MoH to focus on its policy and oversight role and effectively
   support counties. Its role has a direct impact on the financial and technical modalities the counties will
   adopt when implanting arrangements of key policies that support UHC, such as elimination of user fees,
   free maternity care and the recently launched HISP.

    Table 3: National and County Exclusive Functions according to Schedule IV of the Constitution

    Functions                        National                                            County
    as per        1.   Health Policy                              1.   County health facilities and pharmacies;
    Schedule 4    2.   National referral health facilities        2.   Ambulance services;
    (Exclusive)   3.   Capacity building and technical            3.   Promotion of primary health care;
                       assistance to counties                     4.   Licensing &control of undertakings that sell
                                                                       food to the public
                                                                  5.   Veterinary services (excluding regulation of
                                                                       the profession);
                                                                  6.   Cemeteries, funeral parlours and crematoria;
                                                                       and
                                                                  7.   Refuse removal, refuse dumps and solid waste
                                                                       disposal


Framework for support from the World Bank Group

   a) Strategic Shift in HNP engagement

     The World Bank Group will focus on supporting the Government of Kenya to take on UHC to
     achieve the twin goals of elimination of extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. This
     means that by 2030 no one will be tipped into or kept in poverty due to expenditures on health, and
     the poorest 40% will have access to quality essential health services.

   b) Guiding principles:
      • Enhancing focus on service delivery with emphasis on quality of care and results;
      • Promoting financial protection to the poor;
      • Building sustainable institutions and effective and efficient management systems at all levels;
         Supporting partnerships – between different levels of governments, public and private sectors;
         and government and development partners; and
      • Working collectively as one World Bank Group

                                                             17
   c) Enhancing strategic policy dialogue

   •    Continue to provide technical support towards developing the UHC vision and strategy through active
        participation in relevant committees and technical working groups for health financing.

   •    Catalyze support from key partners committed to support the UHC agenda by identifying common areas of
        interest including possibility of jointly supported programs.
        • Immediate (1-2 years):
                  a. Minimize the side effects to service delivery quality and quantity the abrupt devolution to
                      county level has brought about.
                  b. Facilitate Kenya internal and international experience sharing.
        • Medium term (2-4 years):
                  a. Strengthen existing and, as necessary, build new sustainable financing institutions for facility
                      and systems at county and national levels.
                  b. Identify and test alternate options for improving delivery of services (Results Based Financing,
                      Health Insurance Subsidies for the Poor, Vouchers, etc.,) and rigorously evaluate and document
                      them.
        • Longer term (5 years+): Support Kenya to achieve UHC.

       The World Bank Group strategic engagement for Kenya would include a combination of lending and
       learning activities.

Lending:

       Building country capacity for achieving UHC

       1. Implementing Kenyan context specific UHC reforms requires sufficient capacity, continuous
       dialogue and knowledge exchange to learn from other countries that have implemented UHC. Such
       experience sharing helps Kenya to avoid some of the mistakes made by other countries while Kenyan
       experiences help other countries keen to take make progress towards the UHC. Specifically the WBG
       can support Kenya through:

        •   Working closely with the MoH and county governments, identify their institutional,
            managerial, and human capacity gaps to develop and implement specific capacity building
            activities. The potential areas for such capacity building include leadership and management;
            organizational and human resource development in devolved health system; financial
            management and procurement; public private partnerships in service provision, planning,
            monitoring and evaluation of health service delivery.
        •   In collaboration with local training institutions, support flexible capacity building efforts
            especially targeting the marginalized counties (i.e., Arid and Semi-Arid Lands). This will
            include the option of scholarships for diploma level nurses and medical technician training to
            youth with required qualifications selected by county governments and other specific training
            needs identified through capacity needs assessments. When indicated and/or possible,
            preference will be given to learning modalities that do not disrupt significantly service delivery.
        •   Strengthen existing mechanisms for intergovernmental dialogue such as Intergovernmental
            Forum on Health and County Chief Executives of Health Forum by strengthening existing
            liaison mechanisms with the national government.
        •   In collaboration with the World Bank Institute, support knowledge exchange programmes on
            UHC reforms.




                                                        18
       Strengthening institutions

       1. Identifying specific areas of weakness in institutional arrangements, organizational practices
          and governance set-up of key institutions responsible for health care financing, quality of care
          and regulation.
       2. Providing technical support to address identified areas of weakness collectively with other
          partners to support key institutions that are expected to play an important role in the transition
          to UHC. The main institutions would include the NHIF, Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA)
          and Kenya Accreditation Service (KENAS).

       Supporting Health Financing Reforms for UHC

       1. The recently approved additional financing will support the phase I of two key health financing
          reforms. An impact evaluation undertaken by the World Bank will inform decisions on scaling-
          up these innovations. These two reforms include :

                a. The RBF design will be further improved based on the lessons learnt from the Samburu
                   pilot and scaled up to 20 counties in arid and semi-arid parts of Kenya.
                b. The HISP will be piloted in all counties covering 500 households in each county. This
                   will be complemented by targeted initiatives to provide similar subsidies for the
                   vulnerable and marginalized populations

       2. The follow-on operation planned in FY 2015 will support the next phase of reforms in Kenya to
          accelerate progress towards UHC and this will be informed by the findings of the Impact
          Evaluation. The World Bank Group will play catalytic role to convene all partners that are keen
          to support UHC.

Learning:

   Supporting evidence based policy making

   1. Support capacity building for the design and implementation of evidence based policies. This will
      be done through supporting the creation of an UHC unit in the MoH, supporting investments in
      capacity building for the unit and offering technical support when needed.
   2. Strengthen partnerships with local training/research institutions (including universities and the
      Kenya Medial Training Colleges) to generate timely evidence to inform UHC policies and make
      midcourse corrections.
   3. Prepare policy briefs and technical papers on various topics related to service delivery, health
      financing, governance and quality:
          o Strategic options for improving delivery of quality Primary Health Care Services
          o Networking to rationalize hospital services for improving access to effective referral care in
              Kenya based on analysis of distribution of hospitals (including number of beds, large
              equipment), relative need and utilization patterns
            o   Qualitative research to identify the main causes of inefficiencies in health service delivery and
                inform the design of interventions to promote efficiency.
            o   Document innovative options for increasing domestic financing for health based on internal
                experiences to provide policy options to the Ministry of Health and the National Treasury.




                                                      19
                                                                                                                 Annex 1
                               Governments Functions as per the 2010 Constitution

The new Constitution has assigned, in Schedule IV, different tasks to the national and the county as exclusive
functions.
                                 Table 4: Categories of functions and implications


 Classification          Description                                           Implications
 Exclusive functions     Exclusive to the a level of government (according     Should be transferred to the respective
                         to Schedule 4)                                        level
 Concurrent              Functions assigned to both levels of Government       To be performed collaboratively by
 functions               through ‘unbundling’                                  both Governments
 Residual functions      Functions not assigned by the Constitution or         Assigned to the National level
                         national legislation to a county (CoK, art. 186 (3)


        Table 5: Exclusive Functions of National and County Departments of Health (CoK, Schedule 4)
Functions          National                                        County
as per             4. Health Policy                                8. County health facilities and pharmacies;
Schedule 4         5. National referral health facilities          9. Ambulance services;
(Exclusive)        6. Capacity building and technical              10. Promotion of primary health care;
                       assistance to counties                      11. Licensing &control of undertakings that sell
                                                                       food to the public
                                                                   12. Veterinary services (excluding regulation of
                                                                       the profession);
                                                                   13. Cemeteries, funeral parlours and crematoria;
                                                                       and
                                                                   14. Refuse removal, refuse dumps and solid waste
                                                                       disposal


                         Exclusive Functions of State and County Departments of Health

                     National level                                  County level: County Health Services
Kenyatta National Hospital (KNH)                             0016 Provincial Health Services
Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital (MT&RH)                   0017 District Health Services
Kenya Medical Training College (KMTC)                        0005 Environmental Health Services
Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA)                        0006 Communicable Disease Control
National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF)                      0008 Nutrition
National Quality Control Laboratory (NQCL)                   0009 Family Planning Maternal and Child Health
National Blood Transfusion Services                          0010 Health Education
Pharmacy and Poisons Board                                   0015 Health Informative System
National Public Health Laboratory                            0018 Food Control Administrative Services
Government Chemist                                           0022 Vector Borne Disease Control
Radiation Protection Board                                   0023 Communicable Disease Control and Management
Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)                     0028 Provincial Administration and Planning
Mathari Mental Hospital                                      0029 Rural Health Centres & Dispensaries
Spinal injury Hospital                                       0030 Rural Health Training and Demonstration Centre




                                                            20
                    Table 7: Concurrent Functions of State and County Departments of Health

                                           National and County Level
              State Department of Health                County: County health services including
Legislation                                             Legislation
Resource mobilization                                   Resource mobilization
Health financing (Policy & regulation)                  Health financing (implementation)
Financial Management                                    Financial Management
Planning and budgeting                                  Planning and budgeting
Maintenance of health infrastructure, including         Maintenance of health infrastructure, including medical
medical equipment, devices and plant                    equipment, devices and plant
Quarantine administration                               Quarantine administration
Disaster preparedness and response                      Disaster preparedness and response
Disease prevention & control (policy & coordination),   Disease prevention & control, including surveillance
including surveillance
Emergencies/outbreaks                                   Emergencies/outbreaks
Partnerships, including Public and Private              Partnerships, including Public and Private
Intergovernmental relations                             Intergovernmental relations
Procurement of health products and technologies          Procurement of health products and technologies
HRH management and development                          HRH management and development

Monitoring and Evaluation                               Monitoring and Evaluation
Health research (regulation and implementation)         Health research (implementation)
Health Information systems                              Health information systems
Public relations                                        Public relations

                     Table 8: Residual functions of the State Department responsible for Health
                                                National Level only
Regulation of Health Products & Technologies
Regulation, setting norms and standards
Regulation of Health Professionals & Services (Boards & Councils)
Port health services
International health relations and diplomacy
International Health Regulations (IHR)
Regulation of medical training (tertiary & middle level)
Food Safety Policy & Regulation




                                                         21
                                                                                                     Annex 2

                          Improving Pharmaceutical Supply Chain – Kenyan experiences

1.      Timely availability of Essential Medicines and Medical Supplies (EMMS) is critical for delivering
quality health services. Like most developing countries Kenya also has made efforts to ensure sustained
supply chain of EMMS. Two major challenges faced in achieving this objective are unpredictable flow
affecting timely procurement of EMMS by the Kenya Medical Supplies Agency (KEMSA) and high levels
of wastage as well as surplus stocks at the facility level.

2.        To reduce high levels (up to 20%) of wastages and ensure supplies responsive to local needs, Kenya
piloted the pull system of supply in 2006. The pull system allows facilities to place orders based on their
drawing rights while the wastage rates tend to be higher under the push system of supplying prepackaged
kits. The Government of Kenya was finally able to scale-up the pull system to all primary healthcare
facilities by February 2013. The MOH facilitated establishment of drawing rights for districts while districts
in turn made drawing rights for individual facilities based on work load. This initiative was complemented
by support from the World Bank and Danida to capitalize and reform the KEMSA. The technical assistance
provided by the US Government also helped implementation of automated systems. The government of
Kenya started to reimburse KEMSA upon submission of proof of delivery to health facilities every quarter
which ensured replenishment of the capital and better procurement planning.

3.        Simultaneously the government of Kenya reconstituted the KEMSA Board which hired competent
staff through open market recruitment. KEMSA also strategically outsourced warehousing and transport
while instituting proper tracking systems and introduced barcoding of all its supplies. Each batch of EMMS
procured by KEMSA is subjected to quality testing by a WHO pre-qualified laboratory before releasing it
into the supply chain. This enabled KEMSA to effectively respond to the changing paradigm and improve
its efficiency and transparency. A comparison of KEMSA procurement prices undertaken by the MOH in
2011 has shown that at the aggregate level KEMSA was able to procure at 74% of the median international
reference price.

4.       A case study undertaken by the Bank assessed the effect of KEMSA reforms in improving the
provision of EMMS to poorer locations. This was done by regressing KEMSA supplies with district level
poverty data. The study showed that per capita value of supplies made by KEMSA were marginally higher
in districts with highest proportion of the poor (75%) compared to districts where about a quarter of the
population was living below poverty line (K.Sh99 vs. K.Sh86). The study also showed that it costs
KEMSA more to ship supplies to poorer districts compared to better-off districts, probably due to longer
distances from Nairobi, and dispersed location of facilities in such districts.

5.      The public expenditure tracking survey 2013 has shown marginal improvements in availability of
                                                    essential medicines with much enhanced availability
         Figure 16: Availability of tracer drugs    of commodities for maternal health.
               in pull and push facilities
                                                 6.       The devolution resulted in a major change in
                                                 the existing arrangements to procure and distribute
                                                 EMMS. The resources for supplying EMMS are now
                                                 devolved to counties which are at their liberty to
                                                 procure EMMS. Due to political compulsions, the
                                                 Kenyan devolution process was accelerated which
                                                 resulted in disruption of supply chain. The MOH has
                                                 made transition arrangements by allowing KEMSA to
                                                 release supplies for first two quarters of FY 2013-14.
                                                 Meanwhile KEMSA and another important agency
undertaking pooled procurement for faith based organizations the Mission for Essential Medicines and
                                                     22
Supplies (MEDS) both reached out to counties. As it stands, KEMSA has entered in to memoranda of
understanding with all 47 counties and during the third quarter of FY 2013-14 forty four counties have
placed orders. There are however concerns that there could be an overall reduction in volume of ordering
by counties as they have to purchase these commodities out of their unconditional grants and therefore have
to compete with other country priority purchases. There is therefore a significant risk that hospitals would
be favored at the expenses of lower level facilities thereby forcing them to reintroduce some form of cost
sharing for guaranteeing their own functionality.. A quick comparison of supplies made by KEMSA in the
third quarter in the past three years, when the funding was still centralized, shows that generally orders
made by counties in the 3rd quarter of FY 2013-14 was higher compared to corresponding period of
previous two years. Further, the share of orders placed for rural health facilities (RHF) was higher than that
of the hospitals. A more detailed analysis presented in Figure 18 showed that 27 out of the 44 counties,
ordered 50% or more of supplies made to Rural Health Facilities (dispensaries and health centers). While
this is a positive trend, more careful security is required by the MOH to carefully track these trends and also
compliance with essential drug list. Counties need to focus on improving quantification, timely ordering,
proper storage and rational use which makes it win -win for all.




       Figure 17: Value of EMMS supplies made by KEMSA                       Figure 18: Distribution of Counties by share of
        during the 3rd quarter of FY 2010-11, 2011-12 and                  expenditure on EMMS allocated to Rurual Health
                     2012-13 by type of facility                            Facilities in Q3 of 2011/12, 2012/13 and 2013/14

1400                                                             25
                                                                                                                                       21
1200                                                                                                                         19
                                                                 20
1000                                                                                                 16                           16
                                                   664
 800                                                             15
                                                                      11                                  10
 600                            487.4                                                8
                                                                 10
 400                                                                                         5   6                   6   6
                                                   587                     4
 200          169.9                                               5            2         3
                                380.7                                                                            1
              190.5
   0                                                              0
              2011/12           2012/13           2013/14              <30%          30-40%      40-50%          50-60%        60%+

                        Hospital      RHF                                            2011/12     2012/13       2013/14




                                                            23
                                                                                                                              Annex 3
                                     Table 1. KENYA Population projections (World Bank)
                                                             Projection (000s)
AGE GROUP                  2010              2015      2020         2025           2030       2035        2040      2045       2050

TOTAL M+F                40,513             46,313   52,527       58,999         65,840     73,126       80,798    88,682     96,600
MALES
0-4                       3,358              3,749    4,013        4,205          4,465      4,777        5,074     5,298      5,460
5-9                       2,873              3,249    3,643        3,913          4,114      4,383        4,704     5,008      5,240
10-14                     2,422              2,829    3,206        3,602          3,875      4,079        4,351     4,673      4,980
15-19                     2,164              2,384    2,790        3,168          3,564      3,838        4,044     4,317      4,640
20-24                     2,070              2,122    2,340        2,743          3,119      3,514        3,789     3,997      4,270
25-29                     1,782              2,018    2,072        2,287          2,684      3,058        3,451     3,726      3,935
30-34                     1,425              1,724    1,958        2,013          2,225      2,615        2,984     3,374      3,649
35-39                     1,081              1,364    1,659        1,890          1,945      2,152        2,533     2,897      3,282
40-44                       793              1,022    1,299        1,587          1,813      1,868        2,070     2,442      2,799
45-49                       608                742      963        1,232          1,511      1,730        1,786     1,982      2,344
50-54                       487                564      691          904          1,162      1,431        1,642     1,698      1,888
55-59                       394                448      520          640            841      1,088        1,344     1,545      1,601
60-64                       285                356      405          471            583        771        1,001     1,241      1,431
65-69                       186                248      310          353            413        514          684       892      1,111
70-74                       141                150      201          252            289        340          427       572        751
75+                         165                178      192          237            298        358          430       535        703
TOTAL                    20,234             23,148   26,263       29,496         32,900     36,516       40,313    44,198     48,085
FEMALES
0-4                       3,306              3,695    3,956        4,145          4,400      4,704        4,991     5,206      5,356
5-9                       2,842              3,216    3,611        3,881          4,080      4,344        4,655     4,948      5,166
10-14                     2,400              2,805    3,182        3,580          3,853      4,056        4,323     4,635      4,929
15-19                     2,150              2,369    2,774        3,153          3,553      3,828        4,033     4,301      4,615
20-24                     2,067              2,115    2,334        2,738          3,117      3,517        3,795     4,001      4,270
25-29                     1,781              2,017    2,070        2,288          2,688      3,066        3,466     3,744      3,951
30-34                     1,398              1,717    1,954        2,012          2,229      2,625        2,999     3,396      3,674
35-39                     1,013              1,328    1,645        1,883          1,946      2,162        2,550     2,920      3,312
40-44                       761                949    1,258        1,572          1,811      1,878        2,091     2,472      2,836
45-49                       639                711      892        1,195          1,504      1,742        1,813     2,022      2,395
50-54                       552                600      666          842          1,137      1,441        1,675     1,748      1,954
55-59                       459                520      563          625            795      1,081        1,376     1,606      1,681
60-64                       329                426      482          521            581        743        1,016     1,301      1,524
65-69                       214                295      383          433            470        526          677       934      1,202
70-74                       166                179      248          324            368        402          453       589        820
75+                         202                224      247          313            407        494          571       661        830
TOTAL                    20,279             23,165   26,265       29,504         32,940     36,609       40,485    44,484     48,515
Dependency
ratio (%)                   82.2              81.6     79.1          74.7          69.7        65.6        63.4      62.0       60.9

                                       Table 2. Projections for Key Fertility Indicators (World Bank)
                   Indicator                        2010-15      2015-20        2020-25     2025-30     2030-35    2035-40    2040-45
Birth rate (per 1,000 people)                           36.9         34.5          31.8         30.0        28.6       27.3       25.7
Death rate (per 1,000 people)                           10.0          9.1           8.4          7.9         7.5        7.2        7.0
Rate of natural increase (per 100 people)                2.7          2.5           2.3          2.2         2.1        2.0        1.9
Net migration rate (per 1,000 people)                   -0.2         -0.2          -0.2         -0.2        -0.1       -0.1       -0.1

Population growth rate (average annual %)                2.7          2.5           2.3          2.2         2.1        2.0        1.9
Total fertility rate (births per woman)                  4.6          4.3           4.0          3.7         3.5        3.2        3.1
Net reproduction rate (female births per woman)          1.9          1.8           1.7          1.6         1.6        1.5        1.4
Life expectancy at birth (years)                        57.9         59.6          61.2         62.8        64.4       65.7       66.9
Life expectancy at age 15 (years)                       50.1         51.0          52.0         53.0        53.9       54.7       55.5
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)           58.1         52.9          48.5         43.9        39.3       35.2       31.8
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)                      89.0         79.3          71.4         63.5        55.5       48.5       42.8




                                                                    24
