                                                                92267

Options for Conditional Grants to improve Primary Healthcare Service
                              Delivery




                           Final Report




                          September 2014
Context:

The World Bank along with the Government of Kenya (GoK) and other donors is financing the
Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF). The HSSF has been providing small grants directly to
health facility management committees of over 3000 Primary Health Care Facilities
(Dispensaries and Health Centers) in Kenya. This is a GoK led initiative to address the
challenge of timely availability of operation and maintenance funds to health facilities as several
public expenditure reviews identified that funds transferred to erstwhile districts were not
reaching the facilities. This initiative builds on successful experiments undertaken in the Coastal
region.

These primary care facilities form the backbone of health care delivery in Kenya and the 2013
health care utilization survey has shown that overall utilization of outpatient care in Kenya has
increased (from 1.9 visits in 2003 to 3.1 visits in 2013), and the public sector remains the main
source of care, especially for the poor. The HSSF becomes more critical with the announcement
of new government’s policy of free primary care aimed at further improving the access to
essential health care. Currently, the Ministry of Health (MoH) is using the HSSF platform to
transfer the Kenyan Shilling (KSH) 700 million provided by the National Government to
compensate these health facilities for the loss of health revenues.

External evaluations clearly indicate that the HSSF is adding value to the delivery of primary
healthcare services in Kenya. An independent Citizen’s Report Card exercise of HSSF
undertaken by Family Care International (October 2012) in Kitui and Nakuru Counties showed
that a majority of the interviewed clients noted overall improvements in the quality of service,
cleanliness and reduced waiting time compared to the past one year. A facility survey covering
randomly selected health facilities undertaken by the Kenya Institute for Public Policy and
Research (KIPPRA) in 2012 has shown that a majority of the sampled facilities received HSSF
grants and most of them (98%) had health facility management committees (HFMCs) in place
and over half of such committees were elected. Over three fourths of the facilities (77%)
disclosed financial information to the public. However, the study identified the need to
strengthen financial record keeping at the facility level and the HSSSF

Impact of Devolution on HSSF:

Prior to devolution, a Fund was created at the MoH through a legal notice for pooling GoK and
donor monies with oversight provided by the National Health Services Committee. The HSSF
grants from this Fund were managed by the secretariat established at the Ministry of Health,
which was releasing grants based on plans approved and results confirmed by the District Health
Management teams after receiving endorsement by the National Health Services Committee.
The MoH was also releasing authorization to incur expenditure, while facilities were sending
their utilization reports, which were consolidated at the district level followed by the national
level to report back to the Parliament and the World Bank. The accountability ultimately rested
with the Fund administrator, the Permanent Secretary (PS) for health. This arrangement worked
well as facility staff were national civil servants and therefore accountable to the PS for health.

With the devolution, these arrangements needed to be revised to reflect the new accountability
environment. The Counties are now responsible for the delivery of essential health services and
facility staff have been seconded to County governments and now report to 47 County Chief
Officers of Health.

Options for HSSF funds flow in devolved setting:

Based on the extensive discussions the World Bank Health and Financial Management teams,
working closely with the accountable devolution team, consulted with a wide range of
stakeholders on how the funds should be managed in future. Finally, a consensus was reached
that they should take the form of a “conditional grant” to the Counties. This proposal was
arrived at after exhaustive consultations facilitated by the External Resources Department of the
Treasury with Commission for Revenue Allocation, Commission for Implementation of
Constitution, Council of County Governors and the Accountant General and Budget Supply
department.

Considering the context that the HSSF was established to address the challenge of funds that
could not reach the primary care facilities, it is proposed that the actual disbursement of the cash
should be made as was in the past – directly to the facility bank account. This is the fundamental
requirement of World Bank’s financing agreement with the Government of Kenya.

Proposed option for the Conditional Grant:

       The summary of the proposed key FM arrangements is as follows:

   1. The additional funds will be administered in accordance with the Project Agreement and
      Project Appraisal document for the Kenya Health Sector Support Project.

   2. The funds provided under the project would be treated as conditional grants from the
      Ministry of Health (MoH) to the Counties, and would be reflected in the MoH budget as
      a transfer to the 47 counties. The conditions will be: (a) Counties must include these
      funds in the County Department of Health budget; (b) Counties must approve the annual
      facility work-plans, which must incorporate all sources of revenue for the facility; and (c)
      Counties must budget for essential medicines and medical supplies for each rural health
      facility as per the drawing rights established from time to time.

   3. The County Governments will be responsible for triggering the release of the funds based
      on the approved plans and results in their respective jurisdictions. These funds would be
      transferred directly from the Project bank account with MoH to the respective health
      facilities bank accounts upon receiving communication from the County Governments.
      The first releases will be made on the basis of previous quarter’s achievement of the
      facility. Subsequent replenishment of funds to the health facilities would only be done
       when the relevant County Government is satisfied that the earlier advances have been
       properly accounted.

   4. The additional funds would be included in the budgets of each of the 47 counties as
      conditional grants.

   5. The County Governments would ensure efficient use of funds for intended purposes and
      monitor the achievement of results by their respective health facilities. This role
      specifically includes: (a) approving the work-plans from the health facilities and
      incorporating these in the county annual works plan, as well as the County budget
      approved by the County Assembly; (b) triggering release of funds to the relevant health
      facilities, issuing Authority to Incur Expenditures (AIEs) to health facilities; (c)
      undertaking verification of results following agreed protocols and reporting consolidated
      results and financial statements of the health facilities, (d) capturing health facility
      expenditures into IFMIS at the County Treasury level; and (d) dealing with audit queries
      from the Auditor General and other reviewers.


   6. The HSSF funds will be managed in accordance with the Public Finance Management
      Act 2012, and attendant Regulations. The County Government Accounting Officer will
      be responsible for accounting and financial reporting of the HSSF funds, with copies of
      quarterly and annual reports to the Ministry of Health, National Treasury and Controller
      of Budget.

   7. The audit of the HSSF funds will be conducted by the Auditor General or private auditors
      as maybe approved by the Auditor General in consultation with the World Bank.
      Questioned costs shall be recoverable from the County and may result in withholding of
      subsequent disbursements to the concerned County.


The Council of Governors will coordinate the implementation of the Program; assist in resolving
any operational challenges that may arise by engaging with other stake-holders including the
National Treasury, Commission for Revenue Allocation,

Advantages of the proposed option:

   •   Counties will be accountable for approving the plans that determine how the HSSF funds
       will be used, which is in line with the direct management control of the facility staff, and
       their constitutional responsibility for delivering primary health care services.
   •   Facilities would have a single plan and budget that incorporates all sources of funding
       (from HSFF, from County Government and from other donors as well as CDF/LATIF).
       This helps in integrated planning and accounting for all resources.
   •   Over time, conditions could be introduced on increasing county share with matching
       funds, which will transform from the predominant dependence from the national
       government to increased County responsibility to fund all inputs required for delivering
       primary health care. This addresses the sustainability after donor funding comes to an
       end.

Consistency with the legal and Public Financial Management Act

The HSSF funds would be budgeted at both national and County levels. While the national
budget shows the HSSF as a conditional grant, it will be shown in the County budget as an
Appropriation in Aid (A-in A). The A-in-A (funds which are not deposited in to the County
revenue fund) are permitted in Article 207 of the constitution if “reasonably excluded by an Act
of Parliament”. The HSSF regulations do not contravene the PFM Act in any way as it is a
public fund established under the PFM Act that is already in existence and not a newly created
one that would need approval of Parliament. That would only arise if the fund was existing for
the first time. For HSSF not to exist, it would need to be wound up a process which requires
approval of the National Assembly. The Auditor General would also have to carry out an audit.
All this has currently not happened or even been initiated by the Cabinet Secretary.


The PFM act (an Act of Parliament) permits A-in-A under Section 109 (2) (b) if funds “may in
accordance with other legislation, this Act of County legislation, be retained by the county
government entity, which received it for the purpose of defraying its expenses”. The
arrangement proposed would therefore be lawful provided the funds appear in the county budget
estimates and in the county appropriation act (which would qualify as “county legislation” under
this provision).


Secondly section 50(7) of the PFM Act further allows for payment of loan proceeds into ANY
OTHER PUBLIC FUND ESTABLISHED BY THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT OR ITS
ENTITIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The HSSF is a national public fund,
and has been established by the cabinet secretary in accordance with the HSSF Regulations
under the PFM Act.
