                                            92727
Unpacking Performance and Empowerment
in Female Farmers’ Groups
THE CASE OF THE FADAMA PROJECT IN NIGERIA


Raewyn Porter
Diane Zovighian

November 2014

PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
                                                     PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




table of contents

 Acknowledgments                                                                    iii


 Abbreviations                                                                      iv


 Executive Summary                                                                  6


 Introduction                                                                       14

   Gender Gaps in Nigerian Agriculture	                                             14
   Women in Agriculture Projects in Nigeria: The Case of Fadama	                    16
   Research Questions	                                                              18
   Approach and Methodology	                                                        18
   Structure of the Report                                                          21


 A. Women’s Access To, and Performance In, Agricultural Groups                      23

   A.1. Targeting and Selection of Women in the Fadama III Project	                 23
     A.1.a Gender Implications of Community-Based Targeting: Men’s Bridging Role	   23
     A.1.b Accessing Executive Positions in Female Groups: The Weight of Initial    26
     Endowments	
   A.2. What Makes a Group Perform?	                                                29
     A.2.a Defining and Comparing Group Performance	                                29
     A.2.b Variables Affecting Group Performance	                                   30
   A.3. What Affects Individual Performance?	                                       33
     A.3.a Defining and Comparing Individual Performance	                           33
     A.3.b Factors Affecting Individual Performance	                                35

 B. Creating Opportunities for Women Through Domestic, Social, and Productive       38
    Investments
   B.1. Framing Women’s Expenditure Choices	                                        38
     B.1.a	   Where Do Women Choose to Spend Their Additional Income?	              38

                                                 2
August 2014




      B.1.b	  Factors Affecting Women’s Expenditure Choices	                          40
    B.2. Women’s Options: From Safety Nets to Productive Investments	                 41
      B.2.a	  Domestic Expenditures	                                                  41
      B.2.b	  Social Expenditures	                                                    44
      B.2.c	  Productive Expenditures	                                                45
    B.3. Empowerment at the Household and Community Levels	                           49


  C. CONCLUDING REMARKS	                                                              52

    C.1. Key Findings on Targeting, Performance, and Empowerment	                     52
    C.2. Broader Policy Messages and Further Research	                                54


  Annex 1: Distribution of Fadama Registration and Benefits among Male, Female, and   59
  Mixed FUGs in Ogun State	


  Annex 2: Selected Question Guides	                                                  62


  Selected Bibliography	                                                              67




                                               3
                                                   PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




acknowledgements
  This study was designed and authored by Raewyn Porter and Diane Zovighian, under the
  strategic guidance of Caroline Mary Sage and the oversight of Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
  and Ian Bannon. The field research was conducted collaboratively by a team led by Raewyn
  Porter and Diane Zovighian and comprising four national researchers: Sola Ojo, Temilade
  Sesan, Funmi Soetan, and Dixon Torimiro. Olukemi Akinsola, Philip Ejembi, Kanbak Labar,
  Deborah Olumolu, and Joseph Ellong provided administrative and logistical support.

  We are grateful to the Task Team Leader of the Fadama project, Abimbola Adubi, and his
  team, including Seenithamby Manorahan and Sheu Salau, for their constant support and
  advice. We are also grateful to the National Fadama Coordination Office and Ogun State
  Fadama Coordination Office for providing us with the data, information, and logistical
  support required for this study. Special thanks go to the Fadama facilitators in Ogun State
  for their time and guidance during the field research and to the Fadama beneficiaries for
  their time and trust.


  We thank our peer reviewers, Lucas Kolawole Akapa, Pirkko Leena Poutiainen, and
  Jennifer Solotaroff, for their thoughtful insights and suggestions on the concept note and
  Pirkko Leena Poutiainen and Maria Beatriz Orlando for their helpful comments and ideas
  on the draft report. We also thank Markus Goldstein for his detailed comments on the draft
  report, as well as Indira Konjhodzic and Michael Wong for their insightful feedback. The
  final report was designed and produced by Hillary Eason.


  The study benefitted greatly from the feedback received from representatives of the
  Federal Government of Nigeria, academia, civil society, and international organizations
  during the World Bank/Federal Government of Nigeria Technical Dialogue on Gender and
  Agriculture held in Abuja in May 2013.




                                               4
August 2014




abbreviations
     ADP      Agriculture Development Program


     ATA      Agriculture Transformation Agenda


     CBT      Community-Based Targeting

     CDD      Community-Driven Development


     FCA      Fadama Community Association


     FUG      Fadama User Group


     GDP      Gross Domestic Product


     IFPRI    International Food Policy Research Institute


     LFDC     Local Fadama Development Committee


     LGA      Local Government Area


     NBS      National Bureau of Statistics


     SFCO     State Fadama Coordination Office




                                              5
                                                      PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




executive summary


Women play a significant role in producing, processing, and marketing staple
and cash crops in Nigeria, but their ability to expand production is constrained by insecure rights
to land, difficulties in securing labor and credit, and inequitable access to herbicides, fertilizers,
and extension services. Given the challenges faced by female farmers, the inclusion of women has
been a primary goal of the National Fadama Development Project. This project aims to reduce
rural poverty and increase food security through the transfer of financial and technical resources
to beneficiary Fadama User Groups (FUGs) under matching grant arrangements.


In an agricultural sector marked by entrenched gender inequalities, the Fadama project provides
intriguing examples of economic achievements among female farmers. By the mid-term review
of Fadama III in 2013, women represented 41 percent of registered participants in FUGs and the
income of female heads of households participating in the program had increased by about 50
percent—the greatest increase in both absolute and percentage terms for any category of project
participants.


Based on an in-depth qualitative study of successful female FUGs in the Fadama Project in Ogun
State, South-West Nigeria, this paper aims to provide fresh insights on how an agriculture project
can help boost production and income for female farmers, and how project results can affect
women’s economic empowerment.


Section A presents the factors that help target women and support their improved performance
in FUGs. The objective is to explain why and how—in the Nigerian context, which is generally
characterized by poor outcomes for female farmers—some female farmers have successfully come
together and performed under the project, managing to increase their production and income.


Section B discusses the impact of women’s increased income under the project on their economic

                                                  6
 August 2014




   empowerment. The aim is to understand how the increased income reported by members of
   female FUGs is spent, depending on the structure and needs of the household, and how women’s
   role in household expenditure negotiations has evolved, or not, toward more economic security or
   economic autonomy.


A.	 Women’s Access to, and Participation in, Agricultural Groups

a1) Targeting and Selection of Women in the Fadama III Project

   Consistent with community-driven development (CDD) approaches, the Fadama project employs
   community-based targeting and selection of beneficiaries. The targeting mechanisms are largely
   informal and flexible. Information on the project is delivered to communities through various
   channels, including traditional and religious leaders as well as unions and professional associations.
   Inclusion in the FUGs appears to be determined by interpersonal networks. In particular, women
   tend to depend on the support of men to enter the project. Men, whether as husbands or as local
   leaders and elites, facilitate the inclusion of women by channelling information on the project to
   them, encouraging them to join, registering the FUG, and/or providing financial assistance for the
   matching contribution required by the project to acquire assets. Men play an important role in
   supporting women’s access to the Fadama project for three main reasons: men tend to be more
   literate than women, have more income, and be more connected to social and power networks.

   Why do men lift the barriers to women’s entry to Fadama? First, men and women are economically
   interdependent in the cassava and palm oil value chains, as men rely on wives and female relatives
   to process their crops. As such, Fadama support for mechanized processing methods presents
   economic advantages for men, providing them with more efficient and productive processing.
   Second, because the inclusion of women has been promoted heavily by Fadama facilitators, the
   existence of female FUGs gives the umbrella Fadama Community Associations (FCAs) a progressive
   image. Increased visibility within the Fadama project increases their chances to access assets and
   services in subsequent rounds of Fadama financing.


   From a gender perspective, women’s dependence on men in accessing the project can be perceived
   as problematic, but from a functional perspective the share of women participating is substantially
   higher than in many other World Bank-supported government programs.


                                                     7
                                                           PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




a2) What Makes a Group Perform?

  Group performance varies considerably. For example, some groups showed greater capacity to meet
  their counterpart contributions for asset acquisition in a short time frame, or to show resilience in
  the face of delays and complications in obtaining assets. Three variables affected the performance
  of female FUGs:

      (i) Social cohesion: The best-performing FUGs tended to be groups characterized by high levels
      of social cohesion.9 Social cohesion generally stems from preexisting geographic or community
      ties.


      (ii) Economic needs and ties: The cash constraints of individual women have a direct impact on
      their FUG’s performance. The high opportunity cost of setting aside scarce cash to save for
      subsidized assets and waiting for their procurement poses a threat to group cohesion, as cash-
      constrained women are at risk of dropping out of the FUG. The nature of economic ties among
      members also affects the FUG’s performance. For example, FUGs that regularly perform joint
      economic activities appear to have more established systems of mutual economic support and
      to perform more effectively.


      (iii) Men’s financial and technical support: Variations in group performance also arise in response
      to the level of financial and technical support that female groups receive from external actors,
      in particular male family and community members who are members of sister FUGs or apex
      FCAs. Men tend to provide administrative support and technical assistance with the operation
      and maintenance of machinery.


a3) What Affects Individual Performance?

   The research found significant differences among individual female FUG members in terms of
   access to Fadama benefits and production increases. For example, though 90 percent of women
   reported some level of income increase over what they earned prior to joining the FUG, the amount
   of the increase varied substantially. Interviews indicated that, at least in the initial stage, access to
   and use of Fadama benefits depended on individuals’ initial capital endowments and how much




                                                      8
 August 2014




   financial and technical support they received from their spouse or male relatives. Women with
   higher initial capital and/or external support tended to gain access to more benefits and to have
   more opportunities to expand production and increase income.


   Such intragroup variation might raise concerns about inequities among group members. However,
   successful FUGs bring together women with varying levels of resources, which has spillover benefits
   in that better-educated women and those with greater initial financial endowments appear to play
   a critical role in running and sometimes financing female FUGs, allowing less educated and poorer
   women to expand their opportunities.



B.	 Creating Opportunities for Women Through Domestic, Social,
  and Productive Investments

b1) Framing Women’s Expenditure Choices

   Increased income gained from accessing and using Fadama benefits was expended across three
   categories (which are not mutually exclusive):

      (i) Domestic expenditure, including household food, schooling costs, rent, utility costs, and
      clothing. It is important to understand that, in Yoruba culture, men and women account for
      their income and expenditure separately and a husband “puts down” the primary contribution
      for domestic expenditure while a wife “tops it up” with her money.

      (ii) Social expenditure, including donations to extended family “rite of passage” ceremonies
      (such as the naming ceremony after a baby’s birth) and general support to the extended family,
      especially aging parents. Such expenditure can be considered a form of safety net.


      (iii) Productive expenditure aimed at expanding or diversifying one’s business. This spending
      includes buying or renting productive assets such as land, processing machines, and equipment.




                                                   9
                                                           PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




   The expenditure choices that women make within these three broad categories were found to be
   overlaid by three variables:

          (i) Household type, including male-headed monogamous, male-headed polygamous, and
          female-headed households;


          (ii) Stage of the family life cycle, such as whether school-age, young adult, or independent
          children are present, or the age of the woman; and


          (iii) Economic status, including access to assets, social capital, and external financial support.


b2) Women’s Options: From Safety Nets to Productive Investments

   These three variables provide insights into why women spend their additional income on domestic
   and social responsibilities and/or expand or diversify their business interests. For example,
   understanding the household type helps explain why women from polygamous and female-
   headed households—which may not have access to support from men—were found to spend a
   higher proportion of their income on domestic expenditures and less on social and productive
   expenditures than women in monogamous households.


   Similarly, the household’s stage in the family life cycle plays a significant role in determining
   domestic expenditure for all household types; women whose households include school-age
   children and young adults tend to spend more in support of the educational or small business
   needs of their children, while older women may receive remittances from independent children.


   Finally, women’s economic status helps explain their expenditure patterns. Women with higher
   additional income (generally based on better initial capital endowments) are able to meet domestic
   and social expenditures more readily from existing (pre-FUG) income, allowing them to spend
   more of their additional post-FUG income in productive areas.




                                                     10
 August 2014




b3) Empowerment at the Household and Community Level

   Looking beyond additional income and expenditure patterns, this research investigated how
   women’s increased assets, income, and capabilities gained under the Fadama project affected their
   perceptions of their influence and autonomy in the household and community. The majority (71
   percent) of female beneficiaries felt that they had been empowered by the project. In particular,
   57 percent of women reported feeling empowered in the community. This may be explained by the
   fact that women who are able to meet their social obligations, and thereby support extended family
   and community rites of passage, are more likely to feel that their social capital in the community
   is higher.


   Far fewer (7 percent) female FUG members reported feeling empowered within the household.
   Women who did report feeling empowered in their household were more likely to be investing in
   assets and in furthering their business interests, and to be receiving support from their spouse.


   Spousal support plays an important role in obtaining assets, boosting production, and earning
   more income. Women who receive this type of support may enjoy an existing positive economic
   interdependence that is evolving into spousal co-production based on separate and independent
   incomes but jointly acquired economic assets. FUG executive members and older women in
   monogamous marriages and with independent children appear to be more likely to develop such
   co-productive arrangements.



C.	 Conclusions

c1) Key Findings

   Targeting

   The reliance on community-based targeting (CBT) mechanisms tends to privilege women with
   close relationships to male power holders. This risks excluding poorer, less-connected women.




                                                  11
                                                       PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




   Performance
   Understanding a group’s social fabric is critical to explaining its performance. Groups that are
   socially cohesive and have close economic ties tend to perform better.


   Individual performance within a group can vary substantially. The initial socioeconomic
   stratification of the group is reflected in differentiated access to decision making and benefits.
   These initial individual asymmetries lead to different outcomes in terms of increased production
   and additional income.


   One key factor of individual and group success is access to loans and credits. The amount of cash
   needed to access and manage assets and to expand or diversify a business is difficult to obtain.
   More needs to be done to lift credit constraints.


   Empowerment
   Women spend additional income in the domestic, social, and productive spheres, but they make
   different expenditure choices depending on their household type and family needs. Women
   follow distinct expenditure patterns according to whether they live in a female- or male-headed
   household, and in the latter case whether they are in a polygamous or monogamous household.


   The most successful women in female FUGs are those in co-productive arrangements with their
   husband or a male relative. What is important in co-production is that each party is economically
   autonomous and empowered to decide on spending and investments.


c2) Broader Policy Messages

   Unpacking “Gender”
   Overall, the key findings presented above show the need to unpack “gender.” The household
   structure, marital status, age, and socioeconomic status of female beneficiaries affect their
   performance. These differentiated outcomes need to be accounted for in project monitoring and
   evaluation systems and impact studies.




                                                  12
August 2014




  Embeddedness of CDD Projects in Gender and Social Relations
  The findings highlight that, by nature, CDD projects are embedded in local social and political
  contexts that pose specific risks and opportunities. For example, men can play a critical role in
  facilitating women’s participation in development projects or they can use their social and political
  power to exclude them. Understanding men’s motivations for including or excluding women is
  important to providing opportunities for women to succeed.


  Gender Analysis of Value Chains
  The research findings support the need to better understand the social and economic
  interdependence of male and female farmers. No agriculture program can afford to dismiss
  the benefits of a gendered value chain analysis to improve this understanding. This analysis is of
  immediate importance for the commodities and zones receiving attention under the Nigerian
  Agricultural Transformation Agenda.
   




                                                   13
                                                        PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




    introduction                                                          gender



Gender Gaps in Nigerian Agriculture

 The agriculture sector has significant potential to transform Nigeria’s socioeconomic
 landscape. Agriculture is the country’s largest employer, with 60 percent of the labor force (Oseni
 et al. 2013), and it accounts for the largest share of gross domestic product (GDP) at 39.2 percent
 (NBS 2013). By comparison, the oil sector contributes 13.8 percent to GDP (NBS 2013).


 Significant investments need to be made to tap the agriculture sector’s full potential to ensure
 food security and poverty reduction. For the most part, agriculture in Nigeria remains on a small
 scale and uses rudimentary production techniques. Smallholder farmers have on average less than
 one hectare of farmland, and less than one percent of farmers own large mechanized implements
 such as harvesters or planters. Farming remains essentially subsistence-based, with 56 percent of
 agricultural households reporting no crop sales (Oseni et al. 2013).


 Women play an important role in rural economic activity but face severe constraints to
 productivity and socioeconomic security. Nigeria’s agriculture sector employs 35 percent of
 women and up to 44 percent of female heads of households. Women are engaged in the production,
 processing, and marketing of cash and staple crops (Oseni et al. 2013). Yet a number of factors
 constrain the expansion and diversification of their agricultural activities, including fewer rights to
 land than men, lower access to credit, and inequitable access to inputs, fertilizers, and extension
 services (Box 1). As a result, their agricultural productivity remains lower than that of men and
 their vulnerability to food insecurity and poverty higher.


 How to help female farmers increase their agricultural productivity and expand their economic
 opportunities is thus a key policy question. This question is particularly relevant now, as the

                                                   14
August 2014




  Federal Government of Nigeria has embarked on a broad Transformation Agenda that includes,
  from 2011, the Agricultural Transformation Agenda (ATA). The government sees its ATA as a
  critical tool for driving rural income growth, accelerating the achievement of food and nutritional
  security, generating employment, and transforming the country into a leading player in global
  food markets. The strategy is to improve the value chains of a number of agricultural commodities
  by focusing on key aspects, including the availability and provision of improved inputs (seed and
  fertilizer), support for increased productivity and production, and the establishment of staple crop
  processing zones. Some of the value chains targeted by the ATA, such as cassava, are important
  for women as growers, processors, and marketers. Yet women’s specific roles and support needs


                                 Box 1: Gender Gaps in Nigerian Agriculture
    In “Gender Dimensions in Nigerian Agriculture,” Gbemisola Oseni, Markus Goldstein, and Amarachi
    Utah examined the situation of male and female farmers in Nigerian agriculture on the basis of data
    from the General Household Survey-Panel 2010/11. The data show several gender gaps that may
    contribute to the lower productivity of female farmers compared to male farmers:

      •	   Plot management: 21 percent of women employed in the agriculture sector are plot
           managers, compared to 56 percent of men.

      •	   Land size: Male managers harvest land areas that are on average 0.18 hectares larger than
           those of female managers.

      •	   Land rights: 31 percent of female managers have the right to sell the plots under their
           management, compared to 67 percent of male managers. In the same vein, 38 percent of
           female managers have the ability to use land as collateral, compared to 72 percent of male
           managers.

      •	   Irrigation: 3.5 percent of male managers’ plots are irrigated, compared to 0.5 percent of
           female managers’ plots.

      •	   Inputs: Male plot managers are more likely than female plot managers to use inputs such
           as fertilizer, herbicides, pesticides, animal traction, and machinery (with the exception of
           purchased seed).

      •	   Extension services: 15 percent of male-headed households receive extension services,
           compared to 8 percent of female-headed households.

      •	   Labor: On average, female plot managers use 28 days of female family labor and 13 days of
           male family labor, compared to 20 days and 41 days respectively for male plot managers.

      •	   Credit and savings: Only 3 percent of female farmers own a formal bank account,
           compared to 10 percent of men. Conversely, 25 percent of women use informal savings
           groups, compared to 18 percent of men.



                                                       15
                                                    PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




throughout these value chains remain poorly understood. More information is required to design
interventions that recognize and successfully address the constraints faced by both men and
women farmers.


Women in Agriculture Projects in Nigeria: The Case of Fadama

With a view to informing the design of future agriculture policies and projects, this research
investigated the experience of female farmers in an existing agriculture development project, the
National Fadama Development Project (Fadama).1 Fadama is a community-driven development
(CDD) project that aims to reduce rural poverty and increase food availability throughout all 36
states and the Federal Capital Territory in Nigeria. The original National Fadama Development
Project (1992–1999) focused on developing small-scale irrigation and included a component to
help farmers organize into beneficiary farmer groups, referred to as Fadama User Groups (FUGs),
to support irrigation management, cost recovery, and access to credit, marketing, and other
services. The Second National Fadama Development Project (2003–2009) aimed to strengthen
the capacity of Fadama Community Associations (FCAs) and their constituent FUGs and to provide
financing for small-scale infrastructure and asset acquisition.


The Third National Fadama Development Project (Fadama III), on which this research is based,
began in July 2008 and will run until the end of 2017. Fadama III supports sustainable increases
in the incomes of users of rural land and water resources in Nigeria. The project supports the
financing and implementation of components designed to transfer financial and technical resources
to FUGs (Box 2). At midterm, Fadama III had targeted 2.2 million farmers and registered 57,816
FUGs (13,673 with functional assets) and 4,971 FCAs (the apex organizations that are composed
of six or more FUGs).


In a sector marked by entrenched gender inequalities, Fadama III provides intriguing examples
of economic achievements among female farmers. The International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI) has completed a midterm review suggesting a comparatively positive impact on
women and female groups. In particular, it appears that the income of female-headed households
participating in the Fadama project2 increased by about 50 percent—the greatest increase in both
absolute and percentage terms for any category of project participants.




                                               16
August 2014




                                  Box 2: Fadama III Project Components

    The Third National Fadama Development Project is anchored in a CDD approach, through which
    community organizations are responsible for prioritizing objectives, allocating resources, and
    managing funds. Extensive facilitation, training, and technical assistance are provided to ensure that
    poor rural communities, including women and vulnerable groups, participate in collective decision
    making on local development planning. The project aims to promote transparency and accountability
    in planning and management of local public investments, as a means to reinforce trust between
    communities and local government administrations. The total project cost is US$ 425 million, of
    which the World Bank will finance US$ 250 million.



      Component 1: Capacity Building, Communications, and Information Support
      This component includes capacity building support for community organizations and local
      governments, and communications and information support.

      Component 2: Small-Scale Community-Owned Infrastructure
      With a view to improving low levels of infrastructure and services, resources are allocated
      annually to each participating FCA to implement demand-driven, community-owned productive
      infrastructure investments.

      Component 3: Advisory Services and Input Support
      The project helps: (a) empower Fadama users to purchase advisory services from both public
      and private sources; and (b) improve farmers’ access to inputs, including the adoption of new
      technology to enhance their financial capacity to purchase seeds, fertilizers, and agro-chemicals
      and to build savings from incremental earnings to finance future purchases. The project will
      provide matching grants, as piloted under Fadama II.

      Component 4: Support to Agricultural Development Programs (ADPs), Sponsored Research,
      and On-Farm Demonstration
      The project helps ADPs support advisory service providers, conduct quality assurance of advisory
      services, train facilitators, conduct sponsored research and on-farm demonstrations, and train
      extension staff.

      Component 5: Asset Acquisition for Individual FUGs and Economic Interest Groups
      A matching grant is used as seed money to empower smallholder and poor farmers to acquire
      capital assets, to improve farmers’ access to markets, and to provide complementary support that
      adds value to farm produce.

      Component 6: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation
      This component includes technical assistance to national and state-level implementation
      coordination, project coordination, and project monitoring and evaluation.


      Source: World Bank. 2008. Project Appraisal Document for the Third National Fadama Development
      Project.




                                                     17
                                                      PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




Research Questions

This research has aimed to provide fresh insights on how an agriculture project can
support production and income increases for female farmers, and how successful project
outcomes can affect women’s economic empowerment. In particular, the research examines:


   1.	 Targeting of female farmers.
       What are the factors that facilitate and shape women’s access to the Fadama project? In
       other words, how and why do female farmers become beneficiaries of an agriculture project?


   2.	 Performance of female farmers.
       What factors support positive performance by female groups and individuals in the
       Fadama project? Specifically, what variables affect women’s capacity to access and use
       Fadama benefits to increase their agricultural productivity and income under the project?


   3.	 Empowerment of female farmers.
       How do gains in production and income affect the decisions women make on domestic,
       social, or productive expenditures in their household—particularly on how additional
       income is expended?


These questions were investigated through an in-depth qualitative study of women’s participation
in selected locations of the Fadama project.



Approach and Methodology
The Fadama project was chosen for analysis because it offered greater potential for undertaking
gender research than any other World Bank project in Nigeria.3 The Fadama project is a rich
source of information for both quantitative and in-depth qualitative research methodologies.
First, it provides a 15-year record of experience, allowing for some assessment of long-term
impact on beneficiaries. Second, it has been unusually successful in meeting its targets, including a
comparatively high percentage of women as beneficiaries, as reflected in monitoring and evaluation
data. Third, the formation of female, male, and mixed FUGs provides an interesting comparative


                                                 18
August 2014




  basis for revealing women’s experience in improving and diversifying economic livelihoods and in
  economic and social empowerment.


  Purposive Sampling
  The sample of female farmers’ experiences analyzed under this research is limited to successful
  female-only groups in Ogun State in the South-West region of Nigeria. Further research will be
  needed to test the project’s results across regions (thus exploring social and ethnic differences)
  and across group types (women in mixed FUGs as compared to women in female-only FUGs).

  The choice of the South-West zone was guided by preliminary indications that female farmers
  participating in the Fadama project have been particularly successful in this region. Despite
  high overall participation of female beneficiaries, at 41 percent (Nkonya et al. 2013), there is
  considerable variation between the different geopolitical zones, ranging from 27 percent in the
  North-West to over 50 percent in the South-East. The South-West zone, where women make
  up about 45 percent of project beneficiaries, is among the well-performing regions. In addition,
  though sex-disaggregated data on the project’s income effects are not fully available at the federal
  or state levels, there were preliminary indications, provided by the Fadama project, that female
  beneficiaries in the South-West region were performing particularly well in increasing their
  income through the project.


  Within the South-West region, Ogun State was selected because it had long-term experience
  with the Fadama project, and therefore provided an opportunity to analyze the project’s impact
  on women’s economic achievements and empowerment over a relatively long period of time.
  Though Fadama I had focused mainly on improving irrigation of fadama lands in the northern
  states, a few southern states, including Ogun, joined the project toward the end of Fadama I. Ogun
  State was fully involved in Fadama II, which adopted the CDD approach. Ten of the state’s twenty
  Local Government Areas (LGAs) were targeted under Fadama II; the remaining ten LGAs were
  included under Fadama III, though with less funding per LGA. For the purposes of this research,
  FUGs were selected that had been funded under Fadama II in order to provide a reasonable length
  of time for the FUG to have been operational and its members to have experienced changes to
  productivity and income levels.


  Female farmers are involved in both mixed and female FUGs under Fadama, but this study

                                                  19
                                                      PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




purposely looks at female farmers in female-only FUGs. The study draws on the experiences of
one male and two mixed FUGs for comparison, but the discussion centers on women’s experience
in female groups. Though the majority of women beneficiaries in the Fadama project are in mixed
FUGs (both in Ogun State and nationally), the choice to focus on female FUGs was motivated by
the perception, based on monitoring and evaluation data and insights from the Fadama project
team, that women in female FUGs fare better than women in mixed FUGs in gaining decision-
making authority within the group, accessing benefits, and improving their incomes.4


Success was a critical criterion in selecting the female FUGs examined in this research. The
sample selection of FUGs was based on indications, from monitoring and evaluation data and
other information extracted by the State Fadama Coordinating Office (SFCO) in Ogun State,
that these FUGs had performed particularly well in accessing Fadama benefits and using them
to expand their economic activities. This purposive approach to including the best-performing
FUGs was motivated by the specific opportunity these FUGs provide to investigate the factors
that support female farmers’ access to and good performance in the project (which might not be
evident in poorly performing FUGs) and the effects of increased income on women’s control over
income and expenditure (which would be non-existent in poorly performing FUGs that recorded
little or no increase in income).


This paper focuses predominantly on female FUGs involved in cassava and palm oil processing,
as these are the main crops with which women work under Fadama in Ogun State. Of the 101
female FUGs registered in Ogun State, 41 (40 percent) have received grants or assets in agro-
processing, including 17 in cassava processing and 2 in palm oil processing (Table 1). Annex 1
provides a more complete overview of the male, female, and mixed FUGs that have registered and/
or received assets.



                       Table 1: Distribution of FUGs That Have Received Assets
          Enterprise        Male FUGS      Female FUGs      Mixed FUGs           Total
  Crop production                0              0               145              145
  Livestock                     11              1                96              108
  Agro-processing                3              40               57              100
  Agro-forestry                  7              0                32               39
  Fishery                        0              0               123              123
  Total                         21              41              453              515


                                                 20
August 2014




  Field Research

  Qualitative and quantitative data and information were gathered through in-depth interviews
  and focus group discussions with a wide range of actors in 8 FUGs (5 female FUGs, 2 mixed FUGs,
  and 1 male FUG). In total, 105 in-depth interviews and 8 focus group discussions were conducted.
  Individual respondents included FUG members, their spouses, FCA members, community leaders,
  and local government desk officers (Table 2).


  The methodology for in-depth interviewing coupled a storytelling approach and a semistructured
  questionnaire. The former provided the opportunity for the interviewee to identify what was
  important to her or him in the formation and operation of the FUG and with regard to changes
  in intrahousehold behavior. The latter included a checklist of topics to be covered during the
  interview, as well as tables on assets, income, and expenditure to reflect pre- and post-FUG changes
  in asset ownership, income, and expenditure. A question guide was designed for interviews with
  spouses of beneficiaries to capture more fully the household dynamics (including perceptions on
  the decision-making process for household resource allocation) and to provide an opportunity
  to double-check (as much as possible) information on assets, income, and expenditure. Selected
  question guides are available in Annex 2.


  Interviews and focus group discussions were conducted in Yoruba with simultaneous translation
  to English. At each stage, interviews were written up according to a standardized format designed
  to facilitate the extraction and analysis of particular characteristics of the groups and individuals
  interviewed. Appropriate statistical methods were adopted as necessary to enable aggregated
  quantitative analysis of data.



  Structure of the Report
  The data gathered during this research provide critical insights on the targeting, performance,
  and empowerment of women who have participated in the Fadama project. Section A presents
  the factors that facilitate and shape women’s access to and performance in FUGs. The objective is to
  explain why and how—in the Nigerian context, which is generally characterized by poor outcomes
  for female farmers—some female farmers have come together and successfully increased their
  production and income. Section B discusses how women’s increased income under the project


                                                   21
                                                        PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




                 Table 2: Distribution of In-depth Interview Respondents by FUG Type
   Type of FUG       Female           Male          Spouses      Community       Total interviews
                   beneficiaries   beneficiaries                leaders, local    per FUG type
                                                               government of-
                                                               ficers, and FCA
                                                                  members
  Female FUGs           28              0               15           22                70
  Mixed FUGs             7              6               2             2                19
  Male FUGs              0              6               0             9                16
  Total                 35              12              17           33                105




affects their economic empowerment. The aim is to understand how female FUG members
spend their increased income, how these decisions are related to the structure and needs of the
household, and how women’s role in household expenditure negotiations evolves, or not, toward
more economic security or autonomy. Section C draws conclusions on the basis of this research,
laying out key findings and exploring their operational and policy implications.




                                                   22
  August 2014




a. women’s access to, and performance in,                                                              	
       agricultural groups


       The experience of female farmers                            under the Fadama project poses two
       intriguing questions. First, the substantial percentage of women beneficiaries in the Fadama
       project raises the issue of targeting and selection: what are the factors that facilitate and shape
       women’s access to the Fadama project? Second, the positive trends in productivity and income
       recorded by female farmers in the Fadama project, at both the group level and the individual level,
       raises the question of performance: what factors support positive trends in female group and
       individual performance?


       The research identified three critical factors that influence women’s targeting and individual
       and group performance: (i) gender relations in the community and its households, in particular the
       level of economic interdependence and support between male and female family and community
       members; (ii) the initial endowments of individual women and female groups; and (iii) the social
       characteristics of individual women and female groups. Such factors are both predetermined and
       dynamic, and this report examines how they condition women’s participation and how they evolve
       with this participation.


A.1)   Targeting and Selection of Women in the Fadama III Project
A.1.a) Gender Implications of Community-Based Targeting: Men’s Bridging                                 	
       Role
       The community-based targeting (CBT) mechanisms employed by the Fadama III project are
       largely informal and quite flexible. Information on the project is delivered to communities through
       diverse channels, including traditional and religious leaders as well as unions and professional
       associations, and inclusion in the FUGs appears to be determined to a large extent by interpersonal
       relations.


                                                       23
                                                      PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




 Some of the literature on CBT, including in CDD projects, questions the efficiency and pro-poor
 nature of such targeting methods, as well as their feasibility and cost. The differentiated impact
 of CBT on women, however, has been underresearched, if not ignored, and the effects of the local
 political economy and social dynamics on women’s entry into projects are largely neglected. Yet
 in projects such as Fadama, in which targeting and selection occur at the community level, local
 dynamics critically influence women’s access. Women’s position in the community, their relations
 to local power structures, and their sociodemographic profile play an important role in their access
 and participation.

 This research posits that CBT has critical gender implications. While the use of CBT methods in
 Fadama seems to have been associated with a high proportion of female beneficiaries, it has also
 created space for local political economy and social dynamics to determine the characteristics of
 women’s inclusion. The 105 interviews and 8 focus group discussions conducted in Ogun State
 revealed that women depended heavily on men’s support to access the project.


i. Structural asymmetries in access to information and power structures
 As a result of the local political economy and social dynamics, women face barriers to entry in
 the Fadama project, which men, including husbands and male local leaders, can help lift. Men
 have two structural advantages compared to women in accessing project information: they are
 relatively more connected to power structures, and they tend to be more literate.


 Connection to power structures is critical to accessing information on the process, requirements,
 and benefits of projects such as Fadama. To reach out to rural communities, Fadama has relied on
 local political organizations and structures such as traditional and religious leaders (for example,
 pastors) and unions (for example, farmers’ cooperatives). Fadama project staff informed such
 organizations and structures of the project’s application process, requirements, and benefits and
 asked them to share information with their communities and to encourage individual male and
 female farmers to join. Given men’s predominant role in political organizations and structures
 (due to women’s more limited engagement in the public sphere), information about the project has
 tended to be channeled to women through men.


 Gender gaps in education and literacy have the potential to deepen asymmetries in access to
 the project. Fadama requires reading, writing, and numerical skills to understand the project’s


                                                 24
August 2014




  structure and rules (including the group registration process, financial reporting, and meeting
  procedures) and to abide by them. Given generally lower levels of education,5 women tend to
  depend on men’s support to fulfill these requirements. These structural asymmetries explain why
  men’s support is critical to women’s inclusion—that is, because it lifts some barriers to entry—but
  a look at men’s economic and political incentives is needed to understand why they would provide
  this support.


ii. Interdependent gender roles in the value chain and men’s incentives
  The interdependence of men and women’s activities in the cassava and palm oil value chains
  (the two main value chains examined in this research) generate economic incentives for men to
  redress the above-mentioned information asymmetries and facilitate the participation of their
  wives or female relatives in the project. While men engage mainly in crop planting and harvesting,
  women do most of the agro-processing, including processing their husbands’ and male relatives’
  crops (for example, processing cassava into garri or processing palm nuts into palm oil). As such,
  Fadama support to female agro-processors also presents economic advantages for male farmers,
  as it provides them with processing options that increase efficiency (for example, by reducing crop
  wastage) and productivity (for example, through mechanized palm oil extraction, which extracts
  more oil than feet can).


  The high level of co-dependence between men and women’s farming and processing activities
  in rural Ogun State holds true at the household and community levels. Women process their
  husbands’, sons’ or other male relatives’ crops, as well as other male community members’ crops.
  Though compensation arrangements may vary (for example, in the amount paid and whether
  payment is made in cash or in kind) depending on the strength of the relationship (husbands tend
  to pay less than extended family or community members), the availability of Fadama-subsidized
  processing equipment in a community creates opportunities for more effective and efficient crop
  processing for all male farmers growing that crop.


  This condition holds true for both mixed and female FUGs. The acquisition and use of processing
  equipment follow similar patterns in both types of FUGs. In both cases, men contribute to the
  purchase of processing equipment. In female-only groups, men contribute at the individual and
  group level; at the individual level, a large proportion of women appear to depend on financial
  support from their husband and male relatives to acquire (through matching grants) the


                                                  25
                                                             PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




     processing equipment, while at the group level, equipment is often procured through FCAs, whose
     management is dominated by male relatives. The use of processing equipment reveals a similar
     pattern; in both female and mixed FUGs, women tend to process their male relatives’ inputs.

  iii. Political imperatives
     Male leaders have a political incentive to support women’s access to Fadama. By encouraging
     their wives and female relatives to participate, they increase their visibility within the Fadama
     project and their chances to access both assets and services in subsequent rounds of Fadama
     financing. Male Fadama executives repeatedly stressed that the participation of women, including
     the existence of a female FUG, promoted a positive and progressive image of the FCA vis-à-vis
     the SFCO. From a normative perspective, women’s dependence on men in accessing the project
     might be perceived as an illustration of women’s lack of autonomy. From a functional perspective,
     however, this research indicates that the bridging role played by men has been critical in allowing
     greater numbers of women to access the project. The share of women participating in the Fadama
     project is indeed substantially higher than in many other World Bank-supported government
     projects and contrasts sharply with the significant gender gaps in access to productive assets
     observed more broadly in Nigeria’s agriculture sector.


A.1.b) Accessing Executive Positions in Female Groups: The Weight of Initial
     Endowments

     Women’s initial endowments in the social and economic sphere play an important role in how
     they participate in the Fadama project. Though this research found that men facilitate women’s
     inclusion in the project, it also revealed the importance of women’s own social and economic
     endowments in gaining selection for executive positions in the FUGs and FCAs.


   i. Variations in initial endowments
     Significant socioeconomic gaps are observed among female FUG members. Education levels
     vary widely. Some beneficiaries are illiterate, while others have up to secondary (rarely tertiary)
     education. In the same vein, there are considerable differences in women’s initial endowments in
     capital and assets. For example, within one FUG, land ownership among female members varied
     from half a plot to six plots.6 Significant variations are observed in terms of social capital as well.7
     Some women have extended social networks and connections to (patriarchal) power holders such

                                                       26
August 2014




  as pastors or community leaders, who themselves play a role in their respective FUG or FCA.
  This connection can be based on family ties, such as a spouse, sibling, or children (Figure 1), or
  on religious or spiritual bonds (including through active membership in a local pastor’s church).
  Some women have built on their position and role in the community prior to Fadama, including, for
  example, as religious leaders.


ii. Impact on women’s access to executive positions in the FUG
  Variations in social and economic capital have a significant impact on the positions that
  women access within their group. Women with greater social and economic endowments have
  more chances to secure an FUG executive position such as chairwoman, executive secretary, or
  treasurer (Figure 2). Their financial and writing skills send a positive signal about their capacity to
  adequately manage the groups’ budget and administrative requirements. In addition, economic
  capital provides them with the capacity to contribute the matching grant needed to acquire Fadama
  assets, and in some cases to support other individual female members or the group itself in putting
  up the matching grant and acquiring assets. Social capital is critical from both an instrumental and
  a psychological perspective. First, networks and connections allow such women to have privileged



      Figure 1: Share of Executive and Non-Executive FUG Members with At Least One Spouse or Male
                                            Relative in Fadama




                                                    27
                                                        PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




   access to information on the project and its resources. Second, their position in the community,
   especially in the case of women in leadership positions (including religious), endows them with the
   trust of other community members, and has a legitimizing effect for their selection or acceptance
   as executive members of an FUG.


iii. Local elite
   The selection of women with higher human, economic, and social capital for executive positions
   may indicate that the FUGs are controlled by local elites, thus raising concerns of elite capture.
   This research suggested, however, that in most cases the presence in FUGs of women with greater
   initial endowments had spillover benefits for other group members. First, given generally low
   financial literacy and writing ability, these women’s skills have proved necessary for the group
   to function effectively—registering at the Ministry of Local Development, preparing subproject
   proposals, managing funds, and conducting financial reporting. Second, this research observed that
   better-endowed individuals often provided those with fewer initial endowments with monetary
   support to meet their financial commitments, including their matching grant, thus allowing them
   to join or remain in the group and access Fadama benefits and services.



                               Figure 2: Education Levels of FUG Members




                                                   28
  August 2014




A.2)   What Makes a Group Perform?
A.2.a) Defining and Comparing Group Performance

       There were considerable variations in group performance across the sample of female FUGs. As
       mentioned in the introduction, this research focused on the best-performing FUGs. Nevertheless,
       even among the sampled female FUGs, varying levels of group performance were observed.8 These
       variations reflected differences in group capacity to: (i) acquire assets and capacity building services
       under the Fadama project (Box 3); (ii) manage and replace the assets acquired under Fadama; and
       (iii) leverage the resources generated under Fadama to create new economic opportunities for its
       members (for example, through revolving loans).


       Some groups had an easier time meeting project requirements than others. For example, some
       groups were able to put up their counterpart contribution for asset acquisition (30 percent) in
       a short time frame, whereas others encountered more challenges in gathering the necessary
       funds. Similarly, some groups responded effectively to the project’s administrative demands
       (such as holding regular meetings and conducting financial reporting), while others had trouble
       ensuring regular attendance to FUG meetings. The latter groups generally showed less resilience
       to potential delays and complications with asset acquisition. In some cases, slow delivery of assets
       (due to delays in the provision of matching contributions or difficulties in procurement) led some
       group members to opt out of the project.


       Variations were also observed in groups’ capacity to manage their group assets efficiently. The
       management of assets requires group members to contribute a small fee on a weekly, biweekly,
       or monthly basis (generally during the group meetings), which goes toward group savings (kept
       in a Farmer Equity User Fund or savings account). These savings are used by the FUG’s executive
       members to maintain or replace group assets. The regularity and size of such contributions—and
       therefore the group’s capacity to manage and replace its assets—varied across FUGs.


       FUGs also differed in their capacity to create new credit opportunities for their members. These
       opportunities include access to revolving loans (“thrift schemes”) or microcredit schemes. Some
       groups managed to put in place a revolving loan scheme that entailed regular (weekly, biweekly, or
       monthly) financial contributions by group members to a common pot, the funds in which could be
       lent on to members a rotating basis. The best-functioning FUGs also accessed microcredit schemes


                                                         29
                                                            PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




                                     Box 3: The Fadama Subproject Cycle

        Development of subprojects: FCAs, and their constituting FUGs, identify and prepare their
        subproject proposals, assisted by project facilitators and technical specialists. The subproject
        proposal details the assets (for example, processing equipment such as a cassava grinder
        or processing shed) and services (for example, capacity building on handling processing
        equipment) requested by the group. Once subprojects have been identified at the FUG level, the
        FCA prepares a Local Development Plan incorporating all subprojects and submits to the Local
        Fadama Development Committee (LFDC) for review and approval at the local government level.

        Assessment and approval of subprojects: The LFDC prioritizes and approves the
        proposed subprojects, after determining that they are compatible with the local government
        development plan. The SFCO then technically evaluates the approved subprojects and
        confirms compliance with subproject technical, social, and environmental guidelines.
        After SFCO clearance, Subproject Agreements are signed between the SFCO and the FCA.

        Execution of subprojects: Beneficiaries’ associations are then responsible for contracting goods,
        works, and technical assistance for subproject execution. Specifically, for asset acquisition,
        beneficiaries are expected to put up a 30 percent matching contribution.

        Source: Fadama III Project Implementation Manual.




    for members, or for a subgroup of members, through a commercial bank.


A.2.b) Variables Affecting Group Performance

    The research identified three factors that explain variations in performance across the female
    FUGs under study: (i) the level of social cohesion within the group; (ii) its economic needs and ties;
    and (iii) the support it gets from male relatives and community members.

   i. Social cohesion
    The best-performing FUGs tended to be groups with high levels of social cohesion. Social
    cohesion generally stems from preexisting geographic or community ties:


       •	 FUGs that were embedded in small communities (such as settlements or hamlets) where
          extended family ties overlapped with FUG ties tended to be more cohesive than FUGs based
          in less geographically defined and structured communities (such as peri-urban suburbs).




                                                       30
August 2014




     •	 The physical closeness of FUG members’ businesses also played a role in sustaining a
        group’s cohesiveness. FUG members that shared a processing shed and equipment, for
        example, appeared to meet and perform joint economic activities more regularly, to
        value their grouping more, and to have more established systems of mutual support.


     •	 Belonging to other social groups supported the cohesiveness of FUGs. Groups whose
        members belonged to the same church or to a preexisting social group (such as a thrift
        group) had deeper-rooted systems of social support, which could be relied upon by FUG
        members beyond Fadama.

  The level of group cohesion is reflected, among other things, in the degree of mutual support
  that women provide to each other. This support includes assistance in funding and organizing
  life-marking social ceremonies such as naming ceremonies, weddings, or burials. Some FUGs have
  established systems of support and redistribution whereby all members contribute a predefined
  amount for selected ceremonies; others have more fluid and flexible systems whereby individual
  group members decide on an ad hoc basis the level of their contribution.


  Groups with greater social cohesion were more resilient to shocks and challenges. These groups
  were better able to manage obstacles such as delays in the procurement of assets or a group’s
  members difficulty in repaying a loan or microcredit, arguably because of higher levels of trust
  among members and the preexistence of community-based structures to help manage conflicts
  and tensions and avoid the breakdown of the group.
  The cash flow situation of individual female beneficiaries was found to affect their participation
  in and financial contributions to their FUG. Women who want to acquire subsidized productive
  assets through Fadama must put up capital for the matching component prior to receiving the
  nominated asset. That capital is “frozen,” in effect, as their cash is taken out of circulation during
  the approval and procurement process. In this context, delays in the delivery of Fadama assets—
  sometimes for up to a year or more—can be a significant burden for female beneficiaries who
  live under cash flow constraints, relying on credit to buy the inputs they process and/or running
  small-scale trading businesses with immediate cash needs. This burden puts groups with cash-
  constrained members at greater risk of seeing their members opt out of the FUG or decrease their
  financial contributions when asset delivery is delayed.


  Conversely, FUGs that are able to provide their female beneficiaries with opportunities to

                                                   31
                                                       PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




  overcome cash flow constraints, for example through credit and loans, have higher membership
  retention and sustained contributions from their members. Given that credit is the main constraint
  to business growth reported by women,10 and that sampled Fadama beneficiaries relied relatively
  heavily on credit to buy processing inputs, the opportunity to access microcredit or group revolving
  loans through the FUG was identified by beneficiaries as a major incentive to engage and sustain
  participation in the group. This was often seen as more important than acquiring Fadama assets.
  In the study sample, all high-performing groups had a functioning revolving loan scheme and/or
  accessed microcredit schemes.


ii. Economic needs and ties
  The nature of economic ties among members was found to affect group performance directly,
  including attendance at group meetings and contributions to the maintenance and replacement
  of assets. In some groups, women worked autonomously from each other; in others, a number of
  economic activities were conducted jointly, including growing and harvesting crops, buying inputs,
  and processing or marketing goods. Groups with closer economic ties tended to be more cohesive and
  to be managed more efficiently, as their members were more dependent on each other to operate their
  businesses. Three main factors appear to affect the strength of economic ties among group members:


     •	 The nature of the assets procured through Fadama, whether individual assets (provided
        under Fadama II and, to a lesser extent, under Fadama III) or group assets (provided under
        Fadama III), affect the strength of ties between members and their level of interdependence
        and cohesion. Group-based assets create opportunities for FUG members to work jointly
        (for example, joint buying and processing), thus reinforcing economic ties and integration
        among group members.


     •	 The rural or urban nature of the group affects the strength of their economic ties. Faced
        with higher transportation, communication, and information costs, women in rural areas
        have a greater incentive to work together and save costs in buying inputs and marketing
        products. Costs seem to be lower in urban areas, providing fewer incentives to work
        together to achieve economies of scale.
     •	 The extent to which the market in which FUG members operate is structured and
        regulated affects the extent to which women find added value in being a FUG member.
        When market information and price setting for a processed item is regulated by a union or


                                                  32
  August 2014




              producer organization, there is less incentive to develop group strategies to gather market
              information, buy inputs, and market products.

 iii. Men’s financial and technical support
       In addition to affecting the targeting and selection of female beneficiaries, as discussed above,
       men also appear to play a role in the performance of female FUGs. Across the sample of female
       FUGs, performance varied according to the level of financial and technical support female
       groups received from external actors, especially male family and community members who were
       themselves members of sister FUGs or apex FCAs.


       Men provided support at both individual and group levels. At the individual level, financial
       support to female beneficiaries from husbands and male relatives (for example, assistance with
       required financial contributions for asset acquisition or for asset maintenance) was critical in
       easing cash flow constraints that threaten group performance. At the group level, male relatives
       and community members provided financial and technical support to the group as a whole. This
       assistance included, for example, topping up the group’s matching contribution for the acquisition
       of common assets or the payment of asset maintenance costs; providing technical support for
       operating and maintaining machinery; assisting with the purchase of additional processing inputs;
       and helping with administrative tasks such as budgeting or financial reporting. Such support was
       particularly critical for vulnerable female FUGs, including those that brought together elderly
       women with low literacy and limited financial capacity.


A.3)   What Affects Individual Performance?
A.3.a) Defining and Comparing Individual Performance

       Individual performance can be defined from two perspectives. First, it can refer to women’s access
       to Fadama benefits, including individual and group assets, capacity building, and microcredits or
       loans. Second, it can encompass increased production and income as a result of project participation.


       Interviews revealed notable intragroup variations in access to individual assets. Though the
       majority of women benefitted from asset acquisition, women gained access to individual assets in
       varying numbers and values (Figure 3). For group assets, variations were observed in the intensity
       of use of the assets. For example, some women used the joint processing shed and equipment (such

                                                        33
                                                                   PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




         Figure 3: Share of Beneficiaries with Access to Individual Assets by Number of Assets

       35%


       30%


       25%


       20%


       15%


       10%


        5%


        0%
                      0 assets                1-2 assets                3-4 assets          5 or more assets
        Note: This figure refers to only 16 beneficiaries; others are in groups in which all assets are owned jointly.



as grinding machines or frying pans) more frequently or for larger crop quantities than others.
 
Variations were observed in individual beneficiaries’ access to services. Some women participated
more regularly in capacity building than others. In addition, female beneficiaries reported varying
levels of access to microcredit, even more markedly, to revolving loans. For example, some women
had regular access to revolving loans, which they used to expand or diversify their businesses (for
example, by buying or farming more crops, or investing in petty trading), while others had no access
to revolving loans or, on occasion, were unaware that such a scheme was available in their group.
Women’s ability to access assets, capacity building, and microcredit or loans affects their
opportunities to increase their production and income. Fadama’s impact on production and income
occurs through multiple channels. The use of Fadama processing assets provides opportunities
for women to process a larger quantity of inputs (such as cassava, palm nuts, or palm kernels)

                                                             34
  August 2014




     than they did before joining
                                            Figure 4: Reported Levels of Increased Income Among
     the project. Access to capacity                        Female Beneficiaries
     building services provides
     them with new knowledge and
                                                                3%
     expertise on processing and
                                                                       7%
     other agricultural techniques,
     allowing them to increase                                              11%            Unknown
     their productivity. Access to                                                         Nil
                                                    39%
     microcredit or loans provides                                                         Low
                                                                                           Medium
     resources to buy or produce                                              11%
                                                                                           High
     more inputs and therefore to
                                                                                           Very high
     increase the amount of inputs
                                                                 29%
     they process.


     In this context, increases in
     production and income also
     varied across female respondents. When asked to report on the Fadama project’s impact on
     their production and income, 93 percent of women reported some level of increase over pre-FUG
     income. Yet their experiences varied substantially (Figure 4).


A.3.b) Factors Affecting Individual Performance

    Interviews with female FUG members showed that their initial capital and input levels and
    the level of financial and technical support they received from their spouse or male relatives
    were the main factors affecting their access to and use of Fadama benefits. These factors in
    turn affected their overall production and income. Women with higher initial endowments and/or
    external support tended to access more Fadama benefits and have more opportunities to expand
    or diversify their businesses.


    The support of men, which played an important part in group performance, was also found to
    be critical to women’s individual performance. In interviews, women explained the importance
    of external support from their husbands and, in some cases, male relatives by way of reference to
    the cash constraints under which they live (Section A.2 above). In the context of some women’s
    low cash flow and limited access to credit, husbands and male relatives were found to contribute

                                                   35
                                                     PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




to various costs related to expanding women’s processing capacity, including to obtain more
Fadama assets, more land, more processing inputs, or more hired labor. The existence (or not) of
this support appears to explain much of the variation in performance between individual female
FUG members.


Different categories of women experienced varying levels of performance. For example, married
monogamous women tended to receive more financial and practical support from their husbands
than and polygamous women and were thus better able to expand assets and income-producing
capacity. Women’s socioeconomic status prior to Fadama was also an important variable. Women
with higher initial economic endowments (who were also more likely to have obtained higher
education and to be in an executive position in the FUG) were better able to contribute their
matching grants, and thus tended to acquire more individual assets. They were also more likely
to make more intensive use of assets, whether individual or joint, as they generally had greater
access to inputs because they either farmed more land or had more cash to buy inputs.


Access to revolving loans and microcredit also appeared to be highly contingent on a woman’s
status in the group and her initial capital and asset base. Women with higher initial endowments
and those with executive positions tended to have better access to revolving loans and microcredit
(Figure 5). This had an obvious effect on opportunities, as women with access to loans and credit
had more opportunities to reinvest in their business or diversify it, and thereby to increase their
income.


Such intragroup variations might raise concerns about unequal opportunities among group
members, but the fact that all groups pulled together women with varying levels of resources
or inputs had positive spillover benefits. More educated women and those with higher initial
endowments appeared to play a critical role in running—and sometimes financing—female FUGs,
allowing less educated and poorer women, who would not otherwise be able to meet the project’s
contribution requirements, to access Fadama benefits and expand their opportunities.




                                                36
August 2014




                        Figure 5: Access to Microcredit


         80%

         70%

         60%

         50%

         40%

         30%

         20%

         10%

          0%
               Member               Executive             All




                                      37
                                                              PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




b. creating opportunities for women through
       domestic, social, and productive investments


       Following from the above discussion of the factors that led to economic
       livelihood improvements for women in female FUGs, this section examines how additional
       income was spent and the variables that affected their expenditure decisions. 11 The research
       identified three categories of expenditure that women juggled throughout their lives: (i) domestic
       expenditures; (ii) social expenditures; and (iii) productive expenditures. The spending choices that
       women made within these broad categories were found to be overlaid by: (i) their household type;
       (ii) their household’s stage in the family life cycle; and (iii) their economic status, including their
       activity type and level of income.


       In analyzing women’s self-reported perceptions of empowerment in the community and the
       household, this research suggests that the visibility of FUGs and the assets provided by the
       project had an effect on perceptions of empowerment at the community level. However, female
       FUG members’ additional income has translated into limited perceived empowerment at the
       household level.


B.1)   Framing Women’s Expenditure Choices
B.1.a) Where Do Women Choose to Spend Their Additional Income?

       As mentioned above, female FUG members tend to spend their additional income—net of group
       contributions—in domestic, social, and productive areas (Table 3). These categories are not mutually
       exclusive. Rather, women may spend additional income in just one category, in two categories, or
       across all three.




                                                         38
August 2014




                    Table 3: Types of Expenditure Made by Female FUG Members
     Type of expenditure        Description of expenditure type           Share of women who
                                                                       increased spending in this
                                                                                category
    Domestic               •	 Household food                                      71%
                           •	 Schooling costs
                           •	 Other items, such as house rent, util-
                                ity costs and clothing
    Social                 •	 Donations to extended family                        39%
                                life-cycle events (such as naming
                                ceremonies, weddings, and funer-
                                als)
                           •	   Attendance at such ceremonies (in-
                                cluding travel and clothing)
                           •	   General support to the extended
                                family, especially aging parents,
                                for health reasons or to meet other
                                non-routine costs
                           •	   Contributions to nonfamily com-
                                munity members to assist with the
                                expenses of ceremonies or medical
                                care
    Productive             •	 Buying or renting productive assets                 71%
                                (including land, processing ma-
                                chines, and equipment)
                           •	   Buying additional processing inputs
                                (such as cassava, palm nuts, locust
                                beans)
                           •	   Hiring labor in order to expand
                                crop cultivation and harvesting
                           •	   Starting up or expanding microtrad-
                                ing businesses
                           •	   Investing in adult children’s busi-
                                nesses




                                                   39
                                                         PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




B.1.b) Factors Affecting Women’s Expenditure Choices

   i. Household type
     The women in the sample of female FUGs fell into three household categories: male-
     headed monogamous, male-headed polygamous, and female-headed households (Table 4).
     Monogamously married women formed the clear majority of respondents.


     A critical feature of monogamous or polygamous households in South-West Nigeria is that
     Yoruba men and women account for their income and expenditure separately. There is no
     common household pot or account into which household earnings are deposited and from
     which expenditures are made. This pattern was confirmed in this research, with men and women
     controlling their own incomes and expenditures. There are overlaps in expenditure by husbands
     and wives. In a male-headed household, the man is deemed to be the main breadwinner (“he is the
     one that puts down”), and his wife or wives “top up” his income. So while women (and men) may
     control their own incomes, they do have some expenditure responsibilities and obligations.




                                          Table 4: Household Type
           Household type                            % of female beneficiaries
        Monogamous                                              61%
        Polygamous                                              11%
        Female-headed (widows)                                  28%
        Total                                                  100%




   ii. Stage in the family life cycle

     The household’s stage in the family life cycle was found to affect expenditure patterns
     significantly. For example, the number and age of children in the household influenced the amount
     of money women spent on food or schooling fees, uniforms, and supplies (whether the woman’s
     contribution was in full or shared with her husband). Women with adult children had different
     obligations toward their children and received different benefits in turn. While they might assist
     their young adult children—especially those who have migrated to an urban area—with the
     costs of higher education or of opening a trade or small business, they eventually have access

                                                    40
  August 2014




       to remittances from these adult children. Investment in adult children builds intergenerational
       solidarity and mutual support, but does not tend to support women’s economic independence.


       The age of female FUG members also influenced their expenditure patterns. Women over the
       age of 50 tended to be relatively free of domestic expenditures such as food and education, thus
       having the option to support other types of expenditures. There were exceptions to this pattern,
       however, such as having grandchildren who lived in the household (either supported by payments
       from the child’s parents or entirely at the cost of the grandparents). With regard to productive
       expenditures, older women relied more heavily on hired labor to support their income, but would
       be less likely to engage in business expansion.


 iii. Economic status
       Women’s investments in domestic, social, or productive expenditures were affected by their
       economic security, including their ability to mobilize external resources to overcome business
       constraints. As such, the investment strategies of poorer women with few assets, lower social
       capital, and more limited access to external financial support (in particular, widows and women
       whose spouses earned similarly low income) differed substantially from the strategies of women
       who benefitted from outside support.




B.2)   Women’s Options: From Safety Nets to Productive Investments
B.2.a) Domestic Expenditures

       Domestic expenditures formed a significant part of women’s spending (Table 5). Those who
       reported no increase in domestic expenditure included households in which children had recently
       moved beyond school age (implying a reduction in school costs) and those in the “empty nest” stage
       of life.


       Expenditure on food was reported most frequently by women, regardless of age or
       socioeconomic situation. However, food was considered the responsibility of the household head/
       main breadwinner, and additional expenditure by women was used to “top up” household spending
       by the spouse. Though the term “top up” implies a small contribution to expenditure, this is not
       necessarily the case in poor households where food expenditures consume the bulk of household

                                                      41
                                                      PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




                   Table 5: Expenditure of Additional Income in Domestic Category
    Change in domestic expenditure                      % of female beneficiaries
  No increase in domestic expenditure                              18%
  Unknown                                                          11%
  Increase in domestic expenditure                                 71%
  Total                                                           100%




income. The “top up” supplied by a wife’s earnings could be a significant proportion of her and her
husband’s incomes.


For women with young children, food was the most important expenditure, followed by school
fees. As with food expenditure, it was the male household head’s responsibility to “put down”
the school fees, but women often reported using their income for school fees and, even more
frequently, for schooling needs such as exercise books, pencils, and school uniforms. Children’s
education is viewed as a long-term investment in Nigeria, as young adults increasingly join the
urban work force and are expected to provide remittances to help support their aging rural
parents. In the past, children would have provided both farm and domestic labor; now they tend
to be either at school or seeking off-farm income. This increases the family’s financial burden and
workload until, as adults, younger members can provide cash transfers. Investing in children does
not therefore provide the immediate financial returns that business expansion can achieve, but
there are benefits to be gained over the longer term.

Women interviewed for this study did not report expenditure on house rent or utilities unless
they were widows; these items seemed to fit fully into the domain of men’s expenditure. Men
and women spent separately on clothing, and either one or both of them would buy clothing for
their children. Very few women spent additional income on health care expenditures.


There were notable differences in spending among polygamous, monogamous, and female-
headed households. In monogamous and polygamous households, men were considered to be
the main breadwinners and thus responsible for domestic expenditures, whereas women were
seen to “top up” this spending. Though men and women did appear to control their own incomes
and make their own decisions on the extent to which they would “put down” or “top up” joint
spending, the research indicated that the weight of domestic expenditures tends to be heavier

                                                 42
August 2014




  for women in polygamous rather than monogamous marriages. Women in polygamous marriages
  tend to control their own “subfamily unit” within the bigger polygamous family structure and
  therefore have greater responsibility to “top up” the money shared out to all subfamily units by
  the husband. The wives in a polygamous marriage may have different responsibilities for domestic
  expenditures,12 as well as different opportunities for earning income depending on whether the
  household operates as a single unit or a number of relatively independent subfamily units.


  In female-headed households, the responsibility for domestic expenditures tends to fall entirely
  on widows, though there are some exceptions. The research found that most widows do not
  receive financial support from male relatives, but they may receive assistance from adult children
  if they were widowed later in life. They may also have fewer domestic costs it they have access to
  the deceased husband’s home and have only themselves to feed.


  As a result, women from polygamous and female-headed households tend to spend a higher




                      Figure 5: Impact of Marital Status on Domestic Expenditures
               (% for whom domestic expenditure is preferred or among preferred options)

              40%

              35%

              30%

              25%

              20%

              15%

              10%

               5%

               0%
                        Monogamous              Polygamous              Widowed


                                                  43
                                                          PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




    proportion of their additional income on domestic expenditures and have less income to invest in
    social and productive expenditures. By contrast, women in monogamous households tend to have
    more opportunities to allocate resources from their additional income to productive investments
    (Figure 6).


    While this result was the general case, there were some notable exceptions. For example, one
    widow, an FUG chairperson, had acquired landholdings many times greater than other members
    of the FUG and was intent on improving her cassava seed stock, expanding her cassava cultivation,
    and improving her vegetable production and marketing. Another respondent, who was in a
    polygamist marriage, reported making a decision to buy a plot of land using her maiden name,
    against tradition, as a means of securing the property for her children.


    Overall, it is difficult to quantify women’s financial contributions to domestic expenditures
    in male-headed households. In such households, the women’s spouses tend to be vague on the
    specifics and to emphasize that it is a man’s role as the main breadwinner to “put down” money for key
    expenditures. On the one hand, the use of the term “top up” may undervalue women’s contributions
    to domestic spending and maintain the appearance that men are the dominant breadwinners. On
    the other hand, it may give women more space to determine their own expenditure priorities
    because the male household head is held responsible for providing domestic staples.


B.2.b) Social Expenditures

    Family, conjugal relationships to husband and in-laws, and community enlarge the social network
    through which a woman can gain support and economic endowments. Women are therefore
    obligated to do their part in providing material and emotional support at the time of important
    rites of passage such as naming ceremonies, apprenticeship “freedom” ceremonies, marriages, and
    funerals. The social expenditures that support these ceremonies are central to social cohesion,
    both within the extended family and in the broader community, and act as a type of informal social
    safety net. They are an investment in women’s social security, as the level of support that can be
    expected from the extended family and community for one’s own life cycle ceremonies, health
    events, and possible economic shocks, is relative to the effort made to provide support to others.


    Contributions to these ceremonies are contingent on an individual’s financial capacity, but
    significant effort appears to be made to meet these obligations. In the research sample, women’s

                                                     44
  August 2014




                         Table 6: Expenditure of Additional Income in Social Category
          Change in social expenditure                        % of female beneficiaries
      No increase in social expenditure                                   22%
      Unknown                                                             39%
      Increase in social expenditure                                      39%
      Total                                                              100%




    additional income was used to increase social expenditures in almost 40 percent of cases (Table 6).
    It is possible that this percentage is higher, as the early stages of field research did not investigate
    this type of expenditure. As such, the high number of “unknown” responses could be hiding a higher
    percentage of increased social spending.


    The type of household type, its stage in the family life cycle, and its economic status all affect
    the level of social expenditures. The 22 percent of women who reported no increase in social
    expenditure tended to fit into three categories: (i) older women who were no longer expected
    by the extended family or community to contribute toward social costs, having already “paid
    their lifetime of dues;” (ii) women with a high base level of income and/or economic resources,
    whose social expenditure obligations were already covered by existing (pre-FUG) income; and (iii)
    vulnerable, poorer women with dependent children who had no resources to expend beyond their
    domestic obligations.


B.2.c) Productive Expenditures

    Productive expenditures are those that are undertaken to expand income-earning opportunities.
    They include buying or renting of productive assets (such as land, processing machines, and
    equipment); buying additional processing inputs (such as cassava, palm oil nuts, and locust
    beans); hiring labor to expand cultivation and harvest processing crops; starting up or expanding
    microtrading businesses; and investing in adult children’s businesses.


    Nearly three-quarters of female FUG respondents chose to direct at least some proportion
    of their additional income into productive expenditures (Table 7). Though the proportion of
    additional income they directed toward productive expenditures varied significantly across the
    population of respondents, it was a significant finding that such a high percentage aimed to expand

                                                      45
                                                        PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




  and/or diversify their businesses.


  The pattern of productive expenditure was found to vary along two main lines: (i) investments in
  business expansion (Box 4); and (ii) investments in business diversification (Box 5).


i. Productive investments in business expansion
  Business expansion requires that substantial income is saved to facilitate business transactions
  such as buying inputs or renting land, that there is access to credit or loan facilities that can be
  repaid after processing and sale, or that a spouse or male relative provides financial or labor
  support (Box 4). Women who were able to overcome these constraints and increase the quantity
  of cassava inputs they processed tended to be women in monogamous households who had no
  children living at home and who received financial support from their husbands or a male relative.
  Executive members of female FUGs were also more likely to overcome cash and credit constraints,
  as they tended to have more education and an ability to mobilize external support. Executive
  members often, but not always, had support from their husbands or male relatives in other FUGs
  or the apex FCA.


  Because female palm oil processors with mechanized processing equipment were able to process
  palm nuts with greater efficiency, extracting more oil in less time taken, the men who owned
  the palm trees derived greater financial benefit than the women processors. In one female
  FUG that processed palm nut oil, it was the adult “sons” of the women FUG members who had
  initiated the formation and registration of the FUG. They also maintained the processing shed and
  equipment. It was to the sons’ advantage to support their “mothers” to procure the equipment, but
  the mothers also benefitted from increased production of residue products (to varying degrees)
  and from intergenerational mutual support. In this regard, the women were benefitting from being



                      Table 6: Use of Additional Income for Productive Expenditures
     Change in productive expenditure                      % of female beneficiaries
    No increase in productive expenditure                             11%
    Unknown                                                           18%
    Increase in productive expenditure                                71%
    Total                                                            100%



                                                   46
August 2014




                     Box 4: Business Expansion Strategies of Female Agro-processors

      Women chose different paths to expanding their productivity, depending on whether the business
      was related to the core activity of their Fadama support or to a separate and independent business.
      The majority of female FUG respondents were involved in agro-processing; with Fadama asset
      assistance and mechanization, they were able to process their crop (cassava, palm oil, or locust
      beans) more efficiently and with less physical labor. To expand their income opportunities within
      the FUG-related business, they looked to increase their inputs either by buying or renting more
      land to grow more of the crop (typically cassava) or by purchasing more of the crop from other
      farmers. The first option often required hiring labor to assist with clearing and harvesting. This
      labor cost could constrain business growth or reduce the modest profits that cassava processing
      fetched. The second option, which involved direct purchase of the crop either while still in the
      ground or already harvested, required cash up front, both for the transaction and for transport
      to carry the cassava tubers to the processing area.

      Even when conditions favor expansion of agro-processing by increasing cassava inputs, overall
      cassava production is limited by the small scale and seasonal nature of noncommercial cassava
      production. Higher-yielding cassava varieties are available, but these require additional inputs
      such as fertilizer that are beyond the income or credit capacities of most women.

      Women also expanded their business opportunities at the processing end of the cassava cycle.
      For example, cassava can be processed into a number of different food items according to local
      demand. The product requiring the smallest amount of processing is laafu, followed by garri and
      then fufu (which can be sold as wet fufu or further processed in a flash dryer and sold as dry and
      odorless fufu). Women in FUGs with access to a processing shed, clean water, and the full range
      of processing equipment were able to hygienically produce, bag, and market a high-quality fufu
      and/or garri to a larger market and at higher prices than those FUG members with more basic
      processing assets (for example, cassava soaking drums) that produced laafu for home and local
      consumption.

      Women involved in processing palm oil expanded their businesses by processing more of the
      palm nuts from neighboring palm tree owners who lacked mechanized processing equipment.
      Once processed, the palm nut oil belonged to the palm tree owner (who had shared arrangements
      with the harvester of the nuts). The residue products of palm nut oil extraction, particularly palm
      kernel oil, provided an important source of income for women in this business. Processing more
      palm nut oil therefore provided more residue products that women used for domestic purposes
      or, in the case of palm kernel oil, sold at market.




  in the stage of the family life cycle in which adult children could assist them financially and in turn
  receive assistance to increase their own incomes to a greater or lesser degree.




                                                      47
                                                          PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




                 Box 5: Business Diversification Strategies Among Female Agro-processors


       Business diversification strategies were prevalent even before the Fadama intervention, as agro-
       processing at a noncommercial scale is by nature seasonal and women tend to participate in a
       number of farm and off-farm livelihood activities.

       Growing vegetables and selling kolanut and fruit are examples of business diversification
       strategies employed by women in rural areas, whereas petty trading (of domestic provisions and
       appliances, plastic bags, firewood, or byproducts of palm oil processing, for example) are more
       prevalent in areas with greater access to sizeable markets.




ii. Productive investments aimed at diversifying one’s business

   Women can also choose to expand their income-earning opportunities by engaging in other
   agriculture activities or by diversifying into other sectors, such as retail and petty trading (Box
   5). Within the research sample, women were less likely to enter into entirely new areas of business
   activity; rather, they tended to use their additional income to increase existing small business
   activities—for example, by purchasing more of a product for market sales or expanding the range
   of goods sold in a small, informal store. Even then, it was often access to group savings schemes
   or microcredit that enabled the expansion. This underscores the importance of group savings
   schemes or group-supported access to microcredit facilities in expanding business opportunities;
   in some cases (such as iru processors), such schemes were more significant than the Fadama
   project’s asset assistance.


   There were exceptions to this generalization where there was significant support from a spouse
   or other male family member, which varied according to household type. Women in monogamous
   marriages reported receiving substantial cash or in-kind support from their spouse to invest in
   business expansion. For example, two women respondents in one FUG received financial support
   (through loans) from their husbands to purchase land on which to grow cassava for processing
   into garri. Another monogamously married woman reported that her husband had paid for the
   hired labor she needed to grow additional cassava. In each of these cases, the women were able to
   diversify their businesses from purely cassava processing into cassava crop production and, in so
   doing, to reduce their dependence on cassava suppliers. This type of spousal support for productive
   investments may have been motivated by a desire to gain greater control over the productive

                                                     48
  August 2014




       assets and income of the wives, or may be an example of increased co-production based on joint
       asset acquisition. Women in polygamous households did not report receiving such support from
       their spouses, and widows were only likely to receive support from adult children in the form of
       cash for domestic purposes.


       Women’s productive expenditures were also influenced by their stage in the family life cycle. A
       number of older couples—who no longer had significant domestic or social expenditures to absorb
       their income—were found to be directing their additional income away from agriculture and into
       buying land and building houses in urban areas.



B.3)   Empowerment at the Household and Community Levels
       Strengthening women’s incentives and capacity to pursue opportunities can empower them
       economically. Looking beyond additional income and expenditure patterns, this research asked
       women whether they felt empowered in their household and/or community. The purpose was to
       gain an understanding of how the increased assets, income, and capabilities that women gained
       under the Fadama project affected their perceptions of their influence and autonomy in the
       household and the community.


       Most women respondents (71 percent) reported that they felt empowered, more so within the
       community than in the household (Figure 7). This result may be explained by the fact that the
       women belong to a group, the FUG, that is visible in the community by virtue of having successfully
       gained economic assets (either communally, as in processing sheds and equipment, or individually,
       as in soaking barrels and cooking pots) and improved their outputs (through new processing
       techniques and packaging of goods for sale). These assets and outputs can be observed by other
       community members, who accredit the owners—the FUG members—with innovation and success.
       The female FUG members often process the cassava or palm oil nuts of other villagers and villages
       in addition to those of their husbands or other male relatives, thus bringing wider community
       acclaim for their enterprise.


       Interviews reveled several examples of community empowerment through success in Fadama.
       The members of one FUG (Orisun Ayo) reported that, through their Fadama enterprise, they had
       gained more respect and were seen as enterprising women. People often called the members


                                                       49
                                                    PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




“Iya Fadama” (Mother of Fadama). Other women had received appointments in their respective
churches for transferring agricultural knowledge to other members of the community. Women
in another FUG (Itesiwaju Obinrin) felt that they were more highly regarded as a result of their
increased post-FUG incomes and that they were now associated with the name “Fadama,” as were
the cassava-soaking drums that were instrumental to their livelihoods.


Moreover, women who had more money for social expenditures as a result of the Fadama
project also felt empowered in the community. Their ability to support their extended family and
the community in rite of passage ceremonies led to community acknowledgement of success. As a
result, they were more likely to feel that their social capital in the community had increased.


Far fewer respondents (7 percent) reported feeling empowered in the household since becoming
a FUG member. Important to consider in this respect is that the income women earn is separate
from that of their husbands and that women choose, within the constraints discussed in Section B,
how to spend their income. For example, a spouse in a polygamous marriage where wives manage
their own subhousehold units or where additional income earned is low, may not be aware of his
wife’s increased “topping up” of domestic spending on food and school costs. Even when a spouse
is aware that his wife has increased the amount by which she is “topping up” for food and school
costs, it may not be significant enough to change the perception that the wife’s earnings are of
lesser consequence to the household. In these circumstances, women may not feel empowered
within the spousal relationship even if they feel that their assets, income, and economic security
have increased. By contrast, widows tended to feel empowered both in their household and in the
community because they were independent of male support and managing their own economic
affairs.


Women that did report feeling empowered in their household were more likely to have
increased their additional income and to be able to invest in furthering their business interests.
As discussed above, spousal support plays an important role in obtaining more assets, increasing
production, and earning more income. This support may underscore an existing relationship of
economic interdependence (for example, a grower and processor relationship) that is evolving
into something closer to spousal co-production of separate and independent incomes using joint
economic assets. FUG executive members were likely to be found in this group given their higher
literacy rates and strong bonds with men (husbands and relations) in other FUGs and the apex
FCAs. Older women in monogamous marriages and with independent children (often overlapping

                                               50
August 2014




               Figure 6: Female Beneficiaries’ Self-reported Perceptions of Empowerment




                                                                    Feels empowered in
                                                                    her community

                          29%                                       Feels empowered in
                                                                    her household

                                             57%
                                                                    Feels empowered in
                                                                    both her community
                     7%                                             and her household
                          7%                                        Doesn't feel
                                                                    empowered




  with executive members) had also expanded their business interests and were making decisions
  with their spouses about future joint economic assets.




                                                  51
                                                             PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




c. concluding remarks


       This research investigated the targeting, performance, and empowerment
       of women in female farmers groups under Fadama III. The research findings have operational
       implications, both for the Fadama project and more generally for Nigeria’s ATA and other
       agricultural development programs.


C.1)   Key Findings on Targeting, Performance, and Empowerment
       Targeting
       Reliance on CBT mechanisms has significant implications for female farmers’ access to the
       program. While the use of CBT methods in the Fadama project has yielded a high proportion of
       female beneficiaries, it has also created space for local political economy and social dynamics
       to determine the characteristics of women’s inclusion. With the use of CBT methods, women’s
       relations to local (male) power holders, their position in the community, and their sociodemographic
       profile become key variables affecting their access to and role in the project.


       CBT mechanisms tend to privilege women with strong relationships to male power holders.
       Men, as husbands and community leaders, play a “bridging” role in women’s access to the project.
       They do this by lifting constraints (providing access to project information, financial support,
       and administrative assistance with program requirements) that would otherwise put women at
       a disadvantage compared to men with regard to participation in Fadama. Men’s intermediation
       has downsides, however, as women with weak or nonexistent relationships to male power holders
       are at risk of being excluded. In this regard, the development of strategies that specifically target
       women with project information and facilitation services could be tested by CDD agriculture
       projects to mitigate the risk of exclusion of segments of the female farmer population.



                                                        52
August 2014




  Performance
  Understanding the social fabric of the FUG is critical to explaining group performance. Socially
  cohesive groups tend to be those that are embedded in communities where extended family
  ties overlap with FUG ties and those whose members belong to a preexisting social or religious
  group. These groups have deep-rooted systems of trust and conflict management that support
  their performance, allowing them to be more resilient in the face of difficulties such as delays in
  the procurement of assets. Groups with close economic ties, for example because members share
  group assets and perform joint economic activities, also appear to perform better.

  Individual performance within a group can vary substantially, and the socioeconomic status of
  individuals in the group tends to be reflected in differentiated access to decision making and
  project benefits. Women with higher social (specifically, education) and economic endowments
  appear to secure executive positions in their FUG more readily. In addition, poor women face a higher
  opportunity cost of participation (with scarce money taken out of circulation for FUG registration,
  savings for asset acquisition, or contributions to revolving loans) than wealthier women. The
  latter are better able to provide the matching contribution required for asset acquisition and, as a
  consequence, acquire more assets. These initial asymmetries in access to assets result in different
  levels of production and income increases among FUG members. Though the majority of women in
  female FUGs reported higher earnings as compared to their pre-FUG income, significant variation
  in additional income was observed.


  Access to loans and credits is a key factor in individual and group success. The cash required
  to access and manage assets, and to expand or diversify businesses, is difficult to amass from
  individual savings alone. Group savings, revolving loan, and microcredit schemes are important
  in increasing group members’ access to capital. More needs to be done to lift credit constraints,
  for example through supporting enhanced linkages between FUGs and credit facilities. Financial
  literacy is an important element of success in microcredit schemes and needs to be tied to any
  expansion of credit facilities.




                                                   53
                                                            PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




       Empowerment
       Women spend additional income differently depending on their household needs and
       obligations. These vary with their marital status and the characteristics of their household (for
       example, the number and age of children). In particular, women face different opportunities and
       constraints when choosing to invest in domestic, social, or productive expenditures (that is, when
       choosing between sustaining or enhancing their family’s security and developing their business) in
       female-headed versus male-headed households and, in the latter case, between polygamous and
       monogamous households.

       The most successful women in female FUGs are those who benefit from co-productive
       arrangements (generally monogamously married women). This may include, for example, mutual
       assistance with business expansion, diversification, or asset acquisition. Some risks may be
       associated with co-production; as women’s businesses expand, their autonomy could be curtailed
       by spouses keen to maintain overall control as heads of household. What is important for successful
       co-production is that each party is economically autonomous and empowered to decide whether
       or not to spend or invest.



C.2)   Broader Policy Messages and Further Research
       The research findings on targeting, performance, and empowerment have further implications
       for how gender and gender relations are understood, assessed, and supported in agriculture
       projects and policies. In particular:


       Unpacking “Gender”
       Overall, the findings presented above show the need to unpack “gender” and account for
       the diversity of women’s experiences in the agriculture sector. The research has shown how
       household structure, marital status, age, socioeconomic status, and other attributes of female
       beneficiaries affect their performance in FUGs and their capacity to leverage additional income to
       increase their economic security and autonomy.


       The differentiated impacts of agriculture programs on women’s economic security and autonomy
       need to be accounted for in monitoring and evaluation. While Fadama’s monitoring and evaluation
       data capture more sex-disaggregated data than many other programs, this information remains

                                                       54
August 2014




  limited. The project collects only data on the percentage of female beneficiaries (41 percent), and
  the number of male, female, and mixed FUGs across enterprises. Variations in income growth
  across age, marital status, and other demographic and socioeconomic characteristics need to
  be captured and understood in program data. Equally important to understand is how women
  reinvest the income earned through agriculture programs. In this context, more innovative ways
  of measuring the program’s impact on women—beyond productivity—need to be explored.


  Embeddedness of Projects in Gender and Social Relations
  The findings underscore the local social and political embeddedness of CDD projects, a situation
  that poses both risks and opportunities. The findings support analysis of gender relations beyond
  normative approaches to understand how gender relations actually operate in rural businesses,
  households, and communities, and how this affects women’s economic performance and
  empowerment. They illustrate the critical role that men can play in the selection and participation
  of women in female FUGs and, in some cases, in the expansion of their business. This research also
  sheds like on the strong interdependence of men and women in the agriculture sector, including in
  the cassava and palm oil value chains. Moreover, the findings indicate that, while socioeconomic
  stratification in FUGs poses risks of elite capture or inequity, it also provides positive opportunities
  for solidarity, as better-off women support the participation of poorer ones. In several cases, better-
  off members mobilized their resources to help poorer members meet their financial commitments,
  thus enabling the poorer members to remain in the group and access Fadama benefits and services.


  Gender Analysis of Value Chains
  The findings suggest that no agriculture program can afford to dismiss the benefits of a gendered
  value chain analysis. A variety of co-dependency relationships exist between men and women in
  the growing, processing, and marketing of crops and value-added products. These relationships
  between men and women, as producers and processors (both men and women may be both
  producers and processors) in value chains must be better understood, with a view to supporting
  complementarities and opening up opportunities for women to move into other parts of the value
  chain. Conducting gendered value chain analysis for the commodities and zones receiving focused
  attention under the ATA is particularly important.




                                                    55
                                                   PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




Comparisons across regions and group types
The findings of this research, which are based on a sample of female-only groups in Ogun State
in the South-West region, need to be tested in other sociopolitical regions and with other group
types. Further research would be useful to compare the costs and benefits for female farmers’
performance and empowerment in female-only groups versus mixed groups in the Fadama project.
Among other things, such research could compare women’s access to services and decision making
as well as their control over benefits. Furthermore, cross-regional analysis of female farmers’
performance and empowerment would provide insights into patterns of women’s targeting,
performance, and empowerment across the culturally diverse regions of Nigeria.




                                              56
August 2014




notes
  1    Fadama is a Hausa term meaning “irrigable land.”

  2    All female-headed households in the research sample were those of widows.

  3    The World Bank supports the Federal Government of Nigeria and its ATA through additional financing of investment
       lending operations and through budget support to augment federal resources for the sector. Within the Bank’s
       project portfolio, Fadama III, the Commercial Agriculture Development Project, the Rural Access and Mobility
       Project II, and the Growth and Employment in States Program will focus their support on selected segments of the
       prioritized value chains.

  4    Support for this perception was gathered during the field research in comparing the role and achievements of women
       in mixed and female-only groups in the sample. However, the sample of mixed FUGs studied is too small to derive
       firm conclusions, and further research is required to compare women’s economic achievements and empowerment
       in mixed vs. female-only groups.

  5    In the South-West region, 71 percent of female household heads in the agriculture sector have no formal education,
       compared to 36 percent of male household heads. See Oseni et al. 2013.

  6    Orisun Ayo FUG.

  7    Here, social capital is used as defined by Bourdieu in “The Forms of Capital” (1986): “the aggregate of the actual or
       potential resources which are linked to possession of a durable network of more or less institutionalized relationships
       of mutual acquaintance and recognition.”.

  8    Arguably, the differences are even greater among Fadama FUGs more broadly, as there would be more cases of
       failure or group disruption than this study’s sample, which looked purposively for indications of success.

  9    It should be noted that the relationship between group performance and cohesion goes both ways; the cohesiveness
       of a group supports, and is reinforced by, its performance.

  10   This came out clearly in interviews and has been explained and analyzed extensively in the literature on cooperatives
       and microfinance. See, for example, Majurin 2012.

  11   It should be noted that expenditure as discussed in this section is related specifically to the additional income earned
       by an individual FUG member net of contributions made to sustain the FUG. FUG contributions may include: savings
       for asset replacement, a nominal fee for the administration of the FUG and/or FCA, and compulsory or voluntary
       contributions to savings schemes that support either revolving loans to members or counterpart funds for another
       potential round of Fadama subsidized asset acquisition. These are all important investments made by FUG members
       to sustain their FUG and its income base, in particular where the FUG holds common processing assets. For some
       FUG members who earn lower incomes, these FUG-sustaining expenditures may ensure that they have access to
       an ongoing FUG-related agro-processing income, but they may have minimal additional income for increasing other

                                                                57
                                                                PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




     discretionary expenditures.

12
     This research did not investigate whether the rank of a wife in a polygamous marriage affected her expenditure
     patterns.




                                                          58
  August 2014




Annex 1

Distribution of Fadama Registration and Benefits among Male, Female, and
Mixed FUGs in Ogun State

  There are 1,188 FUGs registered in Ogun State, 101 (8.5 percent) of which are female-only FUGs
  (Table A-1). The majority of FUGs (85 percent) are mixed, with both male and female members. Of
  the registered FUGs, the main enterprise category for female FUGs is agro-processing, followed
  by marketing and crop production.



                         Table A-1: Distribution of FUGs That Have Received Assets
            Enterprise         Male FUGS      Female FUGs      Mixed FUGs            Total
    Crop production                35              11              293               339
    Livestock                      16               2              246               264
    Agro-processing                 4              45              131               180
    Agro-forestry                  13               1               40                54
    Fishery                        10               5              197               212
    Marketing                       2              24               72                98
    Other                           1              13               27                41
    Total                          81             101             1,006              1,188




  Only 515 of the registered FUGs have received grants for asset acquisition (Table A-2). Of the 101
  female FUGs registered, 41 (40%) have received grants or assets and nearly all of them in agro-
  processing.




                                                        59
                                                            PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




                      Table A-2: FUGs Receiving Fadama Grants for Asset Acquisition
          Enterprise          Male FUGS       Female FUGs            Mixed FUGs            Total
  Crop production                   0                  0                  145              145
  Livestock                         11                 1                  96               108
  Agro-processing                   3                  40                 57               100
  Agro-forestry                     7                  0                  32                39
  Fishery                           0                  0                  123              123
  Total                             21                 41                 453              515




In the agro-processing category, 100 FUGs received grants for assets (Table A-3). Of these,
69 received grants for cassava processing assets (2 male, 17 female, and 50 mixed). In palm oil
processing, 7 FUGs received asset grants (1 male, 2 female, and 4 mixed).




                  Table A-3: Female FUGs as a Percentage of all FUGs in Agro-processing
       All FUGs           Number         % of Total           Female FUGs         Number    % of Total
  Registered FUGs           1,188           100             Registered female      101           8.5
                                                            FUGs
  FUGs to receive            515            43              Female FUGs to          41           3.4
  grants                                                    receive grants
  FUGs in agro-              100            8.4             Female FUGs in          40           3.4
  processing to re-                                         agro-processing to
  ceive grants                                              receive grants
  Agro-processing            69             5.8             Agro-processing         17           1.4
  FUGs in cassava                                           female FUGs in
                                                            cassava
  Agro-processing             7             0.6             Agro-processing         2            0.17
  FUGs in palm oil                                          female FUGs in
                                                            palm oil




Given the predominance of Fadama-funded female FUGs in agro-processing and the importance
of cassava agro-processing within this enterprise category, it is not surprising that high-performing
female FUGs were identified in this area and consequently form the majority of the female FUGs
included in this research. Surprisingly, there were no female FUGs funded under crop production
despite cassava being the second-most favored crop for women in the southern region. Women

                                                  60
August 2014




  farmers growing cassava may be members of mixed FUGs, however; if so, they were not identified
  in the sample of high-performing FUGs selected for this research.




                                               61
                                                              PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




Annex 2

Selected Question Guides

  This annex provides some examples of the question guides used in conducting in-depth interviews
  of Fadama respondents. It includes the question guide for both individual FUG members and that
  used for their spouses.




Question Guide 1: Individual Member of FUG (Male or Female)


     General indications:

     •	   Where a question is not answered put in the reason for the non-response.
     •	   Explain that you want to capture his/her personal details before hearing his/her story of Fadama.
          Explain that these details will not be used to identify him/her personally in any reporting.
     •	   Before starting, inform the respondent that the interview will last about an hour and a half.




1. FUG Details


           FUG name                                         Date

           FUG Type                Male                     Female               Mixed
           (tick as appropriate)
           FUG Location

           FUG Enterprise

           FUG Activity




                                                       62
August 2014




2. Personal Details


First Name

Gender (tick as appro-   Male                         Female
priate)

Age
Education completed      Never attended   Primary     Junior     Senior      Tertiary
(tick as appropriate)    	                            SS	        SS	

Religion                                  Ethnicity
Marital Status           Married          Informal    Divorced   Separated   Widowed    Never
(tick as appropriate)                     Union                                         Married
                         M          P
•	   If polygamous
     household, no. of
     wives

Age at marriage
Household size (total)


Adults                   Total            Male                   Female
Children                 Total            Male                   Female




                                              63
                                                              PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




3. Storytelling on FUG Formation, Functioning, and Cohesion


   The story telling section should inform the interviewer on how the FUG was set up and how it functions.
   The objective is to understand the dynamics of selection, participation/voice and cohesion. By the end
   of the section, the interviewer should have a good understanding of (i) how individuals get selected/
   targeted to participate in the program, and what is the profile of individuals targeted (ii) what is the
   role and influence of individuals members in decision-making and what are the main characteristics of
   participation in the group, (iii) how and under what circumstances do groups access (or not) services, (iv)
   what is the level of social cohesion in the group, and (v) how members perceive the impact of the project
   on their group’s welfare and the reasons for their success (or lack thereof).

   You may start by asking for the individual member’s story of how he/she became a FUG member and how
   the FUG developed – listening and recording – what points has he/she chosen to tell? After he/she has told
   his story make sure the following are covered (if not told in the story):




   Selection/targeting


       •	   Number of years in FUG
       •	   Why did he/she become a FUG member?
       •	   What were there criteria he/she had to meet to become a FUG member?
       •	   How did he/she become a FUG member? (process)
       •	   Did the FUG come from a pre-existing group or formed in response to Fadama being introduced in
            the community?
       •	   How long had the pre-existing group been together and for what purpose did they form?
       •	   Have some applicants been rejected?


   Group formation


       •	   What Fadama eligibility criteria did the group have to meet?
       •	   How was the money raised to register the group?
       •	   How was money raised to meet matching component?
       •	   What was the role of facilitators/community leaders/FCA/LG/state PIU in supporting the set-up of
            the group?
       •	   Was there any major conflict during the group set-up?


                                                       64
August 2014




      •	   Do you belong to any other non-Fadama economic group or project? If yes, does it have any influence
           on your FUG activity?




   Decision-making


      •	   How was the decision made regarding the FUG activity – did all members of the group decide?
      •	   Did any external actor (LF, Fadama staff, community leader) facilitate the decision of the choice of
           activity?
      •	   How often does FUG meet and what is discussed?
      •	   How are decision taken? Who makes decision in the FUG? Is there any rule for decision-taking (e.g.
           consensus? Majority-based? Leaders decide?)
      •	   Are there key decision makers in the FUG, if so who and why are they dominant in decision-making?
      •	   What has been the most difficult decision the group has taken?
      •	   What role and responsibilities do women vs. men have in the FUG?
      •	   Group cohesion (Is the FUG a cohesive group?)
      •	   Do all the members participate in FUG activities?
      •	   Do members work together outside of Fadama activity? If so, how/on what?
      •	   Do they support each other outside of Fadama activity?
      •	   e.g. if someone is sick/loses a family members/needs income support, what kind of support do other
           FUG members provide?
      •	   Has there been any conflict in the group? Over what? How was it solved?
      •	   Are other members of your household involved in the activities of the FUG on a financial or voluntary
           basis?




   Access to services


      •	   What kind of support has the group received under Fadama?
      •	   Has the FUG used extensions and/or advisory services?
      •	   If yes, get explanation of type, etc.
      •	   If no, why not?
      •	   What was the role of FCA in assisting group access services?



                                                        65
                                                             PERSPECTIVES ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT




•	   How did Fadama staff help the group in accessing services?
•	   Was there any difficulty in accessing services? If yes, what were they and how were they overcome?
•	   Has the group solicited or received any support in cash or kind from individuals or groups not related to
     Fadama? If yes, what impact has the support had on the group’s operational capacity and income? How
     does this compare with the impact of official inputs?
•	   Group achievements
•	   Have expectations of improvement in income been achieved? Why or why not?
•	   Is the FUG meeting its savings plan?
•	   If no, why not?
•	   If yes, what rate of savings has been achieved?
•	   Has there been any discussion or action on reinvesting the savings?
•	   Has any individual in the group got access to the revolving loan scheme? Has the respondent had access?
•	   What does the respondent consider to be the reasons for success of the FUG?




                                                       66
 August 2014




bibliography


 Majurin, Eva. 2012. How women fare in East African cooperatives: the case of Kenya, Tanzania
     and Uganda. Cooperative Facility for Africa (CoopAFRICA), ILO Country Office for Tanzania,
     Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda.


 NBS (Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics). 2013. The Review of the Nigerian Economy 2010. NBS,
    December 2011; Revised 2011 and Estimates for Q1-Q4, 2012.


 Nkonya E., D, Phillip, E. Kato, B. Ahmed, A. Daramola, S. B., Ingawa, I. Luby, E.A. Lufadeju, M.
    Madukwe, and A.G. Shettima. 2013. Medium Term Impact of Fadama III Project. International
    Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).


 Oseni, Gbemisola, Markus Goldstein, and Amarachi Utah. 2013. Gender Dimensions in Nigerian
    Agriculture. World Bank (Draft).


 Oseni, Gbemisola. 2012. Gender and Livelihoods Note. World Bank (Draft).


 World Bank. 2009. Awakening Africa’s Sleeping Giant; Prospects for Commercial Agriculture in the
    Guinea Savannah Zone and Beyond. Washington, DC: The World Bank.


 ———. 2002. Empowerment and Poverty Reduction: A Sourcebook. Washington, DC: The World Bank.




                                                   67
