                          92728
  LABORATORY PROFESSIONALS IN
AFRICA: THE BACKBONE OF QUALITY
          DIAGNOSTICS
DISCUSSION PAPER      NOVEMBER 2014




Miriam Schneidman
Russell J. Dacombe
Jane Carter
   LABORATORY PROFESSIONALS IN AFRICA:




        The Backbone of Quality Diagnostics




Miriam Schneidman, Russell J. Dacombe, and Jane Carter




                   November 2014
        Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP
topics to encourage discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in
any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board
of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor,
Martin Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                             i
        Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

                        Laboratory Professionals in Africa:
                       The Backbone of Quality Diagnostics

               Miriam Schneidmana, Russell J. Dacombeb, and Jane Carterc
a
  Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
USA
b
   Clinical Sciences Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
United Kingdom
c
  Clinical and Diagnostics Department, Amref Health Africa, Nairobi, Kenya


 This paper was prepared under the Africa Region Human Resources for Health Program
 of the World Bank which aims to support governments in the Africa Region to develop
and implement national strategies on Human Resources for Health. It represents part of a
    broader effort to shed light on neglected cadres in health systems on the continent.


Abstract: Laboratories have historically been under supported in developing country
health systems resulting in poor quality diagnosis and inadequate disease surveillance.
The labor market for laboratory workers in many developing countries is typically
characterized by constrained supply (especially amongst well qualified staff), sluggish
public sector demand, and relatively low wages. This leads to a high turnover of staff
with highly skilled staff finding work in the private sector. Laboratory professionals are
predominantly male with relatively limited female labor participation, with potential
gender based barriers to advancement. The focus on communicable diseases has meant
that funding for broader public health laboratory services has been relatively neglected.

In this paper we present a number of strategies to address these problems based on the
outcomes from a literature review and case studies conducted in four African countries.
Improved registration and human resource planning are required to establish the scale of
the problem and to develop country specific strategies to address skills shortages. More
high quality pre-service training is needed to supply the service with suitably skilled
professional staff to address the current deficit. Innovative in-service training is essential
to maintain competence and collaboration is required with the private sector to utilize
their expertise. A clear career structure with transparent promotional opportunities is
required to recruit and retain staff in the public sector. The establishment of suitable work
environments and regulatory and representative bodies will also support recruitment and
retention as well as enhance quality. It is also clear that this cadre has been
underrepresented in human resources for health research and more activity in this area
will lead to greater understanding of the problems and provide more potential solutions.



                                              ii
Keywords: Neglected cadres, laboratory professionals, quality diagnostics, and
laboratories.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Miriam Schneidman, Health, Nutrition and Population
Global Practice, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Email: mschneidman@worldbank.org.




                                         iii
                                                Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .............................................................................................. VI

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................... VII

PART I – INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... 1

PART II– CONTEXT ....................................................................................................... 3

PART III – LABOR MARKET FRAMEWORK .......................................................... 6

PART IV – STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS .................................................................... 21

ANNEX I .......................................................................................................................... 25

ANNEX II ........................................................................................................................ 31

ANNEX III ....................................................................................................................... 32

REFERENCES ................................................................................................................ 34



                                                    LIST OF BOXES

Box 1: A Vicious Cycle ...................................................................................................... 1
Box 2: Framework of the Labor Market for Laboratory Professionals ............................... 7
Box 3: Inadequate Number and High Unmet Needs for Laboratory Professionals in a
    Select Group of Countries ........................................................................................... 9
Box 4: Capacity Constraints in Pre-Service Training in a Select Group of Countries .... 11
Box 5: Factors Influencing Labor Mobility ...................................................................... 12
Box 6: Strategic Planning ................................................................................................. 14
Box 7: Strengthening Laboratory Management Towards Accreditation .......................... 17
Box 8: National Regulatory Bodies .................................................................................. 19
Box 9: National Professional Associations ....................................................................... 20
Box 10: Professionalizing Laboratory Work in Kenya ..................................................... 20
Box 11: A Virtuous Cycle................................................................................................ 21




                                                                 iv
          LIST OF ABREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AIDS      Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
AKMLSO    Association of Kenya Medical Laboratory Scientific Officers
ASLM      African Society for Laboratory Medicine
ASCP      American Society for Clinical Pathology
CDC       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FBO       Faith-Based Organization
FELTP     Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
HIV       Human Immuno-Deficiency Virus
HR        Human Resource
HRH       Human Resources for Health
KENAS     Kenyan National Accreditation Service
KMLTTB    Kenya Medical Laboratory Technicians and Technologist Board
LQIT      Laboratory Quality Improvement Tools
MeLSAT    Medical Laboratory Association of Tanzania
NGO       Non-Governmental Organization
PPP       Public-Private Partnership
PEPFAR    US President's Emergency Plan For AIDS Relief
RABITEC   Rwanda Association of Biomedical Laboratory Technologist
RESOLAB   West and Central Africa Veterinary Laboratory Network for
          Avian Influenza and other Transboundary Diseases
SANAS     South African National Accreditation Service
SLIPTA    Stepwise Laboratory Quality Improvement Process Towards Accreditation
SLMTA     Strengthening Laboratory Management Towards Accreditation
TB        Tuberculosis
USAID     United States Agency for International Development
USG       United States Government
WHO       World Health Organization




                                        v
                             ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was prepared under the Africa Region Human Resources for Health Program
of the World Bank which aims to support governments to develop and implement
national strategies on Human Resources for Health. The paper also represents part of a
broader effort to bring attention to the neglected cadres in health systems in sub-Saharan
Africa.

The paper benefitted from comments of peer reviewers, Christophe Lemiere, Chris Herbst
and Dominic Haazen. Yvette Atkins provided valuable assistance with the production of
the final report.

We would like to recognize the high quality case studies produced under the leadership of
Martin Matu, Laboratory Systems Specialist, and Josephine Kibaru-Mbae, former
Director General, of the East, Central, and Southern Africa Health Community.

We also acknowledge the project coordinators of the East Africa Public Health
Laboratory Networking Project and the teams who supported data collection for the case
studies referenced in the discussion paper and who are now moving this agenda ahead.
Specifically, we would like to thank Alex Opio and Simon Kalyesubula (Uganda); Daniel
Ngamije and Claver Kayobotsi (Rwanda); Mamo Umuro, Joshua Rotich, Willis Akhwale
and Chris Masila (Kenya); and Fausta Mosha, Charles Massambu and Rugola Mtandu
(Tanzania).

The authors would also like to thank the consultants who helped in the data collection
process for the case studies led by Maureen Nafula, Barnabe Sebagabo, Isaac Malagala,
and Joseph Mabula Kasubi.

Finally, the authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP
Discussion Paper.




                                            vi
                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

I. Introduction

Laboratory professionals figure prominently among neglected cadres in health systems
across sub-Saharan Africa. There are often insufficient numbers, a skewed distribution,
low level of qualifications, and limited career opportunities. Laboratory personnel often
work in facilities which are poorly equipped, and do not systematically respect safety and
infection control standards. These factors adversely affect the performance of laboratory
professionals, who are the backbone of quality diagnostics. As a result, clinicians lose
confidence in laboratory services, and often resort to presumptive diagnoses rather than
laboratory confirmation. This paper presents the main challenges facing these neglected
cadres and outlines policies to enhance their performance and ultimately the quality of
clinical care and core public health functions.

II. Context

Laboratories are critical to effective national health systems. Accurate and reliable
laboratory services are essential for supporting clinical diagnosis, guiding treatment, and
managing the spread of drug resistance. Trained laboratory personnel and well-
functioning laboratory systems are also important in helping countries comply with
international commitments on establishing integrated disease surveillance systems and
alerting neighboring countries of disease outbreaks (International Health Regulations).

Yet in many developing countries laboratories have historically suffered from inadequate
infrastructure, limited funding, and lack of skilled personnel. Lack of access to accurate
laboratory services can result in misdiagnosis, which in turn leads to compromised patient
care, higher costs, and continual transmission of communicable diseases. The inability to
provide etiological confirmations during disease outbreaks can lead to delays in
responding efficiently to outbreaks and difficulties in controlling or eradicating endemic
diseases, elevating risk of disease transmission, and fueling economic costs.

During the past decade there has been a renewed interest in improving laboratory services
driven primarily by increased funding for the major communicable diseases. Since the
2008 Maputo Declaration on Strengthening of Laboratory Systems there has been
recognition of the broader importance of laboratory services, and of the role of trained
and qualified laboratory personnel in providing high quality, timely, reproducible results.
This has created a positive funding environment to reverse the previous decades of
neglect of laboratory services and laboratory professionals.

III. Labor Market Framework

The paper provides a discussion of the main factors that influence the availability of
qualified laboratory personnel. It includes a framework for better understanding the labor
market for laboratory professionals which can be applied in different settings to identify

                                            vii
key impediments and policy levers which may be amenable to change. It presents
examples and evidence from different countries to illustrate broad trends and key
challenges.

The labor market for laboratory workers in many countries in sub-Saharan Africa is
typically characterized by constrained supply, sluggish public sector demand, and
relatively low wages. The insufficient supply of laboratory professionals stems from the
limited capacity of pre-service training institutions, sluggish recruitment, and unattractive
wages. Many training institutions across the region suffer from inadequate facilities,
shortages of tutors, and funding constraints.

The labor force in most countries is comprised primarily of certificate holders with a
relatively smaller number of diploma and degree level staff, particularly in the public
sector. There is a skewed geographic distribution with the bulk of the less qualified labor
force in rural areas and the most skilled ones in urban facilities. The public sector
struggles to recruit and retain staff with higher qualifications that have more attractive
opportunities in the private sector. Staff turnover is found to be a key concern in the
public sector. Laboratory professionals are predominantly male with relatively limited
female labor participation, with potential gender based barriers to advancement.

Public sector demand for laboratory professionals has been historically weak. Laboratory
work has not been viewed as a critical profession by health ministries and public sector
institutions have been unable to attract highly qualified personnel due to budgetary
constraints and other priorities. Government policies to structure the laboratory
profession and to develop clear career pathways have been generally inadequate. Job
descriptions are not well structured or standardized and there are often inconsistencies
between qualifications and salary structures which impede recruitment, retention, and
productivity. Performance review processes are not systematically applied to laboratory
staff. The main bodies representing laboratory professionals are not sufficiently strong to
allow laboratory workers to be adequately represented at the facility and policy levels,
and to have a genuine voice in the system.

Private sector institutions (particularly for-profit) have a greater capacity to attract
qualified laboratory professionals and are willing and able to offer better working
conditions with access to the latest technology, more attractive salary and benefit
packages, and innovative incentive schemes. The private sector (faith-based and for-
profit organizations) absorbs a higher proportion of degree holders. Private sector
organizations play a relatively minor role in pre-service training in most countries even
though there are several promising examples of mentorships and placements.

During the past few years there has been an increase in laboratory strategic plans which
are beginning to focus attention on this critical pillar of health systems and to raise the
visibility of the laboratory profession. Government policies and strategies to upgrade and
retrain laboratory workers through high quality, regionally standardized training, to
improve work conditions, and to foster closer working relationships with clinical staff

                                            viii
and the private sector are steps in the right direction. Much more needs to be done as
noted below.

IV. Policy Recommendations

To ensure the most is made of the positive funding environment for laboratories we have
identified a series of policy recommendations. These are presented in terms of broad
strategic directions and are not intended to be prescriptive. Country plans need to take
into account the specific local context to identify the most appropriate combination of
strategies taking into account what is financially affordable. The main recommendations
are as follows:

    Expand the output of pre-service training institutions in order to address the pervasive
     deficit of qualified laboratory staff and/or use public sector funds to contract private
     sector training institutions or public sector facilities in neighboring countries.
    Promote work and competency based in-service training to ensure that staff skills are up
     to date and competency is demonstrated. Strategies such as work place based
     mentorships, e-learning, flexible working hours, and rotational deployment should be
     used to promote training opportunities, especially for staff in more remote postings.
    Conduct joint training of laboratory and clinical staff as this has shown a positive effect
     on participating clinicians’ use of laboratories and could be an important strategy for
     improving the laboratory-clinician interface.
    Improve work environments to ensure that laboratory professionals are well protected
     and work in safe environments with access to well-maintained equipment.
    Develop well-structured career paths for laboratory cadres to increase recruitment and
     retention, and ensure that job titles and descriptions are well aligned with national
     requirements.
    Explore possibilities for greater collaboration with the private sector. Ministries of
     Health need to consider innovative ways to leverage financing and technical knowhow of
     the private sector, such as mentorships, work placements, and training in private
     facilities.
    Strengthen human resources planning for laboratory professionals and ensure that this
     neglected cadre becomes an integral part of broader HR planning at country level which
     will assist Ministries of Health to progressively address shortages and skills gaps.
    Improve registration of laboratory workers to get a better handle on the number of
     workers, the skills mix available, and their distribution.
    Establish or strengthen national regulatory and representative bodies to improve
     governance and enhance quality. Proper regulation of laboratory services through
     activities such as setting and supervising laboratory standards and standardizing and
     regulating pre- and in-service training will help improve morale and the quality of
     services. Representative bodies need to be better organized to effectively represent the
     interests of laboratory professionals and allow them greater voice in the system.
    Scale up research on issues related to laboratory workers to inform public policy.
     Research is needed to better understand the specific labor market situations in different
     countries and the factors which influence the supply and demand for laboratory cadres as
     well as the combination of policies and practices which will improve performance of
     laboratory workers and of public health laboratories.



                                              ix
                                PART I – INTRODUCTION

1.       Laboratory professionals figure prominently among neglected cadres in health systems
across sub-Saharan Africa. There are often insufficient numbers, a skewed distribution, low
level of qualifications, and limited career opportunities. Laboratory personnel often work in
facilities which are poorly equipped, and do not systematically respect safety and infection
control standards. These factors adversely affect the performance of laboratory professionals
who are the backbone of quality diagnostics. 1 As a result, clinicians can lose confidence in
laboratory services, and resort to presumptive diagnoses rather than laboratory confirmation. 2 In
return, laboratory staff can become demotivated by the lack of faith in their profession. Breaking
this vicious cycle (Box 1) is critical to enhancing performance of laboratory professionals, and
ultimately the quality of clinical care and core public health functions.

                                       Box 1: A Vicious Cycle




Source: Authors




1
   Performance is discussed primarily in terms of competency (for example, having the right skills and
qualifications) and ability (for example, operating in a well-equipped and safe working environment). While
absenteeism and productivity may also adversely affect performance, these issues are not covered as there is
little reliable data and information.
2
    Reyburn, H., et al. 2007.




                                                  1
2.      This paper provides an overview of the situation of laboratory professionals in sub-
Saharan Africa and identifies policies that can enhance their performance. It is not meant to
be an exhaustive analysis of all issues but to illustrate broad trends and main challenges. The
paper is primarily descriptive and qualitative. It relies mainly on secondary data. It draws
heavily on a scoping study of the literature 3 and on four case studies (Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania,
and Uganda) commissioned as part of the World Bank funded East Africa Public Health
Laboratory Networking Project. 4 The scoping study highlighted the lack of comprehensive
information on the subject which reflects in part the limited attention given to this group of
health professionals. In total, 30 papers on laboratory professionals in Africa were found in the
peer reviewed literature and another 21 in the grey literature, including 14 Human Resources for
Health (HRH) Observatory country reports. The country case studies used a common
methodological framework and research tools, including participatory methods for ascertaining
views and perceptions of key stakeholders and informants.

3.       Four important caveats and limitations are worth highlighting. First, there are
important data gaps and limitations both in terms of the issues and geographic coverage. Second,
the literature search found that studies do not present information in a comparable fashion, hence
limiting cross country comparisons. Third, findings from interviews and focus group discussions
conducted as part of the case studies must be viewed cautiously as they may not be fully
representative. Finally, the paper covers the role or potential of the private sector only in a
cursory manner, given the lack of data and information.

4.      The rest of this paper is divided into three sections. The next sets the context for the
main discussion by describing the importance of laboratories in health systems and the key role
of laboratory professionals. The following section proposes a framework for analyzing factors
influencing the availability of qualified laboratory workers, and presents examples and evidence
from different countries to illustrate broad trends and key challenges. The final section
summarizes policies and practices that can enhance the performance of laboratory workers and
ultimately the quality of clinical care.




3
    Dacombe, R. 2012.
4
    Nafula, M. 2012.


                                              2
                                     PART II– CONTEXT

5.       Laboratory services are an essential component of health systems. Accurate and
reliable laboratory services are critical for supporting clinical diagnosis, guiding treatment,
managing the spread of drug resistance, and responding to disease outbreaks. 5 The performance
of national and regional networks of laboratories is an important contributor to overall health
system efficiency. Tiered networks of well-staffed laboratories are critical to providing a
continuum of quality assured services and are essential for disease control activities. Laboratory
networks ensure that capacity to diagnose diseases, identify public health threats, and conduct
surveillance is done effectively. Appropriately trained and qualified laboratory personnel are
critical to well-functioning laboratory systems that provide high quality, timely, reproducible
results.

6.       Historically, laboratories have constituted one of the weakest areas in health systems
in sub-Saharan Africa. Laboratories have suffered from: inadequate infrastructure, limited
funding, and lack of qualified human resources. 6 These deficiencies hinder the performance of
laboratory health workers and of public health laboratories. In turn, these impediments impede
governments’ ability to manage the spread of drug resistance, respond to disease outbreaks, and
scale up critical programs. Lack of access to accurate laboratory services can result in
misdiagnosis, which in turn leads to compromised patient care, higher costs, and continual
transmission of communicable diseases. For example, one study in Botswana found evidence of
tuberculosis in only 52 percent of patients suspected with TB, underscoring the importance of
laboratory confirmation of disease. In Tanzania, 50 percent of patients admitted to hospitals with
a clinical diagnosis of severe malaria actually had confirmed blood smear results. 7 A Kala-azar
outbreak in Kenya in May-June 2014 underscored the importance of laboratory diagnosis for this
disease which has clinical manifestations that are common to numerous illnesses (e.g. fever,
weight loss, anemia). 8

7.      The inability to provide etiological confirmations during disease outbreaks can lead to
delays in responding efficiently to outbreaks and difficulties in containing, controlling or
eradicating endemic diseases, elevating risk of disease transmission and fueling economic
costs. The economic impact of the ongoing Ebola outbreak in West Africa is estimated at a
US$2.2 billion under a low case scenario for 2014 alone and over three times higher under a high
 case scenario. 9 The economic costs of other major epidemics have also been associated with
high socio-economic and health costs. For example, the Mexican government estimated that the
H1N1 outbreak had devastating effects on tourism and economic growth with an estimated loss
of roughly .3 percent of GDP or US$2.3 billion. The economic cost of the 2006 Chikungunya

5
  Boillot, F. 2009.
6
  Petti, C., et al. 2006.
7
  Reyburn, H., et al. 2007.
8
  Kanyina, et al. 2014.
9
  The World Bank, October 8, 2014.


                                              3
epidemic in Mauritius and other Indian Ocean countries was substantial in terms of losses to the
tourist industry.

8.       During the past decade there has been a renewed focus on laboratories with the
agenda largely driven by the surge in funding for the three main communicable diseases
(HIV/AIDS, TB, and malaria). As a result, there has been a boost in training opportunities for
laboratory workers, upgrading of facilities, and an introduction of new technologies for prompt
and accurate diagnosis, contributing to improved working environments. While a few simple
microscopic and kit-based laboratory tests have become widely used at point of care, such as
HIV and malaria rapid diagnostic tests, clinical laboratory services remain critical for the
accurate and efficient diagnosis and monitoring of most diseases. 10 Moreover, while there have
been many positive spillover effects from these disease specific laboratory investments the focus
has not been on the broader need to strengthen public health laboratories and to address issues
related to the recruitment and retention of laboratory personnel.

9.      Within the past few years, there has also been a growing recognition of the broader
importance of laboratories and several calls for action. The main regional consensus was
embodied in the 2008 Maputo Declaration on Strengthening of Laboratory Systems which
underscored the importance of putting in place appropriate institutional, policy, and strategic
frameworks and called for action to address the broader laboratory human resources agenda. A
similar policy statement was made during the 59th meeting of African Ministers of Health which
called for strengthening public health laboratories, and tackling the spread of drug resistance to
AIDS, TB, and malaria. Furthermore, virtually all countries in sub-Saharan Africa have made
important international commitments to establish integrated disease surveillance systems and to
alert neighboring countries of disease outbreaks (International Health Regulations 11) which
require well trained laboratory personnel and well-functioning laboratory systems.

10.      The performance of laboratories tends to be closely related to qualifications of
laboratory personnel. While most of the empirical evidence comes from developed countries
there is growing evidence from resource constrained settings. One study in the United States
assessed the accuracy score of a group of laboratories employing only certified medical
technologists compared with a group of laboratories employing only noncertified medical
technologists. The group employing only certified medical technologists had a mean accuracy
score of 95 percent while the group employing only noncertified medical technologists had a
mean accuracy score of only 75 percent. 12 A similar study assessed the performance of two
groups of laboratories, one employing only American Society of Clinical Pathologists (ASCP)
certified technologists and a second group employing no ASCP certified technologists.
Significant differences were found for the basic laboratory services, as well as for comprehensive
diagnostic immunology, blood banking, hematology, and chemistry with laboratories employing
only ASCP certified technologists having a significantly higher probability of achieving 80

10
   Elbireer, et al. March 17, 2011.
11
   World Health Organization. 2005.
12
   Lunz, et al. 1987.


                                              4
percent accuracy. 13 A comprehensive evaluation of the number, scope, and quality of clinical
laboratories in Kampala, the first published survey of its kind in sub-Saharan Africa, found that
laboratories which had qualified personnel had higher testing volumes and tended to be of higher
quality. Out of the 954 laboratories surveyed in Kampala only 5 percent met or surpassed the
lowest quality standards defined by the WHO/AFRO laboratory strengthening quality
improvement system towards accreditation. These facilities had one star on the five-point
system, and had a higher number of laboratory-specific staff than the remainder. 14 In spite of the
essential role of qualified laboratory personnel their numbers and qualifications remain
inadequate, as discussed in detail in the next section.




13
     Lunz M.E., B.M. Castleberry, K. James 1992.
14
     Elbireer, et al. May 30, 2013.


                                                   5
                     PART III – LABOR MARKET FRAMEWORK

11.      In many countries in sub-Saharan Africa the current labor market for laboratory
workers is typically characterized by constrained supply, sluggish public sector demand, and
relatively low wages. These factors are interrelated and contribute to the low number of
qualified laboratory professionals. Laboratory work has not been viewed as a critical profession
by health ministries, production of additional personnel has been modest, recruitment has been
constrained by budgetary ceilings and other priorities, and public sector wages have not been
competitive. This section aims to improve understanding of the main factors that influence the
supply of and demand for and the performance of laboratory workers and of public health
laboratories. Its main value is to use a labor market framework (Box 2) from a publication on the
labor market for health workers in Africa, in order to better understand these relationships and to
identify policy levers which may be amenable to change. 15 While the quality and reliability of
data limits the full application of the framework, information is presented to illustrate broad
trends and key challenges.

12.      Factors that influence the labor market for laboratory professionals include: (i)
current number and type of cadres of laboratory personnel in the public and private sectors as
well as those who may be unemployed or working in non-laboratory jobs; (ii) production of new
or better trained workers (training and education), as measured by the number of graduates from
pre-service training institutions; (iii) attrition and migration of workers, which is linked to
working conditions, incentives, and alternative employment opportunities; (iv) government
willingness and capacity to recruit these workers; (v) private sector willingness and capacity to
recruit these workers, in both NGO-administered facilities and private, for profit structures; and
(vi) donor related actions which influence the demand for these workers either by direct
recruitment or indirectly by providing substantial investments in laboratory services. To
summarize, from a supply side perspective, pre service training and education, attrition, and
migration influence the market by determining the pool of available laboratory workers. From
the demand side, the labor market is affected by three main actors (i.e. public, private, donors).

13.     Governance structures influence the labor market by establishing public policy and
setting rules. Governments and regulatory authorities have an important role to play in: (i)
strengthening strategic planning and conducting rigorous needs assessments; (ii) structuring
career development paths; (iii) developing strategies to strengthen retention and recognition; (iv)
regulating and accrediting training institutions and laboratories; (v) registering and licensing
laboratory professionals; (vi) providing a platform and a voice for representation of laboratory
professionals; and (vii) supporting continuing professional development. The next section
presents examples and evidence from the literature and the case studies on what is known about
these various factors with the main focus on supply side factors as there is a paucity of
information on demand.

15
     Soucat, et al. 2013.


                                              6
         Box 2: Framework of the Labor Market for Laboratory Professionals


                            Need                                        Training and education
                                                                              -Pre-service
                                                                       -Professional development


                          Demand:
                        Public sector                                     Supply                Attrition
                        Private sector                                    Number                Migration
                           Donors                                          Types

                                           Wages, fringe benefits,
                                          employment distribution



                Governance                                               Management incentives
                  structures                                                        &
              Policy & Planning                                           intrinsic motivation
                  Regulation                    Performance
                Accreditation                   Productivity
               Representation




                                                Health System
                                                 Outcomes


Source: Adapted from Soucat, et al. 2013.

Key Trends and Challenges

14.     The most comprehensive information on the public sector shows the relative scarcity
of highly qualified laboratory personnel and a heavily skewed distribution in favor of urban
areas. 16 Laboratory staffing levels range from 0.01 to 1.3 per 1,000 inhabitants with the
majority of countries below 0.1 per 1,000. By contrast, developed countries that have higher
levels of automation, requiring fewer technicians have substantially higher laboratory staffing
levels (UK: .34 per 1000; US: 2.15 per 1000). In countries with data on trends in staffing over
time, the number of laboratory staff remains roughly stable, suggesting limited progress in
addressing staffing needs and gaps. For countries where data were available, the majority of
personnel were heavily concentrated in urban areas (Malawi, Ghana, Central African Republic,
Mali) with a few notable exceptions (Guinea-Bissau, Rwanda). In most countries certificate

16
  Data from the HRH Observatory give the closest available estimates on the pool of laboratory workers.
Given that in some countries many of these workers are not registered or may be unemployed, the HRH
Observatory data probably underestimate the total pool of laboratory workers.


                                                 7
holders are the largest group with a relatively smaller number of diploma and degree level staff in
the public sector. Several countries have been the subject of more in depth human resources
studies which highlight the inadequate number and high unmet need for laboratory professionals
(Box 3).

15.      The demographic profile of the existing supply of laboratory workers can be
characterized as predominantly male and moderately young with this pattern particularly
strong among the higher-level cadres (Annex I). The proportion of female laboratory workers
in countries where information is available show very low (Malawi: 15 percent; Ghana: 20
percent; Central African Republic: 8 percent) or moderate (Kenya: 36.5 percent; Rwanda: up to
47 percent) rates with Congo appearing to be an outlier with females representing 60 percent of
the laboratory labor force (Annex I). Women are more strongly represented in the lower cadres,
indicating potential gender based barriers to advancement. For countries where data is available,
the majority of laboratory staff are under forty years of age: Malawi (70 percent), Ethiopia (79
percent), Ghana (76 percent), Rwanda (up to 92 percent), indicating that retirement of personnel
is not a major risk in the near future. Kenya is a notable exception with 37 percent under forty
years of age.

16.      The private sector appears to absorb a relatively small share of the overall supply of
laboratory workers but a substantial proportion of degree holders. The HRH Observatory
country reports show a significant minority of laboratory workers are employed in the private
sector in most of the countries for which data is available (Annex I). However, this data may not
capture fully the importance of the private sector in absorbing laboratory workers given the
                                                17
scarcity of information on the private sector.     For countries where data is available from the
HRH Observatory it is clear that the public sector combined with faith-based organizations
(which are closely aligned to the public sector in many countries) represent the lion’s share of
employed laboratory workers. The private sector appears to absorb a higher proportion of degree
holders. For example, in Rwanda close to 61 percent of the bachelor degree holders were
employed in the private sector, both for-profit and faith-based organizations. A review of public-
private partnerships (PPPs) for laboratory services in four countries in East Africa (Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda, Kenya) also found that private for-profit sector plays a relatively small role
                                  18
with a few notable exceptions.        Rwanda has a relatively low number of private for-profit
facilities which are heavily concentrated in Kigali. Tanzania has a small and rapidly growing
private health sector which emerged in the mid-1980s when economic controls against private
ownership were relaxed. Uganda has a large number of private clinics and laboratories with
several successful laboratory medical equipment placement arrangements in place. Human
resources in the public laboratory sector are viewed as more trained than their counterparts in the
private for-profit sector. Kenya has one of the largest private health sectors in the region with the
private sector offering more attractive salary packages and exposure to new technology. The

17
   In Van Den Broek and Odona’s study of HRH in 15 countries engagement with the laboratory private
sector was not mentioned in any national HRH strategic plans but in 80 percent of laboratory strategic
plans.
18
   World Bank November 2013.


                                                  8
country has been a pioneer in terms of PPPs with various schemes in place, such as equipment
placement contracts, subsidized public pricing of selective equipment for private hospitals, and
internships with private training institutions.

Box 3: Inadequate Number and High Unmet Needs for Laboratory Professionals in
                         a Select Group of Countries

-Zambia: a World Bank Human Resources for Health assessment reported 480 laboratory technicians with
vacancy rates of 80 percent in rural health centers, 25 percent urban health centers and 50 percent in
hospitals. The annual attrition rate was 3.5 percent and 32 percent of laboratory staff were in post compared
to the 2008 government requirements. 19

-Tanzania: laboratory staffing projections using the Quantity, Tasks, Productivity method estimated that by
2015 the country will have up to 30 percent of the required laboratory technicians. 20 A 2006 report on the
HRH situation in Tanzania reported similar staffing gaps with 35 percent deficit between approved and
filled positions for laboratory staff and a low rate of absenteeism. 21

-Rwanda: according to the 2011-2016 Human Resources for Health Strategic Plan there are roughly 980
laboratory professionals working in public health facilities in contrast to a desired number of 2330, with a
deficit of nearly 60 percent. 22 Moreover, the National Reference Laboratory 2012 Report revealed that 83
percent of laboratory professionals in public district hospitals and health centers have only A2 level
(certificate holders) in contrast to 16 percent which have A1 or A0 levels (degree holders) that comply with
government norms. 23

-Uganda: focus group discussions conducted as part of the Uganda case study found that the majority of
respondents cited concerns with the acute shortages of laboratory personnel in rural areas with many
districts not achieving optimum staffing norms. Respondents noted that the greatest shortages are in the
public sector, followed by faith based organizations and private for profit facilities.

-Kenya: the country is also facing serious shortages of human resources across all cadres of health workers,
as documented in the case study. The public sector is estimated to need some 14000 laboratory workers,
suggesting it is operating with only 14 percent of the required staff. The shortage in the public sector stems
from lack of prioritization, inadequate funding, and bureaucratic employment procedures. In total, Kenya
has close to 1500 registered technicians (certificate holders) and roughly 5400 technologists (diploma or
degree holders) with an approximate equal number of unregistered laboratory workers. The majority of the
country’s laboratory workers hold diplomas (76 percent), and the remainder holds certificates (20 percent)
or degrees (4 percent), reflecting the relatively more mature labor market with an important growth in
degree holders, in comparison to other countries. In total, 3850 laboratory workers are currently employed
in the public sector with the remainder employed either in the private sector or unemployed. The
distribution appears relatively good with 42 percent in urban areas, 50 percent in mixed areas and 8 percent
in the least urban areas.




19
   Herbst, C., et al. 2011.
20
   Kurowski, C., et al. 2007.
21
   Muhondwa, E. and B. Fimbo 2006.
22
   Sebagabo, Muhire B. 2012.
23
   In Rwanda, A0 level staff has a 4-year Bachelor of Biomedical Laboratory Sciences; A1 is a special
program to upgrade A2 certificate holders; and A2 is a secondary school program which is being phased
out.


                                                   9
17.     While most African countries have recognized the need to increase the production of
qualified laboratory personnel, the annual output of pre-service training institutions remains
generally modest. The HRH Observatory country reports contain pre-service education data on
11 countries, of which 8 had some information on admissions and graduations with the majority
experiencing stable trends (Annex II). The private sector appears to play a relatively minor role
in pre-service training in most countries in Africa with a few notable exceptions, such as
mentorships. Several countries have been the subject of more in depth reviews that found similar
challenges to expanding the throughput of pre-service training institutions, including inadequate
training facilities, shortages of tutors, and funding problems (Box 4). Other issues that have
emerged in expanding pre-service training programs are delays in absorbing personnel due to
shortages of accredited facilities for internships (Nigeria) 24 or difficulties in employing degree
holders in countries that have been promoting degree rather than diploma programs (Zambia). 25

18.      The problems highlighted in many countries with lack of distinct roles for diploma and
degree holders suggest that training curricula may not be well aligned with the needs of the
public sector. There is little published information on curriculum issues for laboratory courses.
However an unpublished study from Malawi noted a dichotomy in the Ministry of Health’s need
for graduates to act as laboratory managers and the desire of students for internationally useful
qualifications. 26 This has led to an expansion in the curriculum to include skills with a greater
international utility and a change of emphasis in the student intake from experienced laboratory
technicians to school leavers. In turn, this has caused some tension in the workplace regarding
the role and seniority of school leavers. In the Uganda case study some respondents noted that
private training institutions, that tended to take weaker students who were not accepted by the
public system, should provide foundation courses. In the Kenya case study a number of different
bodies were involved in providing guidance for curriculum development depending on the type
of institution offering the course. This has the potential to lead to a pool of graduates with a
differing skill sets.




24
   Ministry of Health, F.M.O. 2008.
25
   Mwanza, J. 2010.
26
   Kasthala, S., S. Kamiza, and I. Bates. 2010.



                                                  10
Box 4: Capacity Constraints in Pre-Service Training in a Select Group of Countries

-Tanzania: the main challenges were limited student accommodation; shortage of tutors and inadequate
access of tutors to continued professional development; and inadequate infrastructure and insufficient
teaching materials. 27 The country has 15 training institutions offering laboratory science qualifications
compared with 65 nurse training institutions. Efforts to boost production were also impeded by
bureaucratic delays in selecting candidates and challenges in managing the transition from knowledge to
competency based curricula. Demand for laboratory training did not appear to be a problem as there were
three times as many candidates as available positions.

-Rwanda faces similar issues, including a shortage of qualified lecturers both in public and private higher
learning institutions; inadequate training facilities with modern equipment, access to internet for research
and learning; and limited infrastructure for practical learning. According to the Kigali Health Institute 2012
Biomedical Laboratory Science Department Report the shortage of lectures is acute with only 9 full time
staff in comparison to the required 19 full time staff. Moreover, for the few available qualified laboratory
lecturers, turnover is high as they seek more attractive employment opportunities in NGOs. Another
impediment to expanding the pool of qualified laboratory professionals has been the cost of training which
is beyond the means of most personnel who rely on government funding or private sponsorship.

-Malawi has been facing similar challenges regarding infrastructure and teaching staff but has been making
a concerted effort to expand pre service training through government payment of fees with a five-fold
increase in diploma holders during 2004-2009.28 As a result, the number of laboratory technicians more
than doubled from 160 to 380, exceeding government targets. Malawi also established and funded a
national degree program in Medical Laboratory Technology rather than sending students to South Africa.

-Uganda has 27 registered allied health professional training institutions producing qualified laboratory
workers, of which 20 provide only certificate training. On average, these institutions produce about 820
graduates annually of which only 18 percent are diploma holders. Key informants noted similar
impediments to expanding pre-service training, including shortages of full-time tutors, inadequate number
of well-equipped facilities for hands on training, and problems with the duration and quality of training.
The two-year diploma and certificate programs are felt to be too short and the content needs revision to
include key neglected areas such as customer care and client relations, record keeping, management skills.

-Kenya appears to be relatively well off with 34 registered training institutions and a vibrant private sector
which represents 35 percent of the total. Enrollment in public sector training institutions expanded rapidly
over the past decade, with a 2.5 fold increase since late 1990s. Interviews with key informants revealed
relative satisfaction with physical infrastructure and training materials but dissatisfaction with the
availability of computers.

19.      The supply of workers in the public sector is adversely affected by attrition and
migration. Low salaries, lack of career opportunities and inadequate work environments
contribute to low levels of job satisfaction and high turnover. While most of the data is
qualitative in nature concerns with staff turnover are cited in virtually all the case studies (Box
5), highlighting the difficulties of the public sector to retain personnel. This is particularly the
case for degree holders who are sought out by the growing private sector which provides more
attractive remuneration packages, underscoring the challenges of the government facilities to
attract and retain skilled laboratory professionals.



27
     Rao, P., et al. 2010.
28
     O'Neil, M., et al. 2010.


                                                   11
                           Box 5: Factors Influencing Labor Mobility

-Kenya: Interviews with key informants conducted as part of the Kenya case study found that the main
reasons for turnover were: (i) low salary levels (92 percent); (ii) lack of career opportunities (73 percent);
and (iii) heavy workloads (70 percent). Other factors cited include: governance problems (47 percent) and
risk of exposure to disease (45 percent). Focus group discussions and key informants also revealed that in
spite of these push factors, in practice many of these laboratory workers, particularly the certificate and
diploma holders, do not have tangible alternative employment options.

-Rwanda: focus group discussions found that over 70 percent of respondents cited staff turnover as a major
issue caused by poor remuneration, inadequate opportunities for continuous training, no clear career
development, and the desire of laboratory professionals to change the work environment.

-Uganda: concerns over low salaries (96 percent) and lack of a career path (86 percent) were the most cited
reasons for staff turnover. Other factors cited during structured interviews were the poor work
environments, weak supervisory systems, lack of accommodation in rural areas, and inadequate number of
clinicians who drive the workloads of laboratory personnel.

-Tanzania, a survey of 36 health facilities found 72 percent of laboratory staff in rural areas was satisfied
with their job compared to 48 percent in urban areas (Derua, 2011). 29 The same survey found 64 percent
of laboratory staff in rural areas was comfortable with their working conditions whereas in urban areas 45
percent said they were overworked, poorly motivated, and had few training opportunities.

-Nigeria: 61 percent reported satisfaction with their workload, 69 percent considered their managers
supportive but only 54 percent were satisfied with their remuneration. 30

20.      The public sector demand for laboratory workers has been historically weak given the
inability of Ministries of Health to recruit personnel, and/or lack of prioritization in broader
health policy discussions. 31 As governments face numerous challenges and financial constraints
their main focus has been on addressing human resources shortages of physicians and nurses.
Laboratory staffing has not figured prominently in discussions of human resources at national or
global levels with these workers being among the neglected cadres in Africa. Even when there is
a willingness to recruit more laboratory professionals, governments have not been able to match
their aspirations to their capacity to recruit more highly skilled personnel. For example, in
Rwanda, government hospitals have failed to attract the most qualified laboratory professionals
(A0 Biomedical Laboratory Scientists) as salaries in public sector hospitals are less competitive
than in private health facilities.

21.      Private, for-profit sector institutions have a greater capacity to attract qualified
laboratory professionals and are willing and able to offer better working conditions with
access to the latest technology, more attractive salary and benefit packages, and innovative
incentive schemes. As a result, they are better placed to compete with the public sector for the
most qualified professionals. For example, in Zambia, the private sector was identified as a
significant attraction with laboratory technicians being paid three times as much. The Uganda


29
   Derua, Y.A., et al. 2011.
30
   Chirdan, O.O., et al. 2010.
31
   Petti C.A., C.R. Polage, T.C. Quinn, A.R. Ronald, M.A. Sande. 2006.


                                                   12
case study found that the private sector offers more attractive salaries and working conditions
which have negatively affected staffing of public sector facilities. In Kenya, the private sector
has invested in state of the art infrastructure creating an attractive work environment and
enhancing retention.     The private sector uses innovative performance based payment
mechanisms, rendering laboratories one of the most lucrative units in private hospitals. The
Rwanda case study found that a substantial number of the qualified laboratory professionals tend
to leave government health facilities for better paying jobs in private health facilities and non-
governmental organizations.

B. Government Policies

22.      Government policies and strategies to structure the laboratory profession and to
develop a clear career path and promotional opportunities for laboratory workers have been
generally inadequate. In countries where information is available, job descriptions are not well
structured or standardized; expansion of degree programs is progressing slowly; clear pathways
for career development are lacking; there are inconsistencies between qualifications and salary
structures; and performance review processes are not systematically applied to laboratory
workers. In many countries, career development efforts are impeded by the absence of effective
retraining strategies and structured promotional opportunities.

23.      Strategic planning to systematically assess needs and plan ways to address gaps has
not been done in a rigorous manner. Few countries have developed and are tracking compliance
against staffing norms for laboratory cadres which are important steps towards addressing
staffing gaps, and bolstering demand (Box 6). The staffing norms for several countries gleaned
from the available literature are presented in Annex III for each tier of the laboratory network
corresponding to the WHO definitions (i.e. tertiary corresponds to teaching and central hospital
and national reference laboratories, secondary to district hospitals and primary to health centers).
Countries that have data on staffing norms at secondary level all require personnel trained to at
least diploma level. At primary level the education requirements are more varied between
certificates and diplomas. This may be influenced by the type of testing done at primary level in
each country and the laboratory facilities available or could be more pragmatically based on
available staffing. There is no information available on staffing norms for tertiary facilities,
probably due to the diverse nature of these institutions. The scoping study found limited
information on whether staffing targets have been met. One notable exception is Malawi, where a
2010 evaluation of the country’s human resource program found that 70 percent of district
hospital laboratories have at least one laboratory technician and health centers are typically
staffed by laboratory attendants or microscopists. 32




32
     O'Neil, M., et al. 2010.


                                              13
                                       Box 6: Strategic Planning

      •   In Rwanda, districts have the mandate to identify and fill existing laboratory staff vacancies,
          conduct performance appraisals, promote and reward staff. However, low human resource
          management capacity has contributed to delays in recruitment, placement, and promotions.
          Another major challenge is the budget ceilings on personnel emoluments which limit recruitment
          of required staff. While the Ministry of Health adopted a policy of upgrading A2 staff (which
          represents the bulk of the work force), it has faced challenges in offering competitive salaries
          commensurate with the additional training. Moreover, the top two grades (A0 and A1) receive the
          same salary in public sector hospitals since public facilities only budget for A1 positions, which
          can create disincentives to pursue the highest level of qualification (Sebagabo, July 2012).

      •   In Uganda, individuals who are entrepreneurial and secure long-term training are not reassured re-
          entry into the public sector which provides a serious disincentive to pursuing professional
          development, according to key informants. Moreover, laboratory professionals can only move up
          to the level of principal laboratory technologist as the scheme of service has not yet been revised to
          accommodate basic degree and masters’ degree holders which further limits the career trajectory
          for these workers.

      •   In Malawi the role of laboratory technicians and technologists is practically identical despite
          technologists having a higher qualification, leading to inconsistencies in advancement and
          seniority. Representation of laboratory professionals in higher management structures is limited
          (i.e. laboratories have historically been represented at hospital management level by the pharmacy
          department) which impedes influence on policy and practice. Even though Malawi has a good
          range of laboratory cadres with considerable potential for advancement limited direct evidence
          exists to demonstrate if this occurs in practice.

      •   In Tanzania, appraisal of laboratory staff has recently been based on an Open Performance
          Review and Appraisal System which is applied annually by technical supervisors at the place of
          work. It is not known how effective this has been in improving performance or motivation.
          Moreover, the progression of laboratory personnel to higher qualifications is not streamlined, as
          staff with higher national diploma need to undergo the full BSc course before they can progress to
          masters’ level training. The costs of higher education are a major deterrent to laboratory workers
          obtaining higher qualifications as the full costs have to be met by the individuals. Promotion has
          been constrained by shortage of funds to pay higher salaries; in some instances, different cadres are
          in fact paid the same salary.

24.       During the past few years there has been a growth in laboratory strategic plans which
are beginning to focus attention on this critical pillar in health systems and to raise the
visibility of the laboratory profession. The recent focus on laboratory professionals has been
triggered by the growth in demand for laboratory work from the three main communicable
disease programs (HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria) which require laboratory confirmation. An analysis
conducted for the 7th European Congress on Tropical Medicine and International Health reported
on laboratory strategic planning for fifteen African countries found that all had health strategic
and HIV plans, eight had HRH plans and four had laboratory strategic plans (Ethiopia, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda). 33 Of these strategic plans, 80 percent of laboratory, 50 percent of HRH and
33 percent of HIV ones included strategies to address laboratory staff shortages which was one of

33
   This report may underestimate the total number of laboratory strategic plans, as several other countries
(for example, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia) now have such plans.


                                                    14
the main issues addressed. 34 Plans also addressed pre-service education, recruitment and
retention, career development, in-service training, and staff deployment/distribution. While
having plans is an important step in the right direction there is little evidence of the extent to
which these plans are being implemented.

25.     Government efforts to promote task shifting remain modest but have been on the rise
which is promising given the shortages of laboratory workers and the potential to focus scare
resources of trained laboratory cadres on more technically demanding testing areas. There is
evidence of task shifting from laboratory to non-laboratory cadres for only few diagnostic
procedures. This is most prominent and well accepted in HIV diagnosis and has been well
documented in the peer reviewed literature. For example, in Lesotho roughly 33 percent of lay
counselors perform HIV testing 35, in Namibia where lay counselors perform the testing 36, and in
Uganda for unspecified non-laboratory staff. 37 The Uganda study demonstrated that, if properly
trained, non-laboratory staff can perform HIV rapid testing as well as laboratory staff. The
World Health Organization Task Shifting Global recommendations and guidelines also contain
examples of community workers in Malawi, Namibia and Rwanda performing HIV tests. 38 This
larger number of papers on HIV task shifting may be due to the relative simplicity of the test
and/or the greater levels of attention and HIV/AIDS funding. Task shifting for other diseases has
also been documented, including a study brief from Uganda which details use of rapid syphilis
                   39
tests by midwives and a USAID report from the same country which mentions an unspecified
                                                                      40
cadre of non-laboratory staff performing sputum smear microscopy , as does a study from
         41
Zambia.     In Malawi there is evidence of laboratory cleaners preparing smears for microscopy.
42



26.      Government policies to promote collaboration with the private sector are also on the
rise but more needs to be done to translate these intentions into actions. The review of PPPs in
East Africa noted that while public sector actors acknowledge the benefits of working with the
private sector (e.g. efficiency; coverage; reduced workload; financing), they also cite concerns
with high charges, lack of a pro-poor focus, profit motivation, and risk of monopoly. Private
sector actors also recognize potential benefits (e.g. patient volumes, added revenue, skilled
human resources) but cite frustrations with government bureaucracy and mindset. In many
countries broader collaboration is constrained by a historical distrust between the two parties but
this situation is changing rapidly. The PPP study documented close to 40 schemes in the four
East African countries studied, including five which focus on human resources, whereby the


34
     Van den Broek, A., et. al. 2011.
35
     Cohen, R., et al. 2009.
36
     Coggin, W.L., C.A. Ryan, and C.B. Holmes 2010.
37
     Yao, K., et al. 2010.
38
     WHO, 2008.
39
     Dambisya, Y. 2010.
40
     Bitarakwate, E., et al. 2011.
41
     Coggin, W.L., C.A. Ryan, and C.B. Holmes 2010.


                                                15
public sector leveraged the technical know-know and expertise and superior technology of the
private sector to provide mentorship and training to its employees. For example, in Kenya, the
Aga Khan University Hospital provided staff time of senior laboratory professionals, mostly
pathologists, to mentor public sector employees, who were expected to cascade the acquired
knowledge and skills to their peers in the national and referral hospitals. While the partnership
proved useful in terms of improving knowledge and skills its sustainability was dependent on
donor funding, underscoring the precarious nature of these PPPs and the need for a more
sustainable design with financial reimbursement by the public sector. Many PPPs are informal
and small scale, limiting their impact and replicability.

27.       Continuing professional development courses for laboratory personnel, offered by
governments or private sector can generate important benefits in terms of the quality and
accuracy of the testing performed. Assessments of continuing professional development efforts
have documented important benefits from country specific efforts. For example in Ghana, pre
and post training testing found a considerable improvement in capacity to conduct TB smear
microscopy with the concordance of negative and positive results rising from 60 to 99 percent
per test. 43 Another training initiative combined with supportive supervision in Ghana found that
24 months after establishing a quality assurance system false positives and negatives decreased
from about 15.0 percent and 20.5 percent, respectively to 0 percent. 44 In Kenya, one study
showed sustained improvements over time in the accuracy of malaria diagnosis from short and
longer term training. 45 Another study in Uganda found similar improvements in assessment of
malaria slides following training. 46 Pre-training didactic test scores were generally low, with an
average score of 41 percent. After training, didactic test scores improved significantly, with an
average score of 75 percent. Overall, sensitivity in reading malaria slides improved from 84 to
95 percent and specificity rose from 87 to 97 percent after the training.

28.     One important development in strengthening the performance of laboratory
professionals is the expansion in high quality, standardized, regional training programs. A
number of notable examples are worthwhile mentioning. One of the training programs is the 2-
year Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program (FELTP) which started in Kenya in
2004 and has expanded to cover 17 countries by 2010. 47 The program trains field
epidemiologists and public health laboratory scientists, and aims to provide laboratory managers
for public health laboratories. It uses a combination of short didactic lectures and practical work
with 20 months of field placement with associated institutions awarding either degrees in applied
epidemiology or laboratory management and epidemiology. The program is widely supported by




42
   Manafa, O., et al. 2009.
43
   Addo, K.K., et al. 2012.
44
   Addo, et al. 2006.
45
   Ohrt, et al. 2007.
46
   Kigguni, et al. 2011.
47
   Nsubuga, P., et al. 2010.


                                              16
numerous partners, including CDC, USAID, and the World Bank. 48 A regional initiative with a
broader remit is the Centers for Disease Control supported African Centre for Integrated
Laboratory Training established in Johannesburg in 2008. The training facility runs courses on
HIV, tuberculosis and laboratory quality assurance. In West Africa, the Meriux Foundation
supports a regional training program aimed at training professionals participating in the West and
Central Africa Veterinary Laboratory Network for Avian Influenza and other Transboundary
Diseases (RESOLAB). Another approach launched recently involves a needs assessment of staff
prior to training using Laboratory Quality Improvement Tools (LQIT), and proposes the selection
of staff based on duties they perform rather than seniority. LQIT are then recommended for
monitoring training outputs. 49 Mentorships which involve hands on, intensive support and
assisted supervisions are also been scaled up regionally in both the public and private sectors
with promising initial results.

        Box 7: Strengthening Laboratory Management Towards Accreditation

              Links training to quality improvement process (SLPTA)
              Utilizes an effective combination of group learning backed up by on-site visits
              Promotes use of intensive mentorships which are being scaled up in parallel
              Incorporates quality improvement plans which are highly relevant to participants


29.      A relatively more recent regional training program which may be considered best
practice is the Strengthening Laboratory Management Towards Accreditation (SLMTA),
which builds capacity in core areas related to laboratory system improvements (Box 7). The
SLMTA training, officially launched in July 2011 and currently being rolled out regionally, is
directly linked to the Stepwise Laboratory Improvement Process Towards Accreditation
(SLIPTA) process which aims to instill a culture of continuous quality improvement, and
establish a pathway for laboratories to progressively move towards the attainment of five stars
based on the level of compliance with the standardized WHO-AFRO checklist, and gradually
towards the gold standard ISO15189 accreditation. 50 The training model for this course consists
of multiple workshops backed up by intervening site visits. Participants design and carry out
quality improvement projects in their own laboratories as part of the assessment. 51

C. Regulatory Authorities

30.      Government regulatory and accrediting bodies can play critical roles in ensuring and
maintaining quality of laboratory cadres, laboratories, and training institutions, and
bolstering demand for high quality laboratory work (Box 8). Most countries now require
registration and licensing of biomedical laboratory science schools before they start to operate.

48
   In the Africa region the Bank is funding two major regional health projects (East Africa Public Health
Laboratory Networking Project and West Africa Regional Disease Surveillance Project) which are
supporting to scale up this gold standard program.
49
    Marinucci, F., et al. 2011.
50
   Datema, T.A.M., et al. 2011.
51
   Yao, K., et al. 2010.


                                                  17
Lab training schools have to be registered annually as well, and can also be accredited. Many
countries have regulatory bodies but little discussion of their roles was found in the literature
with a few notable exceptions (e.g. Allied Health Professional Council of Uganda; and Kenya
Medical Laboratory Technicians and Technologists Board). Most regulatory bodies require
registration and annual licensing of qualified laboratory workers especially amongst those
holding a diploma or higher qualification. Laboratories are registered annually by their boards
which check on availability of facilities and services. Accreditation is provided by an
independent accrediting body and is typically done every three years. In some countries there
appears to be some confusion between regulation and accreditation, which are two unique
functions that should be conducted separately and not hosted by the same body.

31.      There is also limited information on national medical laboratory accreditation bodies.
Currently, the Kenyan National Accreditation Service (KENAS) is the only national accreditation
body to be established within the East African Community region and is collaborating with other
countries to increase the number of available assessors. The South African National
Accreditation Service (SANAS) is the other major accrediting body within the region and has
been called on heavily by other African countries to accredit their laboratories. One of the major
limitations to laboratories achieving accreditation is the very high cost of obtaining and
maintaining accreditation. For example, in the Kenyan Medical Research Institute HIV Research
Laboratory in Kisumu the costs of obtaining accreditation were estimated to be roughly $126,000
and over $71,000 to maintain it. 52

32.     One important regional initiative towards accreditation is well documented. The
WHO-AFRO supported Stepwise Laboratory Improvement Process Towards Accreditation
(SLIPTA) initiative is assisting numerous countries in Africa to progressively move towards
meeting the ISO15189 or other standards for medical laboratories. Laboratories are graded from
0 to five stars based on the number of points received against a standardized checklist of 110
questions for a total number of 250 points with those attaining five stars considered ready to
apply for accreditation. 53 The Global Laboratory Initiative has recently developed and launched
a Stepwise Process towards TB laboratory accreditation specifically aimed at national level
tuberculosis laboratories. 54




52
     Zeh C.E. et al. 2010.
53
     Datema, T.A.M., et al. 2011.
54
     Datema, T.A.M. 2012. Available from: http://www.gliquality.org/


                                                   18
                                Box 8: National Regulatory Bodies

-Rwanda has no Laboratory Board or Council for registration and regulation of laboratory staff or
laboratories in the country. The national professional association, the Laboratory Association of Rwanda,
currently performs the functions of a regulatory body, but has no legal standing or authority in the country.

-Uganda has the Allied Health Professional Council (AHPC) which many stakeholders cite as ineffective as
it represents too many professional groups, such as pharmacists, physiotherapists, and laboratory workers.
Key stakeholders interviewed argued that the council needs to listen more to the concerns of laboratory
workers in order to better represent their interests. Monitoring and enforcement of regulatory issues was
assessed as poor 50 percent of the time. Leadership and governance of regulatory bodies were cited as key
concerns in the public sector. By contrast, the private sector was considered relatively strong at monitoring
performance.

-Kenya has an elaborate regulatory framework with three main bodies. The Kenya Medical Laboratory
Technicians and Technologist Board (KMLTTB) was established as an act of parliament in 1999. The
functions of the Board are to register and regulate the professional conduct of laboratory technologists and
technicians; license and regulate business practices of laboratory technologists and technicians; and approve
institutions and courses for training laboratory professionals. The Board has recently been re-gazetted
following an enquiry into its management and practices. The Board has been constrained by shortages of
personnel to conduct inspections and monitoring registration of laboratory personnel.

33.      Professional laboratory associations can give a voice to laboratory cadres and enhance
their representation at the institutional level. To date, there have been few national professional
associations established, and they are typically poorly funded and reach only a small segment of
the laboratory cadres (Box 9). At the regional level, the Federation of African Associations of
Medical Laboratory Scientists exists as a representative body. Most recently, the African Society
for Laboratory Medicine (ASLM) was established with USG/PEPFAR support to represent the
interests of laboratory workers and advance the standards of the laboratory profession. The
mission of this relatively young institution, established in March 2011, is to advance laboratory
medicine services needed to support preventive medicine, quality patient care, and disease
control in Africa. It intends to achieve this through partnerships with governments and relevant
organizations.




                                                   19
                           Box 9: National Professional Associations

-Rwanda: in 2006 laboratory professionals in Rwanda formed an association called the “Rwanda
Association of Biomedical Laboratory Technologist (RABITEC)” which has few active members, lacks
premises, and is not yet legally registered, limiting its ability to influence policy decisions.

-Uganda: the country has several professional groups representing the interests of laboratory workers but
stakeholders have expressed frustration with the way they perform their role. Structured interviews with
laboratory workers found that 64 percent of those surveyed were members of a professional association with
the majority belonging to the Uganda Medical Laboratory Technicians Professional Association.

-Kenya: the country has a long standing history of professional associations. The Association of Kenya
Medical Laboratory Scientific Officers (AKMLSO) is the official registered professional body representing
laboratory workers, initially founded in 1964, and with a current membership of about 1800 members at 74
branches nationwide. Focus group discussions conducted as part of the Kenya case study found that only 60
percent of laboratory workers were satisfied with the performance of the association, describing the
leadership as an old boys’ network, and citing concerns over governance and effectiveness in representing
the interests of laboratory workers.

-Tanzania: the country has a long-standing professional association, the Medical Laboratory Association of
Tanzania (MeLSAT) that holds annual meetings and represents the interests of the medical laboratory
profession.

34.      The Kenya case study found evidence of a combination of strong government policies
which are professionalizing laboratory work (Box 10). Officials have introduced a policy of
automatic progression, done sequentially every three years, within three job range groups for
laboratory technicians and technologists, depending on their qualification levels with additional
discretionary advancement dependent on performance. This combined with the growth in
continuing professional development and diploma programs has started to turn the tide for
laboratory professionals. According to key stakeholders interviewed there is a new energy and
confidence brought on by graduates who are increasingly becoming an integral part of health
service delivery teams. Laboratory workers are no longer viewed as “beaten, resigned certificate
and diploma holders”. There is growing evidence of a new generation of confident, assertive,
driven graduates entering the profession. One key informant captured this new trend by noting
that the “medical laboratory profession in Kenya is coming of age”.

                   Box 10: Professionalizing Laboratory Work in Kenya
     Initiated a process of registering laboratory technicians and technologists which enhances
      recognition
     Discontinued certificate programs with training institutions offering twice as many diploma
      programs, thereby expanding the pool of professional workers
     Revised scheme of service in the public sector, by removing job group barriers
     Created representative organizations (AKMLSO) and facilitated affiliation with other professional
      organizations
     Promoted accreditation of laboratories
     Established regulatory body (KMLTB) governed by an act of parliament
     Introduced directive for laboratory workers to take part in ward rounds
     Mobilized substantial donor support to strengthen laboratory health systems
     Piloted PPPs to provide short-term internship and mentorship placements for public sector
      personnel in private sector facilities.
                                                 20
                          PART IV – STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS
35.     This section summarizes the policies and strategies which will contribute to enhancing
the performance of laboratory professionals, and ultimately the functioning of laboratory
services. The summary draws on the main recommendations from the case studies. 55 These are
presented in terms of broad strategic directions and are not intended to be prescriptive. Country
plans need to take into account the specific local context to identify the most appropriate
combination of strategies that are well integrated into national health and human resources plans
and are financially affordable. While there are no blueprints below is a summary of the strategic
directions to be considered to break the vicious cycle facing laboratory workers and create a
virtuous cycle (Box 11).



                                       Box 11: A Virtuous Cycle




Source: Authors

36.     Expanding the output of pre-service training institutions is an essential step to
building capacity of laboratory services in African countries. The production of laboratory
workers needs to be increased to meet country needs by both upgrading the current pool of
laboratory staff and producing additional personnel. The correct mix of qualifications must also
be available to ensure an appropriate balance is reached within the laboratory system. This will
require increased support for laboratory training institutions to improve physical infrastructure
and expand the pool of trainers to accommodate larger number of students. In countries with an

55
     Matu, M., et al. 2013 (unpublished).



                                                21
active private sector where training institutes exist, innovative public-private partnerships can be
considered to leverage access to technical expertise, skills, technology and clinical practices.
The introduction of a rural training approach whereby the trainees come from rural areas would
enhance rural job uptake and employment and improve retention. The shortage of trained tutors
could be addressed by hiring regional experts and/or expatriate tutors in the short term with a
clear program of mentorship and a well-defined strategy of disengagement.

37.      Ministries of Health need to prioritize training of laboratory workers in national
human resources plans and program resources to cover course fees that are beyond the means
of most laboratory personnel. Authorities need to also plan for the absorption of trained
personnel, ensuring a smooth transition between training and entry into the labor market.
Finally, a shift towards competency based curricula which have been endorsed by an appropriate
national or regional laboratory worker regulatory body needs to be considered, as has been done
in Tanzania. The ASLM could act as a regional advisor to national regulatory bodies by assisting
to define and maintain minimum standards for each cadre and progressively introduce
comparability between national qualifications. While curricula would focus primarily on
national needs, regional standardization could facilitate movement of laboratory cadres within
regional economic blocks. A regional approach to expanding pre-service training could be
considered as there may be cost savings from training some laboratory cadres at established
training institutions in neighboring countries within regional economic blocs.

38.      Improving in-service training opportunities is critical to maintaining a well-qualified
laboratory workforce. All staff requires regular in-service training and opportunities to access
further academic studies to both improve the quality of laboratory services and boost morale.
Training and additional qualifications need to be clearly linked to career progression. Training
should be based on a clear needs assessment and transparent criteria for selecting trainees need to
be introduced. Strategies such as e-learning, flexible working hours, and rotational deployment
should be used to promote opportunities, especially for staff in more remote postings. Institutions
and funders need to ensure that in-service training models do not disrupt service provision
unduly, by relying on work place based training, such as mentorships which have proven to be
effective, particularly when conducted in collaboration with private sector actors. Courses need
to be designed to maximize learning outcomes, which in many instances in laboratory sciences
will emphasize practical, hands on training. Courses need to also include formative assessments.
Training programs such as SLMTA, which support the stepwise laboratory improvement process
towards accreditation, are promising as they establish a close link between the core competencies
required and the skills acquired; provide a means for tracking performance; and complement
facility improvements which will result in better working environments. Joint training of
laboratory and clinical staff on diagnostics need to be scaled up as this has shown a positive
effect on participating clinicians’ use of laboratory tests and could be an important additional
strategy for improving the laboratory-clinician interface. Finally, continuing professional
development standards could be set up by national regulators provided there is capacity to
provide the required improvement activities.




                                              22
39.      Strengthening human resources planning for laboratory professionals and ensuring
that these neglected cadres become an integral part of broader HR planning at country level
will assist Ministries of Health to progressively address shortages and skills gaps. There is an
urgent need to obtain accurate figures on the number of laboratory staff. Improved registration of
laboratory workers is one important step that countries can take to get a better handle on the
number of workers, the skills mix available and their distribution. This will assist in better
understanding the labor market, including the role of the private sector in absorbing laboratory
professionals and the number of unemployed laboratory workers who could be recruited. HR and
facility surveys are other important sources of information which should systematically cover
laboratory workers so that additional information is generated on issues related to motivation,
performance, and attrition. Accurate figures from training institutions are also vital to inform
public policy in terms of what potential capacity is being developed and the extent to which
graduates are being effectively absorbed. Countries also need to set realistic staffing norms for
laboratories at different levels of the health care system and to regularly monitor compliance.

40.     Introducing clear, well-integrated career paths for laboratory workers with well-
defined promotion prospects is essential for staff motivation and performance. Health
ministries need to review current career structures to ensure that all cadres have distinct and
complimentary job descriptions which are well aligned with national requirements of their
laboratory system. Job titles need to be clearly linked to these job descriptions and the
differences between these cadres clearly understood across the health workforce. The feasibility
of introducing task shifting needs to be assessed to make more effective use of existing
personnel.

41.      Exploring possibilities for greater collaboration with the private sector. Ministries of
Health need to consider additional ways to tap the potential of the private sector in their
respective countries in order to leverage additional financing and improve access to technical
knowhow and new technologies. Favorable policy and legal frameworks for public-private
partnerships have already been put in place in most countries. Several innovative and promising
PPPs are underway. Much more can be done in terms of mentorships and work placements in
private sector institutions; ensuring that private sector personnel benefit from government run
training programs; and using public sector funds to buy services of private training institutes.

42.     Establishing effective national regulatory and representative bodies is critical for
strengthening governance, enhancing quality and performance. National laboratory regulatory
bodies need to be strengthened to effectively carry out their functions, particularly supervision
and quality control. In countries where laboratory services do not have their own regulatory
body, authorities could consider establishing a dedicated one rather than subsuming these
functions into a general health regulatory body, assuming adequate resources are available. This
would have the advantage of ensuring a strong focus on the needs of the laboratory service.
Proper regulation of laboratory services through activities such as setting and supervising
laboratory standards and standardizing and regulating pre- and in-service training will help
improve morale and the quality of services. Representative bodies need to be better organized to



                                             23
effectively represent the interests of laboratory professionals. It is important these organizations
have a clear mandate and adequate resources to represent the views of all laboratory cadres at
senior policy level.

43.      Scaling up research on issues related to laboratory workers is important to inform
public policy. Research is needed to better understand the specific labor market situations in
different countries and the factors which influence the supply and demand for laboratory
workers. Priority research areas include: determining the measurable effects of different HR
strategies to laboratory recruitment and retention; reasons for gender imbalance in higher
laboratory cadres; effects of different workplace factors to staff retention; and the relationship of
qualifications to performance.




                                              24
                                                                                 ANNEX I
                  Laboratory Worker Numbers by Country, Year and Source

Country             HRH Observatory                      Other sources
                    Year     Number    Density per       Year Number      Source
                                       1000 population
Burundi             2009     159       0.02
Kenya               2010     1221      0.03
Rwanda              2010     800       0.08
Uganda              2005     1702      0.06
United Republic     2007     517       0.01              2009   961       [11]
of Tanzania

Algeria             2007     4922      0.14
Angola              2005     2029      0.14
Benin               2008     245       0.03
Botswana            2007     40        0.02
Burkina Faso        2008     510       0.03
Cameroon            2010     847       0.04
Cape Verde          2010     42        0.08
Central African     2009     40        0.01
Republic
Chad                2009     263       0.02
Comoros             2009     134       0.18
Congo               2007     334       0.09
Côte d'Ivoire       2007     1419      0.07
Democratic          2009     1242      0.02
Republic of the
Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial          2005     75        0.15
Guinea
Eritrea             2008     251       0.07
Ethiopia            2009     2823      0.04              2009   2823      [28]
Gabon               2005     276       0.2
Gambia              2008     89        0.06
Ghana               2008     213       0.01              2010   923       [6]
Guinea              2009     519       0.05
Guinea-Bissau       2009     211       0.14
Lesotho             2005     146       0.08
Liberia             2008     115       0.03
Madagascar          2007     Nd
                    2010     114       0.01              1998   86        [53]
                                                         2008   .03       HRH
Malawi
                                                         2009   .0135     country
                                                         2010   0.0291    profile
Mali                2008     350       0.03
Mauritania          2009     111       0.03
Mauritius           2005     324       0.26
Morocco
Mozambique          2006     809       0.04
Namibia             2010     116       0.05


                                         25
Country             HRH Observatory                              Other sources
Niger               2010     Nd
Nigeria 56          2008     22683           0.15                2007    12073         [25]

Sao Tome and        2008        198          1.3
Principe
Senegal             2007        Nd
Seychelles          2005        59           0.74
Sierra Leone        2008        47           0.01
Somalia
South Africa        2005        1968         0.04
Sudan
Swaziland           2009        57           0.05
Togo                2008        451          0.08
Tunisia
                    2010        546          0.04                2011    480           [4]
Zambia                                                           2008    698
                                                                 2004    417
Zimbabwe          2009         274           0.02
Source: HRH Observatory; other sources




56
   Laboratory scientists only, 5548 currently registered. 936 laboratory technicians and 7044 laboratory
assistants.


                                                26
              Number of Laboratory Workers per 1000 Population by Year

Country      Cadre          2004     2005        2006   2007     2008     2009     2010
Malawi       Technician     0.0135                               0.03     0.0291
Zimbabwe     Worker                                     0.0262   0.0257   0.0222
Ghana                                                            0.01              0.04
Swaziland                                                        0.05     0.04*
Ethiopia     Technician     0.0338                                        0.0249

             Technologist                                                 0.011
Congo                                0.13        0.15   0.09
Gambia       Scientist                                  0.01     0.01
             Technician                                 0.01     0.02
             Assistant                                  0.03     0.04
Guinea-      Technician     2                           1.03              0.14
Bissau                                                  (incl.
                                                        aux)
Benin        Technician                                          0.03
Nigeria      Scientist               1.2                0.9      0.15
             Technician                                 0.21
             Assistant                                  0.5
Central      Technician                                          0.007    0.009
African
Republic
Rwanda       A0                                                  0.002    0.003    0.002
             A1                                                  0.015    0.016    0.016
             A2                                                  0.057    0.058    0.053
Zambia       Technician                                                   0.04     0.04
Mali         Scientist                                                    0.0      0.0
             Technician                                                   0.2      0.2
Source: HRH observatory country reports




                                            27
                    Number of Laboratory Workers Available by Year

Country      Cadre          2004   2005    2006   2007        2008       2009    2010
Malawi       Technician     160    125     178    310         334/473*   380     193*
Zimbabwe     Worker                               320         317        274
Ghana                                                                            923
Swaziland                                                                57
Ethiopia     Technician     2403                                          1957

             Technologist                                                866
Congo                              452     531    334
Gambia       Scientist                            13          15
             Technician                           15          24
             Assistant                            52          60
Guinea-      Technician                           211(incl.
Bissau                                            aux)
Benin        Technician                                       245
Nigeria      Scientist                            12703
             Technician                           2936
             Assistant                            7044
Central                                                       32         40
African
Republic
Rwanda       A0                                               18         28      21
             A1                                               143        165     164
             A2                                               561        643     615
Zambia       Technician                                                  526     546
Mauritania   Scientist                                        70
             Technician                                       41
Mali         Scientist                                                   41      28
             Technician                                                  317     386
Source: HRH Observatory




                                          28
              Proportion of Laboratory Workers in Urban and Rural Areas

Country      Cadre           Year         Urban (%)     Rural (%)     Per 1000    Per 1000
                                                                      pop urban   pop rural
Malawi       -               2008         63            37            0.3         0.04
Ghana        -               2009         70            30            0.06        0.02
Ethiopia     Tech                         -             -             0.157       0.03
             Technologist                 -             -             0.069       0.013
Congo        -                            65.1          34.9          -           -
Gambia       Scientist       2008         73            27            0.02        -
             Tech                         67            33            0.03        0.01
             Assistant                    52            48            0.05        0.03
Guinea-      Tech                         52.3          47.7
Bissau
CAR          -               2005         72            28            0.007       0.003
Rwanda       A0              2010         47.6          42.9          0.001       0.001
             A1                           30.5          73.8          0.005       0.012
             A2                           14.5          85.5          0.009       0.053
Mali         Scientist       2010         100           0             -           -
             Technician                   91.7          7.3           -           -
             Assistant                    100           0             -           -


             Proportion of Laboratory Workers in Public and Private Service

Country      Type           Year      Public          Faith Based       Private   Private Not
                                                      Organizations               for profit
Malawi       Tech           2008      57.9            16.8              13.6      9.9
Ghana                       2010      68.3            13.5              18.2
Swaziland                   2009      33.3                        66.6*
Gambia       Scientist      2008      60              0                 40
             Tech                     58              0                 42
             Assistant                83              0                 17
Uganda                                                                  11
CAR                         2005      97                                3
Rwanda       A0             2010      28.4            0                 71.6
             A1                       67.7            7.8               24.4
             A2                       77.7            14.4              7.9
*Includes FBO
Source: HRH Observatory country reports




                                           29
                        Laboratory Worker Distribution, by Age

Country         Year       Cadre             <30 yrs   31-40yrs     41-50 yrs       51< yrs
Malawi          2008       Workers           33%       39%          25%             3%
Rwanda          2010       A0                14%       36%          18%             32%
                           A1                44%       44%          9%              3%
                           A2                58%       34%          7%              0%
Ethiopia        2009       Workers           67%       22%          7%              4%
Kenya           2010       Workers           4%        33%          52%             11%
Ghana           2006       Workers           51%       25%          23%             1%
Source: HRH Country Reports


                  Proportion of Female Laboratory Workers, by Country

Country                       Cadre                        Female (%)
Malawi                                                     14.8
Ghana                                                      19.7
Ethiopia                      Tech                         35.1
                              Technologist                 23.8
Congo                                                      60
Gambia                        Scientist                    13
                              Tech                         17
                              Assistant                    32
Guinea Bissau                 Tech & assistant             0.76 ratio men 3 women
Mauritania                    Scientist                    13
                              Tech                         29
Nigeria                       Scientists                   14.3
CAR                                                        8.0
Rwanda                        A0                           22.2
                              A1                           38.5
                              A2                           47.2
Kenya                                                      36.5
Source: HRH Country Reports
Source: HRH Observatory Country Reports




                                             30
                                                                                    ANNEX II
                                        Pre-service Education

 Country    Type    Number of                   Graduates                         Admissions
                    institutions   2005     2006 2007 2008      2009   2005   2006 2007 2008    2009
Malawi      Bsc     1              0        0     0       14    18     -      -     -      -    -
            Dip     2              34       35    45      28    113    -      -     -      -    -
Zimbabwe    Dip     1              -        -     25      23    62     -      0     0      25   88
            BSc     1              -        -     25      23    38     -      0     0      0    0
Ghana       -       4              -        18    9       10    -      -      56    54     60   -
Gambia      Cert    0*             14       -     20      -     -      15     -     21     -    -
Benin       BEP     1              -        -     -       -     -      -      -     -      -    -
            C
Nigeria     -       12             -        -         -    -    -      -      -     -     -     -
CAR         -       1              30       28        21   -    -      56     24    24    -     -
Rwanda      -       1              -        42        53   48   11     -      141   186   190   184
Mali        -       -              -        20        35   45   27     -      38    59    58    56
Zambia      BSc,    3              -        77        98   87   76     -      -     120   109   182
            dip
Tanzania    MSc,    10             -        -         -    -    130    -      -     -     -     --
            BSc,                                                14                              53
            dip,                                                189                             172
            cert                                                90                              365
* Qualification obtained through on the job training




                                                 31
                                                                                               ANNEX III
                                            Career Development

      Title                 Country and Qualification                    Roles and Responsibilities
                                   Requirements
Medical              Nigeria – BSc or higher national diploma     Performance, reading and interpretation
Laboratory           Zimbabwe – BSC                               of laboratory tests
Scientist            Rwanda – BSc
Laboratory           Malawi –BSc                                  Depending on position, some staff at this
technologist         Tanzania – diploma                           level have management responsibilities
                     Ethiopia – BSc                               for their own laboratories, as well as
                     Kenya – diploma                              laboratories in the district or region
                     Zimbabwe - diploma
Laboratory           Malawi – diploma
technician           Ethiopia – diploma
                     Nigeria – diploma
                     Kenya – certificate
                     Zimbabwe – certificate
                     Benin – diploma
                     Rwanda - diploma
Laboratory           Tanzania – certificate                       Preparation of reagents and samples for
Assistant            Nigeria – certificate                        testing
                     Malawi – certificate
                     Zimbabwe – none
                     Rwanda – none
Laboratory           Tanzania - unknown
Attendant
Laboratory           Tanzania - certified
Auxiliary


                           Staffing Norms by Laboratory Network Tier

       Country                                         Tier of laboratory network
                                    Primary                     Secondary                  Tertiary
Tanzania[11]               1 lab attendant and 1 lab     Headed by lab               No Data
                           assistant                     technologist
Malawi [2]                 2 trained lab technicians     2 trained lab technicians   No Data
Nigeria (HRH plan)         1 laboratory technician       No Data                     No Data
Gambia                     1 laboratory assistant        No Data                     No Data
Uganda                     1 laboratory technician       1 laboratory technologist   No Data
                           1 laboratory assistant        2 laboratory technicians
                                                         1 laboratory assistant




                                                  32
                       Regulatory and Representative Bodies

         Country        Regulatory body                   Functions               Representative
                                                                                        body
Nigeria[25]         Medical Laboratory            Registers and regulates       Association of
                    Science Council of            laboratories and              Medical Laboratory
                    Nigeria                       laboratory training           Scientists of Nigeria
                                                  institutions, registers
Kenya [26]          Kenya Medical                 Approves and registers        Association of
                    Laboratory Technicians        laboratories and              Kenya Medical
                    and Technologists Board       laboratory training           Laboratory Scientific
                                                  institutions, registers       Officers
                                                  technicians and
                                                  technologists
Malawi              Medical Council of            Approve training
                    Malawi                        institutions and set
                                                  standards for laboratories.
                                                  Register technicians and
                                                  assistants.
Ghana[6]            Allied Health Professions     Responsible for               Ghana Association
                    Regulatory Council            regulating and registering    of Biomedical
                                                  lab scientists                Laboratory Scientists
Tanzania[27]        Health Laboratory             Responsible for               Medical Laboratory
                    practitioners council and     regulating and registering    Association of
                    Private Health                lab scientists,               Tanzania
                    Laboratories Board            technologists and
                                                  assistants. Approve
                                                  training institutions
Ethiopia[28]        Federal Ministry of           Accreditation and             Ethiopian Medical
                    Education – Medical and       certification of training     Laboratory
                    Health Science Training       institutes, curricula and     Association
                    Institution                   health professionals
Zimbabwe (HRH Ob)   Medical Laboratory and
                    Clinical Scientists Council
Uganda              Allied Health Professions
                    Council
Rwanda              None                                                        Rwanda Association
                                                                                of Biomedical
                                                                                Laboratory
                                                                                Technologists
                                                                                (RABITEC)




                                          33
                                     REFERENCES

Addo et al. 2006. Improving the Laboratory Diagnosis of TB in Ghana: The Impact of a
Quality Assurance System. International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases.

Addo, K.K., et al. 2012. Diagnosis of Tuberculosis in Ghana: The Role of Laboratory
Training. Ghana Medical Journal.

Bitarakwate, E., et al. 2011. Sharing Tasks Among Health Care Workers in Uganda to
Integrate Rapid Syphilis Testing in PMTCT Services.

Boillot, F. 2009. A Weak Link to Improving Health Outcomes in Low-income Countries:
Laboratories, Health Systems for Outcomes Publication, The World Bank, October 2009.

Chirdan, O.O., et al. 2010. Perceptions of Working Conditions Amongst Health Workers in
State-owned Facilities in Northeastern Nigeria. Annals of African Medicine.

Coggin, W.L., C.A. Ryan, and C.B. Holmes. 2010. Role of the US President's Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief in Responding to Tuberculosis and HIV Coinfection. Clinical Infectious
Diseases, 2010.

Cohen, R., et al. 2009. Antiretroviral Treatment Outcomes from a Nurse-driven, Community-
supported HIV/AIDS Treatment Programme in Rural Lesotho: Observational Cohort
Assessment at Two Years. Journal of the International AIDS Society.

Dacombe, R. 2012. Scoping Study of the Literature Regarding Human Resource Issues for
Laboratory Workers, World Bank, July 2012.

Dambisya, Y. 2010. Task shifting in Uganda--A Case Study, 2010.

Datema, T.A.M. 2012. Stepwise Process Towards TB Laboratory Accreditation; Available
from: http://www.gliquality.org/.

Datema, T.A.M., et al. 2011. Critical Review of the Stepwise Laboratory Improvement
Process Towards Accreditation (SLIPTA): Suggestions for Harmonization, Implementation
and Improvement. Tropical Medicine and International Health.

Derua, Y.A., et al. 2011. Users' and Health Service Providers' Perceptions on Quality of
Laboratory Malaria Diagnosis in Tanzania. Malar J.

Elbireer, et al. 2011. Strengthening Public Laboratory Service in Sub-Saharan Africa:
Uganda Case Study, Lab Medicine, March 17, 2011.




                                            34
Elbireer, et al. 2013. The Good, the Bad and the Unknown: Quality of Clinical Laboratories
in Kampala, Uganda, Plos One Medical Journal, May 30, 2013.

Herbst, C., et al. 2011. The Human Resources for Health Crisis in Zambia: An Outcome of
Health Worker Entry, Exit, and Performance within the National Health Labor Market,
World Bank.

Joseph, J.K., et al. 2012. Lay Health Workers and HIV Care in Rural Lesotho: A Report from
the Field. AIDS Patient Care and STDs.

Kanyina, et al. 2014. Kala-azar Outbreak Investigation Report, Marsabit County, Kenya,
May-June 2014, Ministry of Health, Kenya.

Kasthala, S., Kamiza S, and Bates I. 2010. Managing National Needs and International
Expectations: Experiences of an Undergraduate Course in Malawi – A Qualitative Study.

Kasubi, J.M. 2012. Laboratory Human Resources for Health: Tanzania Country Report,
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, October 2012.

Kigguni, et al. 2011. Evaluation of a Comprehensive Refresher Training Program in Malaria
Microscopy Covering Four Districts of Uganda, American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene.

Kurowski, C., et al. 2007. Scaling up Priority Health Interventions in Tanzania: The Human
Resources Challenge. Health Policy and Planning. 2007. 22(3): p. 113-127.

Lunz, et al. 1987. The Impact of the Quality of Laboratory Staff on the Accuracy of
Laboratory Results, JAMA.

Lunz M.E., B.M. Castleberry, K. James. 1992. Laboratory Staff Qualifications and Accuracy
of Proficiency Test Results. A National Study. Arch Pathol Lab Med. August 1992;
116(8):820-4.

Malagala, I. 2012. Laboratory Human Resources for Health: Uganda Country Report,
Ministry of Health, July 2012.

Manafa, O., et al., Retention of health workers in Malawi: perspectives of health workers and
district management. Human Resources for Health, 2009.

Marinucci, F., et al. 2011. New Approach to In-Service Training of Laboratory Professionals
in Sub-Saharan Africa, Health Care, 2011.

Matu, M., Schneidman, M., Kalysubula, S, Opio, A., Mosha, F., Kayobotsi, C., Ngamije, D.,
Akhwale, W., and Masila, C. 2013 HRH Study Recommendations Implementation Guide, 2013
(unpublished).



                                             35
Ministry of Health, F.M.O. 2008. National Human Resources for Health Strategic Plan -
Nigeria: 2008-12.

Muhondwa, E., and B. Fimbo. 2006. Impact of HIV/AIDS On Human Resources for Health In
Tanzania, 2006, Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Tanzania.

Mwanza, J. 2010. Human Resources for Health Country Plan – Zambia.

Nafula, M. 2012. Human Resources for Health: Kenya Country Report, August 2012.

Nsubuga, P., et al. 2010/ Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programs in sub-
Saharan Africa from 2004 to 2010: need, the process, and prospects. Pan Afr Med J, 2011.
10: p. 24.

Ohrt, et al. 2007. Establishing a Malaria Diagnostics Centre of Excellence in Kisumu,
Kenya.

O'Neil, M., et al. 2010. Evaluation of Malawi’s Emergency Human Resource Programme,
2010.

Petti C.A., Polange C.R, Quinn T.C, Ronald A.R, Sande M.A. 2006. Laboratory Medicine in
Africa : “A Barrier to Effective Health Care”. Clinical Infectious

Petti, C., et al. 2006. Laboratory Medicine in Africa: A Barrier to Effective Health Care,
Laboratory Medicine in Africa, Clinical Infectious Diseases.

Rao, P., et al. 2010. A Situational Analysis of Three Potential and Two Existing Laboratory
Training Centres in Tanzania. International Training and Education Center for Health.

Reyburn, Hugh, et al. 2007. Rapid diagnostic tests compared with malaria microscopy for
guiding outpatient treatment of febrile illness in Tanzania: randomised trial, Bmj 334.7590:
403.

Sebagabo, Muhire B. 2012. Study on Human Resources for Health: Laboratory Workers in
Rwanda, Ministry of Health, Rwanda, July 2012.

Soucat, et. al. 2013. The Labor Market for Health Workers in Africa: A New Look at the
Crisis. The World Bank.

Van den Broek, A., et al. 2011 Human Resources for Health for theLaboratory, Tropical
Medicine and International Health.

World Bank. 2013. Public Private Partnerships for Laboratory Services in East Africa,
Study Report for the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project, November
2013.


                                             36
World Bank. 2014 The Economic Impact of the 2014 Ebola Epidemic: Short and Medium
Term Estimates for West Africa, The World Bank, October 8, 2014. Available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/publication/the-economic-impact-

World Health Organization. 2005. International Health Regulations. Second Edition.

WHO. 2008. Task Shifting: Rational Redistribution of Tasks Among Health Workforce
Teams: Global Recommendations and Guidelines2008.

Yao, K., et al. 2010. Ensuring the quality of HIV Rapid Testing in Resource-Poor Countries
Using a Systematic Approach to Training. American Journal of Clinical Pathology.

Yao, K., et al. 2010. Improving Quality Management Systems of Laboratories in Developing
Countries An Innovative Training Approach to Accelerate Laboratory Accreditation.
American journal of clinical pathology. 134 (3): p. 401-409.

Zeh C.E. et al. 2010. Field Experience in Implementing ISO 15189 in Kisumu, Kenya. American
Journal of Clinical Pathology.




                                            37
Laboratories have historically been under supported in developing country health systems resulting in
poor quality diagnosis and inadequate disease surveillance. The labor market for laboratory workers in
many developing countries is characterized by constrained supply of well qualified staff, sluggish public
sector demand, and relatively low wages. This leads to a high turnover of staff with highly skilled staff
finding work in the private sector. Laboratory professionals are predominantly male with relatively limited
female labor participation. The focus on communicable diseases has meant that funding for broader
public health laboratory services has been relatively neglected.

This paper presents strategies to address these problems based on the outcomes from a literature review
and case studies conducted in four African countries. Improved registration and human resource planning
are required to establish the scale of the problem and to develop country specific strategies to address
skills shortages. More high quality pre-service training is needed to supply the service with suitably skilled
professional staff. Innovative in-service training is essential to maintain competence and collaboration is
required with the private sector to utilize their expertise. A clear career structure with transparent
promotional opportunities, suitable work environments and regulatory and representative bodies will
support recruitment and retention of staff in the public sector and enhance quality. It is also clear that this
cadre has been underrepresented in human resources for health research and more activity in this area
will lead to greater understanding of the problems and provide more potential solutions.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor, Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                                1818 H Street, NW
                                                                                Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                                Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                                Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                                Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                                E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
