                                                                             92764




Adolescent Girls
Initiative Rwanda:
Midline Report | October 2014




About the Authors

Laterite Ltd. (www.laterite-africa.com) is a research-consulting firm based in Rwanda. We offer
research services clustered around economic and social research, policy development and market
research.
                             World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                     Table of Contents
	  
1. Introduction                                                                           3	  
2. Midline Study Methodology                                                              7	  
3. Main Findings                                                                        15	  
       3.1. Trainee Profiles & Participation                                            17	  
       3.2 Program Management                                                           21	  
       3.3 Girl-Specific Design Elements                                                24	  
       3.4 Technical Training                                                           26	  
       3.5 Life Skills Training                                                         28	  
       3.6 Entrepreneurship Training                                                    29	  
       3.7 Post-Training Phase                                                          30	  
       3.8 Overall Impact of Program Participation                                      33	  
4. Summary & Recommendations                                                            35	  


Annex:
Site 1: Kigali, General                                                                 53	  
Site 2: Gahaya Links, Kigali                                                            56	  
Site 3: Gacuriro VTC                                                                    72	  
Site 4: Nyarugunga VTC                                                                  85	  
Site 5: Shyorongi VTC                                                                   91	  
Site 6: Bushoki VTC                                                                   100	  
Site 7: Rushaki VTC                                                                   113	  




	                                                                                        2	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



1. Introduction

This midline report covers the second component of the 3-part evaluation of the Promoting
Economic Empowerment of Adolescent Women and Young Girls project in Rwanda. This
project is part of the World Bank’s Adolescent Girls Initiative (AGI), which promotes economic
empowerment of adolescent girls and young women in 8 low-income and post-conflict countries:
Afghanistan, Haiti, Jordan,	   Lao PDR, Liberia, Nepal, Rwanda, and South Sudan. The AGI
program includes a strong evaluation component in order to generate new evidence around what
works for improving young women’s labor market outcomes.

The evaluation of the Rwanda AGI program has three overall main objectives, which are listed
below.


       $"   Examine how well the program delivered on planned activities!
            To achieve this, the evaluation will include an analysis of program logistics
            and processes.!



       !"   Assess the usefulness of the training provided!
            To achieve this, the evaluation will engage the beneficiaries in a
            participatory process to elicit their perception of the quality and usefulness
            of the services they received.!


       #"   Measure changes in beneficiary outcomes before and after!
            To achieve this, the evaluation will include surveys to capture information
            on a core set of quantitative indicators relating to the project’s objective of
            promoting productive work. !
            "

A tracer methodology was used for this evaluation which aims to follow individuals before,
during, and after the intervention focusing on understanding if and why their situation,
perceptions, outlook and/or aspirations have changed during the course of the observation period.
By closely following individuals at certain time intervals using a mix of research instruments –
including semi-structured interviews, focus groups and quantitative surveys/metrics – this
methodology traces the individual journey of program trainees over time and to ask specific
questions about why certain changes occurred. This will enable us to understand and probe in a
nuanced way into why certain changes occurred in trainees’ lives and whether these changes can
be linked back to program activities/interventions.

The figure below summarizes the tracer methodology employed by this evaluation:




	                                                                                             3	  
                                  World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       Tracer Methodology: Following participants before, during, and after an intervention to
       understand if and why their situation, perceptions, outlook and/or aspirations have changed
       during the course of the observation period

                                      •  Collect demographic information
         Quantitative Survey          •  Collect information on key quantitative indicators to
                                         measure change over the course of the program

                                      •  Elicit participatory feedback on the quality and usefulness of
       Focus Group Discussions           classroom teaching
                                      •  Include interviews with participants who have dropped out

                                      •  One-on-one interviews (plus translator and transcriber)
           Semi-Structured
                                         going into as much detail as possible with the interviewee
             Interviews               •  Puts information from survey and focus groups into context

                                      •  Training materials
           Collect Program
                                      •  Collect digital attendance records for all participants
              Materials               •  Collect monitoring and progress reports




Project Background: there are 3 components to the AGI program and this evaluation focuses on
the first component: Skills Development and Entrepreneurship Support. This component has
been designed to assist 2,700 adolescent girls and young women aged 16-24 to enable them
establish themselves in profitable small enterprises. The project operates in two urban and two
rural districts of Rwanda; Kicukiro, Gasabo, Rulindo and Gicumbi respectively. The
interventions will equip beneficiaries with a set of technical, business and life skills, along with
institutional and psycho social support, mentoring and links to credit. This component is
implemented by the Workforce Development Authority (WDA), under the supervision of the
Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion (MIGEPROF).

The project is implemented in 12 sectors across the 4 districts. There is one vocational training
center (VTC) in each sector run by WDA to provide technical training in these trades. An
assessment undertaken during the project preparation identified opportunities for self-
employment in a number of areas including: (i) agro-processing (e.g. food processing, honey
production, baking, juice processing), (ii) culinary arts, and (iii) arts and crafts. In addition, life
skills training and entrepreneurship training will address crucial gaps to the access of adolescent
girls in the labour market. Frontier Great Lakes have been contracted to provide life skills and
entrepreneurship training whereas Gahaya Links has been contracted to provide and arts and
crafts training. The program consists of 5 months of classroom training and 5 months of
cooperative formation.

The project will provide small stipends to beneficiaries participating in training and mentoring
activities to mitigate the potential loss of income by the beneficiaries associated with their
participation in the project. The proposed stipend will be below the minimum daily salary for


	                                                                                                        4	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



agricultural work at 700 RWF/day during the induction and technical and skills formation
phases, and 300 RWF/day during the mentoring phase. From this stipend, 200 RWF/day will be
deposited in a savings mechanism for each individual beneficiary, accessible only on successful
competition of the training program. If beneficiaries fail to complete the program, the stipend
money will be returned to the project.

The project aims to serve a total of 3 batches of 650 trainees each. The project operates in two
urban and two rural districts of Rwanda; Kicukiro, Gasabo, Rulindo and Gicumbi respectively.
This evaluation focuses on the second batch of trainees to go through the Promoting Economic
Empowerment of Adolescent Women and Young Girls project. By focusing on batch 2, the
evaluation can assess the project after the early lessons from batch 1 have been incorporated.


1.1 Objective of the Midline Evaluation

The objective of this midline evaluation focused specifically on:
(ii)   assessing the quality and usefulness of the training provided;
(ii)   evaluating the implementation process and identify areas for potential improvement.

While the first midline objective is based on the TOR and the overall objectives of the
evaluation, the second midline objective was not derived from the TORs. The focus on
evaluating the implementation process and identifying areas for potential improvement was a
suggestion by the Laterite team after they observed certain process issues during data collection
for the baseline survey; the World Bank team agreed that more of a focus on process evaluation
at midline would be beneficial.

The major components of the evaluation are summarized by the timeline below. The midline, in
June 2014 (Month 6), is comprised of 5 focus group discussions and 12 semi-structured
interviews conducted mid-way through the program.




	                                                                                             5	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




         !"#$%"%&'()$*%+#)            3'(4*)0)                      3'(4*)5)                 3'(4*)--)
             ,--./0-12)              ,-/./0-12)                     ,5./0-62)                ,--./0-62)


         78"9#:)!"#$%"%&'()            ;%+#<=(#)                      3=><=(#)                 ?(><=(#)

       •  Finalize Survey      •  Quantitative              •  Focus Group               •  Quantitative
          Instruments             survey with 160              discussions                  survey with
       •  Pilot quantitative      beneficiaries                                             same 160
          survey with             before the start          •  Semi-Structured              beneficiaries
          batch 1                 of the induction             interviews                •  Focus group
          beneficiaries           period                                                    discussions
       •  Randomly                                                                       •  Semi-Structured
          sample survey                                                                     interviews
          participants


       Throughout: collect training materials, digital attendance records, monitoring and progress
       reports, and interviews with administrators and trainers




This report covers the midline components of the evaluation. Section 2 describes the midline
study methodology including (a) the scope and sampling (b) research tools design (c) piloting (d)
selection of sectors (e) selection of participants (f) data collection methodology and (g) analytical
approach. In the next section of the report, the main findings from the midline study are
highlighted focusing on 7 main research areas: (i) trainee profiles and participation (ii) program
management (iii) girl-specific design elements (iv) technical training (v) life skills training (vi)
entrepreneurship training and (vii) the post-training phase. An overall summary and
recommendations are provided in the final chapter. Finally, an annex is provided that contains
interview guidelines and full transcripts from focus group discussions and semi-structured
interviews.




	                                                                                                            6	  
                                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



2. Midline Study Methodology

2.1 Scope of the Midline Evaluation
	  
The qualitative midline evaluation was designed to achieve the two objectives described above.
Accordingly, it included a mix of interviews with beneficiaries and interviews with staff. There
were several factors that determined the scope and sampling strategy for the focus group
discussions (FGD) and semi-structure interviews (SSI):
     a. Triangulate data with various sources: SSIs were conducted with a few beneficiaries to
        validate claims that would arise in FGDs. Furthermore, following conversations with the
        World Bank team and WDA/MIGEPROF, it was ultimately decided to conduct 5 focus
        group discussions and 9 semi-structured interviews. Laterite conducted 3 additional
        interviews during the data collection process in order to follow-up with issues that had
        been raised during some of the earlier interviews. In the end, 5 FGDs with participants, 3
        SSIs with participants, 3 SSIs with dropouts, and 6 SSIs with program staff were
        conducted. The program staff interviews included 3 trainers (Gahaya Links, Frontiers
        Great Lakes, and a food processing trainer from Bushoki VTC) and 3 school managers
        (at the Gaculiro, Nyarugunga, and Rushaki VTCs). Please see the image below to
        illustrate the final research scope.
     b. Logistics: SSIs were conducted with dropouts rather the FGDs due to logistical
        challenges of bringing together dropouts from different sectors/districts for a focus
        group discussion.
     c. Small FGD size: FGDs were conducted with a relative small group of 6 participants due
        to the length of the research tool and to allow for better facilitation of the FGD.
     d. Diverse range of opinions: in order to capture a wide range of program staff opinions,
        school managers and trainers were interviewed in both urban and rural VTCs.

            !"#$%&%'((              ,$-."/&(              01"%$2$32"(               4$-.'/&(             5.1'%'32&(   6&2"7&(8!"."1"(9&3/-(
              )*+(                   )*+(                    )*+(                     )*+(                  )*+(             :(;!9<=(



                              •  FGD with 6                                                                           •  FGD with 6
       •  FGD with 6             trainees              •  SSI with 2 drop-    •  FGD with 6          •  FGD with 6       trainees
          trainees            •  SSI with 1               outs                   trainees               trainees      •  SSI with 1
       •  SSI with school        trainee               •  SSI with 1 school   •  SSI with 1                              trainee
          manager             •  SSI with 1 school        manager                trainee                              •  SSI with Gahaya
                                 manager                                      •  SSI with 1 food                         Links Co-
                              •  SSI with 1                                      processor trainer                       Founder
                                 dropout                                                                              •  SSI with PM of
                                                                                                                         FGL


            * FGL – Frontier Great Lakes




	                                                                                                                                         7	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



2.2 Research Tool Design
	  
Laterite drafted the initial research tool for the focus group discussions (FGD) and semi-
structured interviews (SSI). This was then shared with the World Bank team for comments. After
initial comments from the World Bank team, the revised tool was shared with a wider group
including the WDA/MIGEPROF team for further comments. A meeting was held on Monday,
June 2, 2014 between Laterite and WDA/MIGEPROF to discuss logistics and further comments
on the research tools. Finally, final comments from the midline evaluation workshop in Kigali
were provided to Laterite during which the baseline report was presented to a large group of
program implementers including trainers and school managers. Copies of the research tools are
provided in the annex.


2.3 Piloting
	  
Laterite conducted two pilots for Focus Group discussions with members of the enumerator team
who had been involved in data collection for the baseline survey. Following the pilot, comments
were incorporated focusing on translation and clarity issues. A second pilot was conducted with
6 enumerators to test the timing of the revised research instrument.


2.4 Selection of Sectors

A random selection process was followed whereby one sector was randomly selected from each
of the 4 districts (Gicumbi, Gasabo, Kicukiro and Rulindo) to participate in the evaluation. The
selected sectors were Gaculiro, Nyarugunga, Bushoki, and Rushaki. However, in addition to
visiting the 4 randomly selected sectors, WDA/MIGEPROF requested that Laterite visit
Shyorongi to conduct an additional focus group discussion, as thy were interested in learning
from the VTC given that it was considered as an exemplary VTC. A summary of the learning
trades administered at the VTCs is provided in the table below.

       •   Nyarugunga VTC: is based in the urban Kicukiro district (one of the 3 Kigali districts).
           The VTC provides training on culinary, food processing and arts/crafts trades.
       •   Gaculiro VTC: is based in the urban Gasabo district (also one of the 3 Kigali districts).
           The VTC provides training on culinary, food processing and arts/crafts trades.
       •   Shyorongi VTC: is based in the rural Rulindo district, which is located in the Northern
           province. The VTC provides training on culinary, food processing and arts/crafts trades.
       •   Bushoki VTC: is also based in Rulindo district, which is located in the Northern
           province. The VTC provides training on food processing and arts/crafts trades.
       •   Rushaki VTC: is based in the rural Gicumbi district, also based in the Northern
           province. The VTC provides training on food processing, arts/crafts, and agri-business
           trades.


	                                                                                                8	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




                                              Food Processing                              Agri-business
       AGI Training                                                          Arts and    (Nursery beds, Fruits
                         Culinary         (Milk Processing and Fruit
         Center                             and Juice Processing)
                                                                              Crafts      and Vegetables and
                                                                                             Beekeeping)

       Nyarugunga            x                         x                             x            -
         Gaculiro            x                         x                             x            -
        Shyorongi            x                         x                             x            -
         Bushoki             -                         x                             x            x
         Rushaki             -                         x                             x            x

During data collection, the logistics for FGDs led to a slight change in the allocation of focus
groups across VTCs. In Kigali, the girls enrolled in the arts & crafts program all attend classes at
the headquarters of Gahaya Links, a Kigali-based handicrafts company and training center.
Therefore, one focus group was conducted at Gahaya Links and one at Gaculiro, instead of one
at Nyarugunga and one at Gaculiro. The focus group at Gahaya Links included 5 girls from the
Nyarugunga VTC and one from the Gaculiro VTC.

2.5 Selection of Participants
	  
Within the selected sectors, FGD participants were randomly selected from the list of
participants who had completed the baseline survey. If the selected participants were not present
at the time of the interview (either because they were absent that day or because they had
actually dropped out of the program), then other girls from the list were randomly selected in
their place. Based on the random selection of respondents from the original baseline survey list,
only 3 girls were not available at the time of the interview and accordingly, 3 girls were
randomly selected again from that baseline list. The Laterite team read the list of randomly
selected names (or provided a list of pre-selected girls to the school manager) upon arrival at
each VTC.

6 staff interviewees were selected in advance based on conversations with the WB and
WDA/MIGEPROF. The staff selected for interviews included trainers from Frontiers Great
Lakes (FGL) and Gahaya Links. The criteria used to select program staff to interview included
staff that have worked in both urban and rural centers so their perspectives represent a mix of
both environments and would consist of 3 randomly chosen trainers (Gahaya Links, Frontier
Great Lakes and a Food Processing Trainer) and 3 randomly chosen school managers (form
Gaculiro, Nyarugunga, and Rushaki VTCs).

A summary of the selection criteria of all participants at the 6 sites is provided below. This also
includes demographic info of focus group participants.



	                                                                                                          9	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Site 1: Kigali - Gahaya Links Interviews:
    • 1 SSI with the Program Manager at Frontier Great Lakes (FGL)
    • 1 SSI with the Co-founder of Gahaya Links
    • 1 SSI with 1 trainee at Gahaya Links
    • 1 FGD with 6 trainees at Gahaya Links

Staff Selection: Laterite interviewed a Program Manager at Frontier Great Lakes who travels to
all of the centers to conduct training. An interview was also conducted with the co-founder of
Gahaya Links, which is based at the training center in Kigali. Gahaya Links hosts girls from the
Gaculiro and Nyarugunga VTCs but also manages the arts & crafts training for all of the other
centers.

FGD Selection: Before going to the center, Laterite randomly selected 8 beneficiaries from the
Gacuriro VTC and 8 from the Nyarugunga VTC (from the list of participants in the baseline
survey), with the intention of having the FGD divided evenly between the two groups (3
participants from each center). It turned out that many of the selected respondents were not
present at the center: they were in other trades at their VTCs and some were absent. Only one
member of the baseline sample from Gacuriro was present at Gahaya that day. The other five
participants in the focus group were from the Nyarugunga center.

       Respondent#    Unique ID             VTC                  Age               Trade
            1           50304             Gacuriro                23            Arts & Crafts
            2           30161            Nyarugunga               18            Arts & Crafts
            3           20925            Nyarugunga               24            Arts & Crafts
            4           30168            Nyarugunga               24            Arts & Crafts
            5           10879            Nyarugunga               18            Arts & Crafts
            6           20100            Nyarugunga               22            Arts & Crafts



Site 2: Gacuriro VTC Interviews:
    • 1 SSI with the School Manager at Gacuriro VTC
    • 1 FGD with 6 trainees at Gacuriro VTC

FGD Selection: At this center, Laterite provided a list of 6 randomly selected trainees to a
member of the program staff and explained that we needed to interview 6 of these girls if they
were present. All 6 participants were present to be interviewed.

       Respondent#     Unique ID              VTC                  Age               Trade
            1            50323               Gacuriro               22              Culinary
            2            50227               Gacuriro               19              Culinary
            3            50408               Gacuriro               19              Culinary



	                                                                                              10	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



            4             50368              Gacuriro               20               Culinary
            5             50456              Gacuriro               22               Culinary
            6             50297              Gacuriro               23               Culinary



Site 3: Nyarugunga VTC Interviews:
    • 2 SSIs with Dropouts at Nyarugunga VTC
    • 1 SSI with the School Manager at Nyarugunga VTC

Dropout Selection: Based on the list of dropouts provided by the WDA team, Laterite randomly
selected 2 dropouts and contacted them to set up interview times. Both of the initially selected
drop-outs were available for the interviews. The interview with the school manager was not
planned but the Laterite team decided to conduct the interview to clarify certain comments that
emerged from the dropout interviews.

Site 4: Shyorongi VTC Interviews:
    • 1 FGD with 6 trainees at Shyorongi VTC

FGD Selection: At this center, Laterite provided a list of 6 randomly selected trainees to a
member of the program staff in advance of the meeting and explained that we needed to
interview 6 of these girls if they were present. All 6 participants were present to be interviewed.

       Respondent#      Unique ID             VTC                  Age                  Trade
            1             15693             Shyorongi               20              Food processing
            2             15848             Shyorongi               18               Arts & crafts
            3             15747             Shyorongi               18               Arts & crafts
            4             15647             Shyorongi               20              Food processing
            5             15648             Shyorongi               19              Food processing
            6             15697             Shyorongi               17               Arts & crafts



Site 5: Bushoki VTC Interviews:
    • 1 SSI with 1 trainee at Bushoki VTC
    • I SSI with 1 Food Processing trainer
    • 1 FGD with 6 trainees at Bushoki VTC

FGD Selection: Participants were randomly selected from those present who had taken the
baseline survey.

       Respondent#      Unique ID             VTC                  Age                  Trade
            1             91688              Bushoki                22               Arts & Crafts



	                                                                                                    11	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



            2             91686              Bushoki                19               Arts & Crafts
            3             91631              Bushoki                19              Food Processing
            4             91640              Bushoki                22              Food Processing
            5             91637              Bushoki                21              Food Processing
            6             91678              Bushoki                17              Food Processing



Site 6: Rushaki VTC Interviews:
    • 1 SSI with 1 trainee at Rushaki VTC
    • 1 SSI with 1 dropout at Rushaki VTC
    • 1 SSI with 1 school manager at Rushaki VTC
    • 1 FGD with 6 trainees at Bushoki VTC

FGD Selection: Participants were randomly selected from those present who had taken the
baseline survey.

       Respondent#     Unique ID              VTC                  Age                  Trade
            1            61463               Rushaki                19               Arts & crafts
            2            61533               Rushaki                18               Agri-business
            3            61500               Rushaki                18               Agri-business
            4             61499              Rushaki                20               Agri-business
            5             61504              Rushaki                17               Arts & crafts
            6             61438              Rushaki                17               Agri-business




2.6 Data Collection Methodology

The purpose of the focus groups discussions that included current trainees was to learn about
trainees’ opinions of the process, quality and relevance of the training they received during the
first six months of their experience with the AGI project in Rwanda. Following a brief section on
background information, the discussions with current trainees were structured into 9 modules:
(1) Attendance; (2) Impacts; (3) Trade-Specific Training; (4) Life Skills Training; (5)
Entrepreneurship Training; (6) Quality of Teachers; (7) Transition to Part II; (8) Program
Management; and (9) Other Comments. The discussions lasted between 1 hour 30 minutes and 2
hours.

Two Laterite female enumerators managed discussions: one discussion leader and one note
taker/translator. The discussions were not recorded but all of the focus groups were transcribed
and translated (please refer to the Annex). The discussion leader used a “nominal group
technique” to facilitate conversation. At the beginning of each module, the discussion leader
introduced the topic and posed the main question to the group. Each participant was asked to


	                                                                                                    12	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



reflect on her response for 2-3 minutes (and to take notes if she wants to) before sharing her
thoughts with the group. After each participant had an opportunity to share her thoughts with the
group, the discussion leader posed follow-up questions and encouraged all participants to share
as much information as possible. The discussion leader used the flip chart to facilitate the
conversation. At the end of each module, the note taker verbally reported a summary of what was
heard. This served as confirmation for the group members that they communicated what they
intended to, and allowed them to make any suggestions for adjustments in the event that what
they said was not accurately represented.1

The semi-structured interviews (SSIs) were conducted by a team of 2: a Laterite research analyst
and a translator. The research analyst began each module by posing the main question and
recording the response as the translator provided the verbatim translation. Depending on the
direction of the conversation, the research analyst the posed relevant follow-up questions,
recording as much information as possible for each topic.

All of the SSIs and FGDs included an informed consent paragraph that explained the project
evaluation, the purpose of the interviews, confidentiality, the voluntary nature of the information
shared, and emphasized that there was no obligation to participate. The Laterite team also sought
their contact information in case there was a need to contact them for follow-up questions over
the next 6 months.


2.7 Analytical Approach

FGDs and SSIs with current and former trainees: after transcribing interviews (based on
written notes and recordings), Laterite compiled responses to all key questions into a spreadsheet
to facilitate comparisons and analysis (attached to this document). 	   The analysis file contains
quotes and relevant information from FGDs as well as SSIs with participants and dropouts. Each
sheet corresponds with a section of the report module. Each column corresponds with a sub-
section and contains quotes and examples that are relevant to that sub-section (detailed
background information is provide in the transcripts annex and in Section 2.5 above). Using this
matrix, averages were calculated for binary responses (e.g. Yes and No) to determine the
frequency of responses. Given the limited number of FGDs and SSIs, it was not necessary to
code the open-ended responses but key themes were identified from the matrix.

After identifying key themes, quotes were selected that represented the majority opinion as well
as important outliers. The final report used these quotes to illustrate the key themes coming out
of the interviews.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1These instructions are drawn from the WBI Evaluation Group (2007): “Managing Focus Groups,”
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/WBI/Resources/213798-1194538727144/6Final-Focus_Groups.pdf



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



SSIs with program staff: analysis for SSIs was combined with the FGD analysis matrix. Major
over-arching themes/ideas that were evident during data collection process were identified using
this matrix. After noting these, and collecting illustrative quotes, we reviewed all transcripts to
note any areas of disagreement and to compare the findings from program staff interviews with
the findings from participant/dropout interviews.
                   	  




	                                                                                              14	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



3. Main Findings

In this next section of the report, we highlight the main findings from the midline study focusing
on 7 main research areas: (i) trainee profiles and participation (ii) program management (iii) girl-
specific design elements (iv) technical training (v) life skills training (vi) entrepreneurship
training and (vii) the post-training phase. A brief summary of the overall program impact is
provided following these 7 research areas. A summary of the key themes emerging from these
research areas is provided below:
	  
1. Trainee Profiles & Participation:
Selection Criteria: overall, the program staff was satisfied with the selection process, insisting
that the focus on vulnerable girls and single mothers was appropriate. Most trainers also
indicated that the trainees were attentive and inquisitive. However, some trainers indicated that a
key challenge related to the selection process is the low education level of some trainees, which
made it difficult to facilitate the training. For the trainees, the main challenge related to the
selection of trades. While the majority of trainees reported that they chose the trade they ended
up studying, some reported that the selection criteria prevented them from doing so, as they did
not have the requisite skills to study the trade.

Program Attendance: Attendance was relatively high with only few trainees citing the high
transport costs and opportunity cost of lost income as barrier to attending the program. A number
of trainees that did not complete the program cited the inadequate transport stipend as the key
factor. However, trainees in urban areas noted that the program left little time to engage in other
income-generating activities, which affected their ability to support their families.

Stipend: Delivery, Use and Usefulness: one of the key challenges of the program implementation
was the late delivery of the stipend both for trainees and program staff. On average, trainees
faced a month delay whereas program staff faced delays ranging from one day to several weeks.
For trainees that relied on the stipend for daily transport to the VTCs, this was a significant
burden. Several trainees indicated that they would not be able to attend the program if they were
not provided the stipend as it covered their transport costs. Trainees in urban areas primarily used
their stipends for transport whereas trainees based in rural areas were likely to spend their
stipend mainly on basic needs and livestock.

Attrition: the 3 dropouts interviewed claimed that it was a result of delayed transport stipends
and family pressure. All the dropouts indicated that they would prefer attending the training if
their circumstances changed. The program staff instead claimed that dropouts were for another
set of reasons related to marriage, pregnancy or misidentification.

2. Program Management: the program staff felt that the implementation of the program for
Cohort 2 was relatively more efficient due to lessons learned from the previous cohort. This was


	                                                                                               15	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



accompanied by the good communication between management and program staff. Yet, some
key implementation challenges remained related to: (i) delayed stipends (ii) hidden costs of
program for trainees in certain trades (e.g. trainees in urban areas noted that the program left
little time to engage in other income-generating activities, which affected their ability to support
their families) (iii) limited training time (iv) low teacher-student ratio, and (v) logistical issues
related to managing overlapping Cohorts 2 and 3.

3. Girl-specific design elements: overall, most trainees were satisfied with the girl-friendliness
of the VTCs but there was not a clear take-up or knowledge about additional services such as
childcare, counseling or family planning services.

4. Technical Training: one of the key messages emanating from all the training components
from the program staff was the need to adjust the training curriculum (for all the trade, life skills
and entrepreneurship trainings) in order to accommodate the varying levels of education of the
trainees. As a result, there was a stronger emphasis on practicals and hands-on training as
opposed to theory. Specific to the trade training was the selection of trades. Overall, most
trainees were happy with their selected trades and the training but some complained about the
relevance or lucrativeness of trades such as food processing and arts/crafts.

5. Life Skills Training: from the trainees’ perspective, the training did have a significant impact,
specifically in terms of improving their social relations, birth control, having a mentor, and
confidence about finding a job or taking out loans for starting a business. This training appeared
to be the most popular training session and was mentioned several times during the interviews.

6. Entrepreneurship Training: similar to the other trainings, trainees were satisfied with the
training curriculum and felt they would benefit from the course.

7. Post-training phase: most girls seemed fairly confident about the transition after the training
and felt they were prepared to embark on their cooperative initiatives or seek employment with
their newly-acquired skills. Those trainees that were not optimistic about their post-training
opportunities raised the issue of potential funding gaps for their cooperatives.




	                                                                                                16	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



3.1. Trainee Profiles & Participation

3.1.1 Appropriateness of the Selection Criteria
	  
Program Selection: The majority of the program staff members we interviewed were satisfied
about the way girls are selected into the program. They generally felt that the program was right
to focus on assisting vulnerable girls – their definition of vulnerable girls referred to girls that
dropped out of school and were young mothers. The trainer from Frontier Great Lakes (FGL)
was especially keen that single mothers benefit a lot from the program, since they are otherwise
marginalized. She explained that there are some differences in the level of understanding given
that girls come from different educational backgrounds, but she would not exclude those with
less education “because they are the ones who really need the program” (SSI1).

All the program staff also commented on challenges in teaching trainees with a range of different
educational backgrounds. As a result, the trainers adjusted their teaching methodology to include
more practicals rather than focus on theory. However, they did not feel that the selection process
needed to be adjusted.

Only the school manager from Rushaki suggested that the recruitment methods should be
adjusted: “It would be good if applicants were required to complete 9 years of basic education,
since their understanding level is a bit higher” (SSI10). The school manager from Gacuriro did
not feel that it was necessary to change the recruitment methods but felt that it was more
important to have the appropriate level of resources to teach the students: “If there are enough
materials for the students, the recruitment criteria are not important; materials are important”
(SSI4).

Trainee Performance: Despite the challenges in teaching students with varying levels of
education, the trainers across the board reported that the trainees are attentive and inquisitive.
They especially appreciated the experiential learning and participatory approaches of the
training. The trainer from Frontiers Great Lakes indicated: “In reproductive health, they will ask
you – you may even stay there all day – questions you never thought about. Because there are so
many myths and then the culture, their lack of knowledge sometimes, the rumors and things they
hear here and they. They will ask you – up to the last question, they don’t fear [speaking with the
teachers]” (SSI1).

The trainer from Gahaya Links reiterated the same message when asked about trainee
performance. She says that the girls performed better than they expected: “You know, when you
see somebody who is hungry to learn, you can even tell from her face. Like, when they come
here in the morning, the way they interact, the way they ask you, the way they engage with their
teachers...so there are ways to test them to know – are they really enjoying what they are doing
or are they just here” (SSI2). As an example, the trainer also referred to innovation week, which


	                                                                                               17	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



is a week when girls are assessed on their ability to apply what they have learned. She could tell
that during that week the girls had been engaged and understood what they were learning. She
also adds that she feels the life skills training had an impact on the participants’ lives by showing
them how to work together in a team (SSI2). This was reiterated by many trainees who said they
really appreciated the life skills training.

The school manager from Gacuriro felt that the trainees perform well enough to compete on the
job market: “For now there are students that are part of a cooperative. They are producing juice
and they say that all of the products – the juice – has been sold. You find that if their products are
popular on the market, it gives the management the trust that what they are doing has quality.”
(SSI4).

3.1.2 Challenges with Program Attendance
	  
Main barriers to program attendance: There was significant variation in trainees’ responses
about whether or not it was	   difficult to attend the program on a regular basis. The main
difference was between rural and urban areas and was tied to the cost of transport and the
opportunity cost of lost income. In the urban VTCs (Gahaya Links and Gacuriro), trainees
describe the large burden of transport fees, which were typically higher than 500 Rwf per day
and therefore were not fully covered by the stipend (FGD1 and FGD2). While there is no clear
evidence that it led to drop-outs, it was an issue that was reiterated by several trainees from urban
areas. Respondents in these centers typically say that they would not have been able to attend
without the stipend and even with it they faced challenges. (Note that the question of travel time
was contentious in Gahaya – participants accused each of lying about travel time, so the question
was not asked to all participants). Furthermore, urban participants were more likely to engage in
income-generating activities as some of them indicated they were migrants and needed to
generate other income to send money back home or work as maids in households they were
living in.

As discussed in the section of stipends, the delayed arrival of stipends was particularly
challenging for participants in urban areas because they face a high burden of travel costs. Most
rural participants would travel on foot whereas urban participants would use public transport. For
example, one respondent in Gacuriro explains, “It was difficult to come here because we could
not afford transport, but now they are providing it” (FGD2). One dropout from Nyarugunga VTC
suggested that uniforms were a requirement for the food processing training but it was not
possible to verify this.

Moving to a new home was not considered a significant barrier and affected only 2 participants
(FGD1 and FGD2), who indicated it made it more difficult to attend because their new homes
are farther away from the VTCs.



	                                                                                                 18	  
                                       World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



As discussed in the section on the impact of training on trainees income-generating activities, the
participants in urban areas also reported a significant strain on their income from participating in
this program (FGD1 and FGD2). Many of them were previously earning income either as
housekeepers, through irregular (part-time or occasional) employment, or through selling things
in the market. Their participation in the training left little time for these activities. This was less
of an issue in rural areas where trainees explained that they spend less time cultivating than they
used to but that the income from their daily stipend makes this trade-off worthwhile (FGD3,
FGD4, and FGD5).
	  
Travel Time: On average, it took the trainees 1.5 hours to reach the training centers, with Gahaya
taking the longest time on average and Gacuriro VTC the shortest. Please see Table 1 below for
the average travel time to the center reported by the FGD participants. In the urban areas,
trainees from Shyorongi and Bushoki said that it was not challenging to commute to the centers
(FGD 3 and FGD4). They arrived on foot and although it took a significant amount of time, they
did not describe this as a significant challenge. In Rushaki, despite travel times that were
typically less than those in Shyorongi and Bushoki, respondents described the length of distance
traveled as a significant challenge (FGD 5).

                                          Table 1: Average Travel time to VTC
	  


          Center               Urban/Rural                 Average Travel Time to Center (Hours, One-Way)
          Gahaya                  Urban                                         2.50
          Gacuriro                Urban                                         0.75
         Shyorongi                Rural                                         1.63
          Bushoki                 Rural                                         1.44
          Rushaki                 Rural                                         1.29
       (Note that this is based on responses during Focus Group Discussions with enrolled trainees only. It included travel
                                                 on foot or using public transport)
	  
	  
3.1.3 Feedback on Stipend Delivery & Utility
	  
Stipends are provided to the entire cohort of trainees (i.e. eligible adolescent girls and young
women) participating in training and mentoring activities. The stipends are considered a
productive investment as they directly facilitate the participation of the trainees in training by
mitigating the potential loss of income by the trainees. The stipend payments are based on the
following setup: they will be below the minimum daily salary for agricultural work, i.e. 700
RWF/day during the induction and technical and skills formation phases and 300 RWF/day
during the mentoring phase. From this stipend, 200 RWF/day during Phase 3 and 4 will be
deposited in a savings mechanism for each trainee and will only be accessible on successful
completion of the training program. If the trainee fails to complete the program, the stipend
money will be returned to the project.



	                                                                                                                      19	  
                                      World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Stipend Delivery: Participants in all of the focus group discussions reported that they received
their stipends late. The reported length of the delay was typically about 1 month. Program staff
also reported delayed stipend delivery but they reported significantly shorter delays than those
reported by the participants. Their reported delay lengths included: (i) no delay (Gahaya Links,
SSI2, 1 day (school manager Gaculiro, SSI4); (ii) 1 week (school manager Rushaki, SSI8); (iii)
and 2 weeks (school manager Nyarugunga, SSI7).
          	  
Stipend Use & Usefulness: All of the respondents in rural areas say that they would have been
able to attend without the stipend (FGD2, FGD3, and FGD4). In rural areas, the stipend was used
for basic needs and other products such as livestock, clothing and health insurance. A very small
minority of rural trainees paid anything for transportation to the VTC. Whereas, in urban areas,
most trainees used their stipends to cover their transport costs. Only one of the respondents at
Gahaya Links said that she would have been able to attend the program without the stipend,
since she sometimes walks (FGD1). The table below provides a summary of how the trainees
used their stipend.

       Table 2: Stipend Use - How Many Trainees in Each VTC Reporting Having Bought a Particular
                                                  Item

                                                   Basic                                                     Health
       Stipend Use by VTC        Transport                       Livestock         Clothing    Savings
                                                   Needs                                                   insurance
       Gahaya (urban)                 6              0                0                 0          0           0
       Gacuriro (urban)               3              4                1                 0          0           0
       Shyorongi (rural)              0              4                3                 5          3           0
       Bushoki (rural)                0              3                6                 0          3           0
       Rushaki (rural)                0              4                6                 6          0           4
       Note that this question was open-ended. All participants except for 1 (at the Gacuriro VTC) gave an answer about
       what they had used their stipend for. The “Basic Needs” category mainly refers to hygienic products and body
       lotion, though some of the respondents just gave the general answer of “basic needs.”

3.1.4 Experiences of Attrition from Program Dropouts

Three SSIs were conducted with dropouts. All 3 dropped out within 2-3 weeks of the program
commencement. Two of the dropouts indicated that they dropped out because of the transport
fees associated with traveling to their respective VTCs (SSI5&6). The stipends provided would
not cover their transport costs to their assigned VTCs. The delay in providing stipends
perpetuated their program since they could not float the travel expenses to attend. The last
dropout (SSI12) indicated that they left the program due to pressure from the family to pursue an
alternative career in tailoring. All 3 dropouts indicated that they would have preferred staying in
the program and during the short time in the program they had appreciated the trainings,
especially the life-skills training focusing on reproductive health and personal hygiene issues.


	                                                                                                                   20	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



From the perspective of the trainers, the FGL trainer pointed out that many of the girls who never
came to training were actually misidentified as eligible during the recruitment process. They had
not dropped out of school but were waiting for their national exam results to see if they could
return for upper secondary school (SSI1). The school manager at Gaculiro reported that there
were 2 or 3 girls who dropped out of his training center because their land was appropriated.
There were also some participants who dropped out of the program because they got pregnant.
(SSI4). The trainer from Gahaya Links said that there were 2 participants who dropped out
because they got married. She encouraged them to come back and one did but the other did not
(SSI2).


3.2 Program Management

3.2.1 Strengths and weaknesses of Program Management (Program staff feedback)

Strengths:
Program Implementation: Both the Gahaya Links trainer and the Frontiers Great Lakes trainer
felt that the implementation of the program was easier with Cohort 2 after gaining lessons from
their previous experience with Cohort 1 (SSI1 and SSI2). For example, FGL moved the
reproductive health module earlier in the curriculum in response to pregnancies and other
challenges that girls encountered early in their time in the program in cohort 1. They also
adjusted the levels of some of the lessons to meet the incoming students’ level of understanding
(SSI1). All the interviewed trainers also adjusted their curriculum to incorporate more practicals
to accommodate the low level of education of incoming trainees. For example, the FGL trainer
(SSI1) adapted her self-esteem lessons to change the focus to talking about personal experiences
rather than providing notes. The program was adapted to have an increased focus on experiential
activities.

The trainers also felt that the program for Cohort 2 was implemented better due to managed
expectations of the trainees and the supervisory role played by Cohort 1 trainees to their fellow
counterparts. The school manager from Gacuriro provided an example: “There is a difference
because, before, you could find that the project was just starting – it was the first time. The
students were expecting to have a lot of facilities because it was the first time. They were
expecting the project to rent houses for them but because Cohort 1 has completed their studies,
they are like ambassadors – they talked to other cohorts, showed them what is there, and
explained it to them” (SSI4).

Communication: Generally, all of the interviewed program staff had positive things to say about
the level and ease of communication and collaboration with program managers. The trainer from
Frontiers Great Lakes pointed out that communication was sometimes slow but “Anytime we
had to collaborate, it [was] smooth.” (SSI1). The trainer from Gahaya says that she would



	                                                                                             21	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



contact the WDA focal point. “Their communication is swift is fast so I have never encountered
anything. They call me when there is something. I think the best thing that happens between us is
the center managers. When I want to take my report, no problem.”

The school manager at Gacuriro explained the channel he follows if he encounters a challenge:
“It starts with the teachers. Then there is a prefect in charge of education. In between those, there
is the female teacher who knows the girls. So, what the three levels cannot solve, they report to
the school manager. He solves what he can and, what is impossible for him, he reports to the
WDA (either Winnie or Sam). Winnie and Sam also report those problems to the higher levels of
WDA. MIGEPROF is on the same level of WDA”. Asked if they faced any challenges with
communication, he said no because they were using phones and WDA visited the school
frequently (SSI4).

The staff also reported that the budget allocation was beneficial. For example, the school
manager from Gacuriro explains, “Now, there are operating funds and before there were no
operating funds. Now, they have sent it. For example, before there were no computers and now
they have provided a computer and a printer. So that eases communication – now it is easy to
send reports.” (SSI4)

Weaknesses:
A clear consensus of weaknesses related to program implementation did not emerge from the
program staff/trainers. The weaknesses included ensuring that trainers had more time with the
trainees to provide additional support; making it easier for the trainees to get internships;
reducing the delays at the commencement of the program and ensuring that trainees could afford
the materials required to operate within their cooperatives. Program staff had feedback on what
they could improve in terms of program management, which is listed in Section 3.2.3 – Lessons
Learned.

3.2.2 Strengths and weaknesses of Program Management (Trainees feedback)

Strengths:
Most trainees indicated they were satisfied with the program management and several cited how
helpful school managers have been in terms of resolving their problems. The trainees at Rushaki
VTC were particularly effusive about the help provided by their school manager such as
providing advice on cooperative management, incorporating a sports break during the week, etc.

Weaknesses:
There are two key program challenges which are detailed in other sections as well: (i) delayed
stipends to both the participants and the program staff (though the delay was more significant
for the trainees). It is not conclusive how many trainees took loans but one of the dropout
trainees suggested that she knew several trainees that had to take loans to pay for transport: “My


	                                                                                                22	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



suggestion is that there are times you take a loan or debt to pay transport fees and they delay to
pay the stipend, yet those who lend to you want their money” (SSI5); (ii) opportunity costs of
the program, which primarily emerged during the Nyarugunga interviews. For example, several
urban-based trainees noted that they could not engage in other income-generating activities due
to the time commitment of the program so they could not support their families. Furthermore,
one former trainee indicated that she could not afford the transport fees as it cost her RWF 800 to
go to and from Kicukiro and 600 Rwf to go to and from the Nyarugunga center – a sum that
would not be covered by the program stipend and meant that she would have to pay the
difference every day.

3.2.3 Lessons learned

The trainer from FGL says that she would have liked to have more time with the beneficiaries for
follow-up and to help them handle personal issues, such as when they are “mistreated, beaten, or
kicked out of their homes” (SSI1). She did not mention precise cases that constituted abuse but
she had girls seek her advice and wish she had more time to follow-up with them. She also says
that there is a “challenge of numbers,” meaning that there are not enough teachers for all of the
students. She had adapted to this by changing the exercises so that girls split into sub-groups for
some exercises, but she still says that she feels some girls are missing out. This was reiterated by
2 other program trainers that said the class sizes were too small.

The trainer from Gahaya Links says that she would prefer a longer training period. An additional
2 months of practical lessons would help significantly (SSI2). With additional support from
WDA/MIGEPROF, she says that she would also add more skills to the training. For example,
she says that the girls currently learn how to make tie-dyed fabric but it would be helpful to also
learn how to make the fabric into clothing. The class length was reiterated by a few trainees that
indicated that they felt that they would prefer slightly longer sessions to benefit from the lessons.

Another issue stemmed from the overlapping cohorts 2 and 3. The trainer from FGL pointed out
that this sometimes made things difficult for cohort 3 because the trainees are tired in the
afternoon and it is already hot outside when they begin their training (SSI1). Similarly, the
school manager from Gaculiro said that it was a challenge, at first, for the girls to study in the
afternoon (SSI4).

Few comments emerged about the level of resources dedicated to the program in terms of
teachers and materials. The school manager from Gaculiro VTC explained that the “AGI
teachers were not enough, so [this training center] used other teachers from the VTC staff”. They
hired an additional female teacher to support the girls in the program. They felt that this was not
a major issue since the teachers were already public employees, so they could participate in the
AGI project. However, it would help to have more teachers to avoid teacher recruitment during
the program. (SSI4). Furthermore, he also indicated that since they are teaching students to start


	                                                                                                23	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



cooperatives they need to acknowledge that the materials the students need are expensive. He
says the program needs to help provide materials, with the schools supervising, which would
ensure a better future for the students. Finally, he mentioned that the trainers’ current contracts
are only 3 years long and suggested that it could be extended because the training centers have
equipment and materials; only the consumables and teachers’ wages are lacking to keep the
program running.



3.3 Girl-Specific Design Elements
	  
3.3.1 Availability, Use and Impact of Additional Services

Childcare: it seems that the childcare facilities are not available or not used by the trainees at
most of the interviewed VTCs. In Rushaki VTC, there is no childcare facility as only 3 girls have
babies and they tend to leave their kids at home since they travel a long distance to the VTC
(SSI10). Trainees from Gahaya indicated that they were not allowed to bring their babies to the
training center. However, the trainer from Gahaya Links pointed out that the need for childcare
services was more of an issue with cohort 1, which was older, and also is more of an issue in
urban than in rural areas. She did not directly address the issue of the usefulness of providing
childcare services, most likely because they are not available at her center (SSI2). Similarly, the
trainer from FGL reiterates that childcare was not an issue because most of the girls left their
children at home (SSI1). In Gaculiro VTC, the school manager felt that the childcare services are
not used as there are no young mothers with babies under the age of 1. While he feels that there
should be some support for girls with children, he concedes that it creates additional challenges
for the center, as it was difficult to find someone to take care of the babies (SSI4).

Family planning resources/advice: we asked these questions during SSIs only; no trainee
indicated that they faced challenges requiring family planning resource or advice. We also asked
if girls have sought out family planning resources and none said they had. The typical response
was SSI11 indicating that while she had not specifically sought out family planning resources or
advice she would use contraceptives due to the knowledge from the training.

Counseling services: There was inconsistency in the responses regarding the availability of
counseling services provided at the VTC. Trainees from Gahaya and Shyorongi were not aware
of any available counseling services and only referred to the advice provided to them during
training sessions. The food processor trainer from Bushoki VTC was also not aware of any
counseling services provided at the center. Whereas, trainees at Rushaki VTC were informed that
counseling services were available if they had issues at home and could talk to designated
teachers about these matters: “For example, when you have a problem or issues with family




	                                                                                              24	  
                             World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



members, and then you come here and keep thinking about it, they told us you can go see the
teacher and they will help you.” (FGD 5).	  
	  
3.3.2 Girl Friendliness of VTCs
	  
From the trainees’ perspective, overwhelmingly most of them indicated that the VTCs were girl-
friendly and they felt comfortable in those areas. When prompted to provide suggestions to make
the VTCs more girl-friendly, they responded, “I think that what they have done is enough
because, as my fellow student said, when you are sick there is a place you can go and then come
back after when you feel good” (FGD 4). The participants at Bushoki VTC also indicated that
they had all used the girl-room at the VTC and had amenities such as pads, soap, lotion, and a
bathroom to wash.

However, one trainee from Gahaya pointed out that “…they lied that when someone has periods
they would provide hygienic pads; they didn’t [provide them]” (FGD 1). Similarly, she
mentioned that while there are toilets at the VTC, there are no girls’ room. This was the only
critical comment from the trainees about the girl-friendliness of the VTCs.

The trainer from FGL says that most of the centers are girl-friendly but some are too small, such
as Kinihira. The lack of space means that girls feel less comfortable there (SSI2). The Gacuriro
school manger says that he feels the center is girl-friendly since it has a lot of different facilities,
workshop rooms, and classes. There are also employees who focus specifically on female
students (SSI4). The Gahaya Links trainer had requested that for some of the VTCs such as
Byumba, she had requested more light (SSI2).
	  
3.3.3 Suggestions for Improvement

a.      The main area of improvement relates to clarification on the need and availability of
       additional services such as childcare, counseling and family planning advice. It seemed
       trainees were not fully informed about the availability of counseling and family planning
       advice and referred to their ongoing training as sources of counseling or family planning
       advice. A formal announcement and regular reminders on the availability and the process to
       access family planning and counseling advice should be communicated to the cohort on a
       regular basis.

b. With regards to childcare services, most trainees indicated that these services were not
   available at the VTCs. The program staff indicated the main reason there was a lack of
   childcare services was that the trainee cohort did not have as many children and therefore,
   did not require the services. Some of the trainees complained about the lack of these facilities
   so it would be important to clarify with the trainee cohort the desire for these services and
   accordingly, ensure the provision.


	                                                                                                   25	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



3.4 Technical Training

3.4.1 Selection into Trainings
	  
While the majority of trainees reported that they chose the trade they ended up studying, some
reported that some of the selection criteria as they understood them prevented them from doing
so. For example, at Gahaya Links, two respondents said that they wanted to study food
processing but ended up in arts & crafts. One chose to do arts & crafts over food processing
because she could not afford to travel to the VTC for food processing classes; the other ended up
in arts & crafts because she did not meet the criteria of speaking other languages (FGD1). These
were the only trainees who indicated that they did not meet the selection criteria or were unable
to take their first choice. Whereas, at Gacuriro VTC, all trainees were satisfied with their trades
and only 2 would have preferred other trades, i.e. hair-dressing (not on offer) and culinary. This
was a similar scenario at Shyorongi, Rushaki and Bushaki VTC where all trainees indicated they
were happy with their trades. One of the trainees indicated that there was no criteria for trade
selection so the girls chose their preferred trades (SSI8). This was inconsistent with responses
from a former trainee in Nyarugunga who said that she had wanted to study culinary but had
been placed in arts & crafts because she does not have a background in chemistry and biology
(SSI5). The program staff were not asked their opinion of the trade selection process.
            	  
Very few of the respondents indicated that given the choice today, they would have chosen a
different trade (among those offered) from the one they originally chose. Instead quite a few girls
suggested other trades outside of the offered trades: they included 3 girls at Gahaya who would
have preferred to do hair braiding, as there is a good market for it and two trainees who would
chose tailoring because it is high income generating activity (FGD 1). Similarly, one of the
trainees from Rushaki VTC also claimed that hair-dressing is a more lucrative opportunity, along
with culinary incase one manages to open a restaurant (SSI10).

3.4.2 Trade-specific Challenges

Trainee comments: Culinary and agribusiness seemed to have better prospects (i.e easier to find
jobs or to generate income by selling produce) than arts & crafts and food processing because of
higher start-up costs and difficulty in finding markets. This is reflected in some of the criticism
girls have of the trades they studied and in the discussions about challenges in finding a market
for arts & crafts products – especially for girls residing in rural areas. Other complaints related to
the specific training curriculum. For the Gaculiro VTC trainees undergoing culinary training,
they would only recommend adding more modules around customer care and working in
restaurants. At Shyorongi VTC, one of the trainees was not satisfied with the food processing
training, as they were taught food processing techniques using strawberries and apples – products
that are not readily available in their community (FGD3). At Bushoki VTC, expectations were
met and only one of the food processing trainees suggested that they expand the training to


	                                                                                                 26	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



bread-making as well to increase their income-generating opportunities. One of the participants
at Rushaki (SSI11) indicated that she preferred agribusiness to arts and crafts as she did not think
there was a viable market for the arts and crafts sector – however, this was not confirmed by
other arts and crafts trainees.

Program staff comments: The school manager from Gacuriro had positive comments about the
trades offered at his center (culinary, food processing, and arts & crafts). “Based on two
parameters – first, whether it is possible to be employed, and second, whether it requires high
capital to start.” He says that it is possible to be self-employed in food processing and arts &
crafts; in culinary, the hotels in Rwanda need employees. He adds that these trades do not require
high capital to start, especially compared with trades like being a mechanic, which requires a
large amount of capital (SSI4).

3.4.3 Implementation: Successes and Challenges

Curriculum: the trainer from Frontiers Great Lakes commented on challenge of adapting
curriculum to the level of the girls. She managed this by incorporating more participatory
activities into the Life Skills training. This was a key message that was reiterated by several
trainers. The Gahaya Links trainer also spoke about making adjustments to the curriculum due to
the challenge of teaching girls who came in without a lot of education and with different levels
of understanding. She explains, “I can’t say that it is a challenge – it’s only that I had to learn and
know how to handle different levels of education.” Asked if these girls have a lower level of
education than the people she would normally hire, she specified that the challenge is working
with girls of different levels in the same classroom. They have had to redo and redesign some
modules. She dealt with this by focusing more on practicals rather than teaching theory before
practice as she normally would have (SSI2). Similarly, the food processing trainer from the
Bushoki VTC talked about how active the beneficiaries are during the practical portion of the
program. Judging from these responses, it seems that the participants respond particularly well to
the hands-on components of the training. As we will address in the following section, the Life
Skills & Entrepreneurship trainer from Frontiers Great Lakes suggests that this is also true for
the type of training she provides.

Trade Training: Trainees did not mention any parts of the training as having been less useful.
This is probably due to shyness or unwillingness to criticize any of the topics taught. Even in
Gahaya Links, where some of the participants clearly stated that some parts of the arts & crafts
training were going to be more useful than others, they were reluctant to answer the question
about which topics were the “least relevant.”




	                                                                                                  27	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



3.4.4 Suggestions for Improvements
	  
Overall, trainees were pleased with the training and the trainers but there were a few comments
that focused on ensuring that the trades were relevant to the current job opportunities. For
example, one of the participants in the food processing training suggested that it could be
improved by focusing more on processing foods that are more easily available. Asked if the
trade-specific training met their expectations, R4 says that it didn’t “because we study very few
things and because the foods we studied in theory – like strawberries and applies – are not
available in practice.” (FGD3)


3.5 Life Skills Training

3.5.1 Implementation: Successes and Challenges

Similar to comments by the Frontiers Great Lakes trainer, the Gahaya trainer said that she
needed to make adjustments to the curriculum to adjust to the level of understanding of the
trainees. She dealt with this by focusing more on the practicals rather than teaching theory before
practice.

3.5.2 Impact of Training

The program staff had very positive comments about the Life Skills training. For example, the
trainer from Gahaya Links commented that the Life Skills training was important for creating a
sense of community among the trainees (SSI1). The Gacuriro school manager explained,
“Normally, students don’t only need to learn about their trade – for example, to learn only about
culinary. That’s what I said before about girls needing to know how to say no for protection.
They need to learn this in life skills, so life skills is very useful to them. For us, the management,
we consider that not all of the girls will have a job after completing their studies. Those who are
planning to be entrepreneurs, they need to know the values of entrepreneurs, so it is very useful
for them to study entrepreneurship so they can also be entrepreneurs outside – not only in what
they have studied but also in other things. For example, there are some students who are owning
small businesses – so they can improve their businesses” (SSI4).

The trainees were just as enthusiastic about the life-skills training. One trainee from Rushaki said
she had learnt a lot about pregnancy and birth control through the training and also how to
operate and live within the community (SSI11). One of the trainees from Gahaya was also
effusive in praise about the sex, gender and violence modules: “the reason is that it will be useful
to have education on sex and how you can behave with boys and girls. It is useful to know about
sex.” She also says that she learned how to apologize if she has done something wrong to others.
She says that she has already applied what she learned about personal hygiene (SSI3). Most other


	                                                                                                 28	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



trainees in the FGDs also indicated that they learnt a lot from the training related to pregnancy,
family skills, and managing stress.

Many respondents talked about how they see this training as complementary to their trade
training. For example, in the focus group at the Gaculiro VTC, one participant said that she
thought the life skills training was useful because “When studying [life skills], we studied about
health. You cannot achieve something great if you are not healthy. Another reason is that, in
culinary, health is very important because at work they will ask you for a certificate showing that
you are healthy” (R1, FGD2).

3.5.3 Suggestions for Improvements

As in the trade training, the trainer from Frontiers Great Lakes observed that it was challenging
to teach girls who arrived to the program with different educational backgrounds. Similarly to
the other trainers, she responded to this by incorporating more participatory activities into the
curriculum. The Gacuriro school manager suggested improving the training program by
incorporating a stronger internship component: “For me, there are a lot of programs that are
meant to help students, such as internships. So the program could provide internships or specific
institutions where students can go for internships.” He explained further that the program should
provide an assurance for students that they will be able to provide internships. He is currently
doing this through his VTC’s existing program (SSI4).

Only one of the dropouts indicated that the explanations during the life skills training was not
sufficient: “If they could provide more explanations because not all students understood the life
skills section. Some people skipped class, missed lessons, or didn’t understand” (SSI12).


3.6 Entrepreneurship Training

3.6.1 Implementation: Successes and Challenges

There were no suggestion that implementation of the entrepreneurship training was difficult,
either by trainers or the trainees. One of the Frontier Great Lakes trainer was quite effusive about
the role of the business canvas module: “A business canvas is used by start-ups – business plans
are used by more established businesses. The business canvas is a tool that involves idea
generation and planning. For example, some of the girls have the idea of starting a restaurant and
the course takes them through the planning about things like who their customers will be, what
activities they will do, etc. Most of the girls plan business related to their studies. The girls in
cohort 1 have started businesses” (SSI1).




	                                                                                               29	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



3.6.2 Impact of Training

All the trainees (Shyorongi, Bushoki, Gaculiro VTCs) were complimentary about the
entrepreneurship training stating that they learnt how to save, track expenses, customer service,
and apply for loans. They said that the information was new to them and did not have
suggestions to improve the training. Some comments from the Gacuriro FGD included: “I
learned to seek opportunities to make money and to gain customers. I learned that you have to
convince customers to pay and also have good customer care skills. Rather than an advertisement
on the radio, you can attract customers with good customer care skills”. One other trainee also
noted: “It was very useful. I learned about starting capital, about how to get information about a
business before starting it, about how to identify customers around the location and how to know
their characteristics/criteria, how to identify and know the products you need to offer, how to
start a business and gain a reputation through friendships with customers, how to have good
customer care skills, and how to expand the business” (FGD 2).

3.6.3 Suggestions for Improvements

Only one trainee from Bushaki had a suggestion on improving the training by incorporating a
focus on working in cooperatives may be useful: “I would choose for them to provide
information again about working in cooperatives. Some people didn’t understand it very well so
it might be useful to provide those trainings. Nothing was very complicated but the level of
students to understand it is different” (SSI8). The trainer from Gahaya suggested including
training on marketing and making market connections for the trainees in Rwanda as part of the
entrepreneurship training. When asked to elaborate on the girls’ level when they graduate, she
says, “They have no capacity. Nobody should lie to you. They are still shy. They can’t approach
anybody, so they need to create a marketing component of AGI” (SSI1).


3.7 Post-Training Phase

3.7.1 Expectations and Concerns

The main concern that emerged from the interviews regarding the post-training phase was
financial, both at an individual level and in order to pursue the cooperative initiative. Some
trainees claimed they would sell their livestock or pursue other activities if they could not
generate sufficient funds for their cooperative ventures. However, at least half of the trainees
interviewed did not express any concern and had confident in their abilities to start and maintain
the cooperative.

For example, one of the Gahaya trainees indicated that her worries for the next 6 months related
to having enough money to start the cooperative and to cover transport from where she lives in


	                                                                                             30	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Nyabogogo to where she works: “it's a lot because we have thought about it and the minimum
per girl is 50,000.” She said that she would continue to do housework or sell fish if she could not
get the necessary funds (SSI3). Similarly, trainees from Gacuriro expressed similar concerns:
“The worries that I have are concern for us. For example, I think that we have gathered our
money but we need other funds and I am worried if we don’t have those funds” (FGD1). A
trainee from Shyorongi reiterated the same financial concerns: “I am trying my best to make
more efforts so as to be a part of a cooperative. It is not difficult to be a part of a cooperative but
I need the financial means. I think the money in the savings will be enough and even if I don’t
have enough, I will sell livestock to have enough” (FGD 3).

Whereas, trainees from other VTCs (e.g. Bushoki and Gacuriro) said that they felt prepared and
are not worried because they will be in a cooperative with fellow students. There was no
obligation to be in a cooperative with other students: “If you want to work individually, you can
do it. It was not an obligation. They explained to us the benefits and we all decided to join.” It
would also be possible to leave the cooperative but “maybe you have to sit with cooperative
members and decide how to divide [the funds]” (FGD 4). Similarly other participants from the
Bushoki FGD did not have worries because they contribute each week so “the saved money will
help us start” (FGD 4). Similarly one of the trainees from Gacuriro indicated: “For us as a whole
class, we will use the stipend. We have taken a certain amount and gathered it together in a bank
account. After completing studies we will set together and look for something we can do
collectively and then start it” (FGD 2).

3.7.2 Challenges and Strategies for Support

Trainees indicated that their main form of support would be the teachers from AGI (at least two
participants mentioned the cashier as a source of advice). Some teachers have already started
supporting with advice and several of them plan on keeping in touch with the teachers following
the training to seek advice. This was a common theme echoed across most of the interviews.
Some examples include: “Our teacher is helping us; we go to her and ask advice” (FGD 2 -
Gacuriro); “The teachers provide advice and guidance on how we should operate. They have
already begun providing advice and they will continue to do so, including helping us address
obstacles should there be any” (FGD 4 - Bushoki); “We will come to see them [teachers] if we
have any problems” (FGD 3 – Shyorongi); “We have planned that we will look for a time to
come here to school for advice, if possible once a week” (FGD 4 – Bushoki).

Most trainees did not expect financial support from WDA/AGI except for advice but one FGD
group was planning on reverting to WDA to also help secure funds if they were not able to meet
their financial targets: “We think that a cooperative, after studying and after using that money in
the account, we will use it for a certain goal. We will sit and look at the required money for that
goal and if it is not enough, we will ask WDA to fund it” (FGD 2).



	                                                                                                  31	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




3.7.3 Experience with Cooperative Formation

Most trainees indicated that they would engage in the cooperatives and were actively saving.
Some trainees had already discussed plans of where to sell their products and had their
cooperatives established already. Apart from financial concerns highlighted above, there were no
other concerns regarding the cooperative formation.

One of the trainees from Bushoki also mentioned how her leadership skills have increased as a
result of the program and she feels confident in becoming a leader in the cooperative. She felt
she could provide guidance and advice to “those who bring issues or misbehave”. She expands:
“I like to see people listening to me, respecting me, and giving value to what I’m saying. When
we came here in training, the explained to us not to be shy. I became a leader but I never was one
before” (SSI8).

In terms of the process of forming the cooperative, the trainees at Bushoki explained the process
of cooperative formation in detail. One trainee explained that they have a cooperative where they
save 500 Rwf per person per week. Their teachers and the cashier helped them set it up but also
provided guidance and approved the approach to save money each week - which had been the
cashier’s idea. Her group will start working with the cooperative immediately after the formal
training ends. There was even a small disagreement on a place where they could sell their
products but they all indicated they felt prepared (FGD 4). Similarly, another trainee from
Bushoki indicated: “After completing my studies, I will start working in a cooperative. I can also
work individual by selling beans.” The cooperative will work in food processing. They have
already set up the cooperative with the support of AGI. In terms of the process of setting up the
cooperative, she says that each week the members give 500 Rwf and they have opened a bank
account where this 500 Rwf per person is deposited (FGD 4).

3.7.4 Suggestions for Improvements

There were no direct suggestions for improvement for the post-training phase or the cooperative
formation from either trainees or program staff. However, it will be important to clarify the role
of AGI/WDA following the training so that expectations are managed, both in terms of financial
and advisory support. A few trainees were expecting that WDA could potentially provide
additional funding for their cooperatives if they failed to meet their targets. While this was an
expectation by a handful of trainees, it would be important to clarify the role of WDA/AGI
following the training with relation to financial support. However, most trainees do expect strong
advisory support from AGI teachers following the training. Clear guidelines on the access and
availability of these teachers post-training should be communicated to the trainees, in order to
manage expectations.



	                                                                                             32	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



3.8 Overall Impact of Program Participation

Findings below relate to the overall impact of the various training components to various aspects
of the trainees’ lives. The following is a summary of the key impact that the program had on
their lives.

Impact on time use: For girls in urban areas, they felt that they had less time for other income
generating activities and balancing household chores (as indicated in Section 3.1.2 Challenges of
Program Attendance). E.g. several girls from Gahayak indicated they stopped activities such as
selling fish, working as a housekeeper, and other part-time activities such as washing clothes.
However, most other girls felt they got more organized about balancing household work and
other activities. Given that it had been such a long time since they attended school, they had to
adjust their household chores in order to align with the school schedule. It forced quite a few of
the trainees to develop a time-table and some of them had to push their household chores to the
weekends to accommodate the training.

Impact on finding better work: It was not apparent what kind of jobs the trainees preferred Most
feel they will find better work at the end of the program. A participant from Gacuriro explains:
“My involvement was very useful because before I was at home. I could look for a job and when
they asked what I studied, I wouldn’t know what to reply. Now, I can go to a hotel to apply for a
job and tell them I have studied culinary arts” (FGD 2). Other positive responses from the
Gacuriro FGD include: “The reason why I am hopeful to have a better job than before that will
help me earn income is that my knowledge has increased”; “Once you have a certificate saying
you have completed your studies, it is easy to get a job” (FGD 2). Although there are some
respondents who are nervous about this (particularly at Gahaya Links). The concerns emanated
from balancing the requirements at the cooperative and trying to find another permanent job
(FGD 1).	  

Impact on taking out a loan: In the baseline survey, we were surprised to find that many of the
respondents had taken out loans prior to joining the program. Therefore, during focus group
discussions, we specifically probed for 3 types of loans: loans from “boutiques” (meaning that
girls borrow from shopkeepers when they cannot pay their bill), loans from friends, and loans
from MFIs/Saccos2/banks. Only one respondent had taken out the third type of loan before the
program started. Many others had taken out the other types of loans. Nearly all of the
respondents say that they plan to take out a loan from an MFI/Sacco/bank in the future. They
usually say that this will be used to help them start a business or purchase inputs for their
businesses. There are some exceptions when respondents say that they will take out a loan to
cover their own [personal, presumably] expenses.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2	  SACCO	  -­‐	  Savings	  And	  Credit	  Co-­‐operative                                                                                                                                                                    	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                33	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Impact on social life: Many participants mentioned making new friends in the program. Some
participants mentioned that other people respect them more now and that they rely on other
people less than they previously did. Finally, a few participants said that their social life changed
because they see their old friends/acquaintances less, now that they are busy with classes.

Impact on relationships with mentors: In the baseline survey, we were also surprised to find that
many of the respondents said that they already had had a mentor. When we probed for this in the
midline, we learned that many of the respondents consider their parents to be their mentors.
When we asked if their relationships with their mentors changed at all, many of the respondents
say that they have become less dependent on their parents.

Impact on marriage: None of the respondents got married during the program. It was not
possible to determine how many were married prior to the program but one of the trainees from
Gahaya indicated that most trainees were already married so it was hard to manage household
chores. The staff from Gahaya and Nyarugunga also indicated that some dropouts were as a
result of marriage – it was not possible to confirm this as the dropouts interviewed provided
alternate reasons. One respondent legalized her marriage indicating it was due to her husband’s
increased respect for her (FGD1).

Impact on ability to support children and other family members: It was negative in urban areas
as there is less money to send home or to use to take care of children who live with them in
Kigali, since they no longer have time for IGAs. However, it was positive in rural areas as they
could buy things for people or, at the very least, not relying on them anymore.

Impact on goals for the future: Overall, it was positive as some girls indicated that their goals
have not changed (since they are still working towards the goals they set for themselves before
the program), i.e. in several cases this meant having a job; others say that their goals have
changed because they achieved their old goals or because they are now setting more ambitious
goals. These goals included finding better-paying or permanent jobs given the trade skills they
have acquired, e.g. working in restaurants.

Sustainability: When asked whether they expect the changes in their lives to last, all of the FGD
participants say that they do. A typical response is that of a focus group participant in Shyorongi
who explained, “For me, it will last because I’m planning to apply my knowledge by being a
member of a cooperative so I will apply it and continue to use it in a cooperative” (FGD3).




	                                                                                                34	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



4. Summary & Recommendations

A summary of the main findings from the interviews is provided in Chapter 3 but there are some
key themes that emerged from the midline that are worth highlighting. There is a clear difference
between expectations and program experience between trainees from urban areas compared to
rural areas. This included managing time for household chores, other income-generating
activities and the time and cost burden of travel to the VTCs. Secondly, the experience of the
program depended on the type of trade a particular trainee was engaged in, e.g. some trainees felt
that the food processing trainings focused on products not readily available and the arts& crafts
activities is not a market demand in rural areas. Finally, one of the key comments from the
program staff with regards to the program implementation was the adjustment of the curriculum
to ensure that more participatory approaches and practicals were incorporated to accommodate
the low education level of incoming trainees. From the perspective of the trainees, one of the key
program implementation challenges was the delayed stipend that was provided to them, leading
to unnecessary stress and in some cases, dropouts.

4.1 Summary of urban/rural differences:
 a. Stipend use – trainees in urban areas used all (Gahaya) or most (Gacuriro) of their stipend on
     transport; whereas, trainees in rural areas purchase other things (e.g. a lot of livestock,
     hygienic products, etc.). Several urban trainees indicated that they would not be able to
     attend the program if it was not for the stipend which was used primarily on covering their
     transport costs to the VTCs. Rural trainees did not face these challenges as they would in
     most cases walk to the VTC and were able to use the stipend instead to supplement family
     income and spend it on basic needs.
 b. Trade usefulness – it seemed to be more difficult to find a market for arts & crafts products in
     the rural areas compared to the urban areas. The trade was more conducive for trainees
     living in urban areas.
 c. Competing obligations – trainees in urban areas have more competing obligations such as
     conducting other income-generating activities. As some of them moved to Kigali as
     migrants, some trainees work as housemaids so their livelihoods depend on continuing to
     work for the families they live with (compared with trainees in rural areas who say that they
     have very few other demands on their time). There was an opportunity cost of the lost
     income for urban trainees compared to the rural trainees.

4.2 Summary of differences by trade: Overall, trainees were satisfied with their trades but
    there was some criticism about the viability and lucrativeness of the trades. Based on
    comments from some trainees, culinary and agribusiness seem to have better prospects
    (easier to find jobs or to generate income by selling produce) than arts & crafts and food
    processing (higher start-up costs, more difficult to find markets). This is reflected in some of
    the criticism girls have of the trades they studied and in the discussions about challenges in
    finding a market for arts & crafts products – especially for girls residing in rural areas.


	                                                                                               35	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       Furthermore, some of the trainees suggested they would have preferred learning other trades
       such as hair-dressing as income opportunities were higher in these fields.

4.3 Summary of management issues – Trainers have had to adjust the curriculum to meet the
    level of the girls by incorporating more participatory approaches in Life Skills training and
    more focus on practicals in the Arts & Crafts and in food processing seminars. This was key
    message that was reiterated across several interviews. The trainees main management
    complaint was related to the delayed stipends that affected the urban trainees significantly as
    this was their only option to pay for transport to the VTC.


Recommendations

The recommendations provide below are summarized based on the two main objectives of the
evaluation, i.e. (i) assessing the quality and usefulness of the training provided; and (ii)
evaluating the implementation process and identify areas for potential improvement.

Quality & Usefulness of Training: overall, both trainees and program staff had positive
comments about the training, training curriculum and the quality of the trainers. This is reflected
by the overall confidence about transitioning from the program (despite a few trainees expressing
concern about funding gaps following the training program). Both trainees and trainers were very
enthusiastic about the Life Skills training component. Trainers reiterated that the low education
level of incoming trainees resulted in them adjusting the training curriculum to incorporate more
participatory approaches and practicals, rather than a focus on theory. Going forward,
institutionalizing participatory approaches and practicals within the training curriculum should
be the norm.

Opportunities for improvement relate to continually ensure the relevance of the trade training.
For example, arts/crafts are not easily sold in rural areas so the training is not very relevant for
trainees living in rural areas. Similarly, the food-processing training should not focus on products
that are not readily available.

Implementation Process: while a lot of lessons had been learned from the previous Cohort,
there are still several operational challenges that need to be resolved to reduce the number of
drop-outs and also increase the overall satisfaction of the program. Two key areas that could be
evaluated to reduce drop-outs include (i) providing higher stipends in urban areas to cover
transport obligations and (ii) acknowledging and potentially compensating for hidden costs such
as lost income for urban trainees due to the time commitment to the program.




	                                                                                               36	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Another key implementation challenge refers to the late delivery of the stipend. As indicated,
trainees would encounter month long delays to receive their stipend. For urban trainees that
relied on these stipends, this resulted in a few trainees taking out loans simply to be able to pay
for the transport costs to attend the program. Ensuring the timely payments of stipends will help
reduce drop-outs and also ensure trainee satisfaction, as this was the main complaint of the
program implementation.

Based on the feedback from the midline, we also propose including the following questions into
the quantitative endline survey to validate some of these emerging findings:
 a. Do trainees have to pay for a uniform to wear during AGI training? Are there any other
     hidden costs that the trainees encounter? How much did trainees pay?
 b. Experience of GBV or did any trainee became pregnant during program (since we only asked
     a small number of girls about this in the qualitative component)
 c. Use or plan to use family planning services (since we only asked a small number of girls
     about this in the qualitative component)
 d. Did you choose the trade you studied? If not, who chose it? (since this seems to have been
     done differently at the different training centers)
 e. Do you think that this program should be expanded to be available for boys, too? (since the
     girls seem to have divergent opinions on this – it would be interesting to know if they feel it
     addresses challenges that girls uniquely face, or if it is gender-neutral)




	                                                                                               37	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                         World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ANNEXES

                                                                                                 I. Focus Group Discussion Guidelines: Enrolled Trainees
Instructions

The purpose of these focus group discussions is to learn about trainees’ opinions of the process, quality
and relevance of the training they received during the first six months of their experience with the AGI
project in Rwanda. Following a brief section on background information, the discussion is structured into
8 modules: (1) Attendance, (2) Impacts, (3) Trade-Specific Training, (4) Life Skills Training, (5)
Teachers, (6) Transition to Part II, (7) Program Management, and (8) Other Comments. The discussions
will last between 1 hour 30 minutes and 2 hours.

Discussions will be managed by two female enumerators: one discussion leader/translator and one note
taker. The discussion leader will use a “nominal group technique” to facilitate conversation. At the
beginning of each module, the discussion leader will introduce the topic and pose the main question to the
group. Each participant will be asked to reflect on her response for 2-3 minutes (and to take notes if she
wants to) before sharing her thoughts with the group. After each participant has had an opportunity to
share her thoughts with the group, the discussion leader will pose the follow-up questions and encourage
all participants to share as much information as possible. As indicated in the “instructions” column of the
questions guideline, the discussion leader will use the flip chart to facilitate conversation. At the end of
each module, the note taker will verbally report a summary of what was heard. This confirms for the
group members that they communicated what they intended to, and allows them to make any suggestions
for adjustments in the event that what they said was not accurately represented.3

Informed Consent

Read Aloud: Hello, my name is __________, and I am from Laterite Limited. Laterite is a Rwandan
research firm that has been hired to conduct research on young women participating in the Adolescent
Girls Initiative, or AGI project. We interviewed all of you for our baseline survey before the program
began, and now we are conducting a midline evaluation. The purpose of this midline evaluation is to learn
your opinion of the quality and relevance of the training that has been provided to you. If you agree to
participate in this midline evaluation, we will ask you questions about your experience in and opinion of
the program so far. We will hold this discussion together as a group. The information you share is entirely
voluntary and will not be circulated beyond the management team. If you do not want to provide
information, you can still continue participating in the AGI training – there is no obligation to participate
in this focus group discussion. You will neither gain nor lose anything from participating in this
evaluation. If you agree, we will contact you again in the next 6 months for follow-up questions, so it will
be important for me to find out the best ways to contact you in the future.

The interview will take about two hours. You can choose to stop at any time. If you do not want to answer
any question, you can refrain from answering or leave the group at any time. Please let me know if you
have any questions before we proceed, and feel free to interrupt at any time if you have questions or
concerns about sharing information with us.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3These instructions are drawn from the WBI Evaluation Group (2007): “Managing Focus Groups,”
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/WBI/Resources/213798-1194538727144/6Final-Focus_Groups.pdf



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                38	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Background Information on Participants

Instructions: Before the start of the discussion, record the following information for each participant
based on data from the quantitative baseline survey and trade enrollment data from WDA: name, unique
ID, age, and trade. Verify this information with each participant at the start of the discussion.

Location (training center):
Date:
Respondent #     Name                           Unique ID         Age                  Trade
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Questions for Enrolled Trainees

Instructions: Provide each participant with a pen and small notebook to jot down her thoughts
throughout the interview. Begin each module by posing the “main question.” Ask participants to think
about the question for 2-3 minutes and to jot down her thoughts if she would like. Once the time has
passed, ask all participants to share their thoughts with the group, one-by-one. Afterwards, pose the
follow-up questions and allow any respondent who would like to answer them the chance to share with
the group. Use follow-up questions to engage participants in conversation together and encourage them
to share as much as possible. If the follow-up question is in bold, make sure to ask ALL respondents so
that the notes can include the total count of respondents who gave particular answers.

Module            Main Question         Follow-up Questions                    Instructions
                                        a) How long did it take you to travel -
                                            to the training center? Did you go
                                            on foot or some other way? Was
                                            it difficult for you to get there?
                                            How much did you pay for your
                  Was             it
                                            commute?
                  challenging    to
                                        b) Was it difficult for you to commit
1. Attendance     attend        the
                                            time every day to training? Did
(10 minutes)      program on a
                                            you have other important
                  regular    basis?
                                            obligations? How did you
                  Why?
                                            balance these obligations with the
                                            training course?
                                        c) Did you move to a different home
                                            during the program? Why? How
                                            did this affect your involvement
                                            in the program?
                  Has        your       a) Which element of the program -
2. Impacts        involvement in            was      most     important     in
(30 minutes)      the AGI program           generating this change? Was it
                  changed    your           the life skills training, the



	                                                                                                  39	  
                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       life in any way?        entrepreneurship training, the
       How?                    trade training, the mentorship,
                               or something else?
                          b)   How has the way you spend your
                               time changed? Have your
                               income-generating        activities
                               changed at all during your time in
                               the program? Why? Do you work
                               on the weekends?
                          c)   Will it be easier for you to find
                               work now than before the
                               training? Do you think that you
                               will have a better type of work
                               now that you completed the
                               training? Why?
                          d)   Did you ever take out a loan
                               before the program began?
                               What type? Have you now, or
                               do you plan to? What type?
                          e)   Has your social life or
                               relationships changed during your
                               time in the program? Which
                               relationships have changed? In
                               what ways? Why? Can you give
                               me an example?
                          f)   Have your relationships with
                               mentors changed? Did you have a
                               mentor before you started the
                               program? If so, who was your
                               mentor? Has your relationship
                               changed with that person?
                          g)   Do you think that other people’s
                               opinion of you has changed since
                               you joined the program? Why?
                          h)   Did you get married during the
                               program? How did this affect
                               your experience of the program?
                               Did your involvement in the
                               program impact this?
                          i)   Has your ability to support your
                               children or other family members
                               changed during your time in the
                               program? In what ways? Why?
                               Can you give me an example?
                          j)   Have your goals for the future
                               changed during your time in this
                               program? In what ways? Why?
                          k)   Has your self-confidence changed
                               during your time in this program?
                               In what ways? Why? Can you
                               give me an example?


	                                                                       40	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                        l)    Do you think these changes will
                                              last after the program is over?
                                              Which changes will last and
                                              why?
                                        m)    What did you use your stipend
                                              for? Would you have been able
                                              to attend the program without
                                              the stipend?
                                        n)    What do you plan to do with
                                              your savings?
                                        (a)   Are you glad that you studied
                                              this trade? Why or why not?
                                        (b)   If you could have studied a
                                              different trade (including trades
                                              that are not offered by this
                                              program), which one would you
                                              have studied? Why?
                                        (c)   Did the trade-specific training
                                              meet your expectations? Why or
                                              why not?
                                        (d)   What was the most useful module
                                              or lesson from your course?
                                              Why?                                     For questions 2d and 2f,
                                        (e)   Can you give a specific example          the discussion leader lists
                                              of something useful that you             the different modules on a
                                              learned?                                 flip chart. Once all
3. Usefulness      What is your         (f)   What was the least useful module         participants have had a
    of    Trade-   opinion of the             or lesson from your course?              chance to list the most
    Specific       quality        and         Why?                                     useful and least useful
    Training       usefulness of the    (g)   Can you give a specific example          modules, the discussion
(20 minutes)       trade-specific             of something that you learned            leader        asks     the
                   training? Why?             that was not useful?                     participants to blindly
                                        (h)   Did you think the course lasted          vote on which single
                                              the right amount of time, or was         modules they felt were the
                                              it too long or too short? Why?           most and least useful.
                                        (i)   If you could change anything
                                              about your training course, what
                                              would you change?
                                        (j)   Do you think you will end up
                                              working in this trade after the
                                              training is over? Why or why
                                              not? If you will, what materials
                                              will you need? How will you get
                                              them?
                                        (k)   What other topics would you
                                              have liked to have seen covered,
                                              or which topic do you wish the
                                              class had spent more time on?
4. Relevance       What is your         a)    Which topics or lessons were             For questions 4a and 4c,
   of     Life     opinion of the             most relevant to your life?              list each of the modules
   Skills          quality    and             Why? (list 3)                            on the flip chart and ask


	                                                                                                            41	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



    Training      relevance of the    b) Can you give a specific example             each participant to list the
(15 minutes)      life       skills      of something relevant that you              3 most and least relevant.
                  training? Why?         learned? Why was it relevant?               The                     Life
                                      c) Which topics or lessons were not            Skills/Entrepreneurship
                                         relevant? Why?                              Training included a total
                                      d) Can you give a specific example             of 8 modules: (1) Trust,
                                         of something that you learned               Problem Solving, Team
                                         that was not relevant to your life?         Building, Setting Personal
                                         Why was it not relevant to your             Goals;        (2)      Self-
                                         life?                                       Awareness, Self-Esteem,
                                      e) Was most of the information new             and     Leadership;      (3)
                                         to you, or did you know most of             Family       Skills;     (4)
                                         it before?                                  Communication in the
                                      f) Can you remember most of the                Workplace; (5) Managing
                                         things you learned during the life          Stress,     Anger,      and
                                         skills training?                            Conflict; (6) Personal
                                      g) Did the life skills training meet           Hygiene, Nutrition, and
                                         your expectations? Why or why               Healthy Lifestyles; (7)
                                         not?                                        Sexual and Reproductive
                                                                                     Health; (8) Sex, Gender,
                                                                                     and Violence
                                      a) Which topics or lessons were
                                         most relevant to your life? Why?
                                      b) Can you give a specific example
                                         of something relevant that you
                                         learned? Why was it relevant?
                                      c) Which topics or lessons were not
                                         relevant? Why?
                                      d) Can you give a specific example
5. Relevance      What is your
                                         of something that you learned
   of             opinion of the
                                         that was not relevant to your life?
   Entrepren-     quality      and
                                         Why was it not relevant to your
   eurship        relevance of the
                                         life?
   Training       entrepreneurship
                                      e) Was most of the information new
   (15 minutes)   training? Why?
                                         to you, or did you know most of
                                         it before?
                                      f) Can you remember most of the
                                         things you learned during the
                                         entrepreneurship training?
                                      g) Did the entrepreneurship training
                                         meet your expectations? Why or
                                         why not?
                  What was your       a) Did you feel the teachers for the           For question 4d, the
                  opinion of the         life skills component were                  discussion leader lists the
                  teachers   you         knowledgeable? Did you feel                 different         proposed
6. Quality of     worked    with?        they communicated well?                     changes on a flip chart.
    Teachers      Why?                b) Of the different life skills                Once all participants have
(10 minutes)      Remember that          trainings that were delivered,              had a chance to propose
                  what you share         which was the most effective                changes, the discussion
                  with us today          training approach? By training              leader       asks       the
                  will be kept           approach, I mean “style of                  participants to blindly


	                                                                                                           42	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                 anonymous. We             teaching.”      Why        was    this    vote on whether or not
                 will not share the        effective? Which was the least            they agree with each
                 names of anyone           effective training approach, or           proposed change.
                 who        makes          style of teaching? Why? What
                 comments about            other training approaches, or
                 teachers or AGI           styles of teaching, would you
                 staff    –    this        recommend and why?
                 information will     c)   Did you feel the teacher for your
                 be     used     to        trade was knowledgeable? Did
                 improve        the        he/she communicate well?
                 program.             d)   Did the teacher encourage you to
                                           ask questions? Was she/he easy
                                           to talk to?
                                      e)   Do you prefer male or female
                                           trainers for life skills training? Do
                                           you prefer male or female
                                           teachers for trades training?
                                           Why?
                                      f)   Did you teachers attend the
                                           program on a daily basis?
                                      g)   Were they available for extra
                                           support if you needed it, whether
                                           related to the training or outside?
                                           Can you give an example?
                                      h)   If you could change anything
                                           about your experience with your
                                           teachers, what would you
                                           change?
                                      a)   Do you know what you will be              -
                                           doing in the second half of the
                                           program? What will you be
                                           doing?
                                      b)   Have you worked with a mentor
                                           or someone from the program to
                                           set up your work plan for the next
                                           part of the program? If yes, who
                 How do you feel           mentored you and how? Has the
                 about          the        mentor been helpful? Why or
7. Transition    transition from           why not?
    to Part II   your      training   c)   Are you in a cooperative? If not,
(10 minutes)     courses to the            do want to or expect to join one?
                 second half of            If so, when did you join? Who
                 the program?              helped you form it? Is it having
                                           problems? Do you plan to
                                           continue working with it after the
                                           program ends? Why or why not?
                                           Will the cooperative start a
                                           business related to the trade you
                                           studied? Why or why not?
                                      d)   Do you have any worries about
                                           the next part of the program? If


	                                                                                                      43	  
                           World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                         yes, what are they?
                                      e) Are you prepared to leave the
                                         training and to start a business or
                                         cooperative? How can the project
                                         help you prepare?
                                      a) Were there any problems in the             For question 6e, the
                                         management of the training                 discussion leader lists the
                                         center? What were they?                    different         proposed
                                      b) Did your classes start on time             changes on a flip chart.
                                         every day? If not, how often did           Once all participants have
                                         they start late? How late?                 had a chance to propose
                                      c) Did the distribution of your               changes, the discussion
                                         stipends work correctly? Did you           leader       asks       the
                Do you think
                                         get paid on time?                          participants to blindly
                your      training
                                      d) Were         childcare      services       vote on whether or not
                center was well
                                         provided? Was this useful? If              they agree with each
                managed? Why
                                         childcare was not provided, how            proposed change.
                or why not?
                                         did you manage? If it was not
                Remember that
                                         provided, would it have been
                what you share
                                         useful to have had it? Why or
                with us today
8. Quality of                            why not?
                will be kept
    Program                           e) Were you ever told about
                anonymous. We
    Manage-                              counseling services that might be
                will not share the
    ment                                 available?     Are     you     using
                names of anyone
(10 minutes)                             counseling services?
                who         makes
                                      f) Did you feel that your training
                comments about
                                         center was girl friendly? How
                teachers or AGI
                                         could it have been made more
                staff    –     this
                                         girl friendly? “Girl friendly”
                information will
                                         means that there are facilities and
                be     used      to
                                         services that are specifically
                improve         the
                                         helpful for girls.
                program.
                                      g) Is there a girls’ room at the VTC?
                                         Do you go there? If yes, what do
                                         you use it for? Has it made the
                                         training easier in any way?
                                      h) If you could change anything
                                         about the management of the
                                         program or training center, what
                                         would you change? Why?
                                      a) What do you like most of the               -
                Please share any
                                         program? What do you like least
                other comments
9. Other                                 about the program?
                or feedback you
    Comments                          b) Is there anything you would
                have about the
(10 minutes)                             change about the program that
                AGI program or
                                         you have not mentioned?
                this evaluation.




	                                                                                                         44	  
                             World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



             II. Semi-Structured Interview Guidelines: Enrolled Trainees

The purpose of these interviews is to probe more deeply into the issues raised during Focus Group
Discussions. Thus, the focus of the conversation will depend largely on what was said during the focus
group discussion. These interviews may also include mores sensitive topics that are not addressed during
FGDs, such as pregnancy, family planning, and gender-based violence.

Module            Main Question            Follow-up Questions
1. Open topics    Is there anything        a) Was there anything positive about your experience in the
                  about            your        program that was not covered in the group discussion? Can
                  experience in this           you tell me about it?
                  program that you         b) Was there anything negative about your experience in the
                  would like to talk           program that was not covered in the group discussion? Can
                  about, that we did           you tell me about it?
                  not cover in the
                  group discussion?
2. Attendance     Was it challenging    a) Did you have any obligations at home that made it
                  for you to regularly     challenging for you to attend?
                  attend this program?  b) Are you pregnant? Did you become pregnant during this
                                           program? Has that presented any challenges for your
                                           involvement in the program?
                                        c) Have you experienced gender-based violence over the past
                                           6 months, whether at home, at the training center, or
                                           somewhere else? Have you reported this or would you like
                                           to report it? If you reported it, was anything done? Is there
                                           anyone in the program – a friend or a trainer or anyone else
                                           – who you can talk to about this?
3. Impacts        Can you tell me a) [Follow-up questions will depend on individual responses]
                  more about how you
                  feel the program has
                  impacted your life?
4. Usefulness     Can you tell me a) Which trade did you study? Did you choose this one? Why
   of Trade-      more     about    the    or why not?
   Specific       quality          and b) [Other follow-up questions will depend on individual
   Training       usefulness of the        responses]
                  trade-specific
                  training?
5. Relevance      Can you tell me a) Which of the different teaching approaches worked best for
   of     Life    more     about    the    you? Why? Can you give me an example? Which of the
   Skills         relevance of the life    different teaching approaches worked the least well? Why?
   Training       skills training to       Can you give me an example?
                  your daily life?      b) Have you applied any of the things you learned in life skills
                                           training to your life? Which things?
                                        c) Have you sought out family planning resources or advice
                                           since you began this program? Can you tell me about that?
                                        d) [Other follow-up questions will depend on individual
                                           responses]
6. Quality of     Is there anything a) Was your experience with the teachers mostly positive or
   teachers       else you want to talk    mostly negative? Can you tell me about a positive
                  about regarding the      experience? Can you tell me about a negative experience?


	                                                                                                   45	  
                          World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                teachers          you b) [Follow-up questions will depend on individual responses]
                interacted       with
                during this program?
7. Transition   What will you be a) How do you feel about this? Why?
   to Part II   doing in the second b) How was this decision made? Were you comfortable during
                half of the program?      that process?
                                       c) If you could do something else, what would you do?
                                       d) [Other follow-up questions will depend on individual
                                          responses]
8. Quality of   Can you tell me a) [Other follow-up questions will depend on individual
   program      more about your responses]
   manage-      opinion      of    the
   ment         management of this
                program?
9. Other        Is there anything [Follow-up questions will depend on individual responses]
   topics       else you would like
                to talk about?




	                                                                                             46	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



            III. Semi-Structured Interview Guidelines: Former Trainees

The purpose of these interviews is to learn about former trainees’ experience with the AGI program, their
opinions of the process, quality, and relevance of the training they received, and their reasons for
dropping out of the program. The former trainee modules are: (1) Timing of Dropout, (2) Reasons for
Dropout, (3) Impact of Program, (4) Since Dropping Out, (5) Suggested Changes (including changes to
prevent drop-outs), and (6) Additional Comments.

These interviews will be conducted by a team of 2: a research analyst and a translator. The research
analyst will begin each module by posing the main question and recording the response as the translator
speaks. Depending on the direction of the conversation, the research analyst will then pose relevant
follow-up questions, recording as much information as possible for each topic. The length of each module
will depend on the respondent.

Background Information: Before the start of the interview, record the following information for each
participant based on data from the quantitative baseline survey and trade enrollment data from WDA:
name, unique ID, age, and trade. Verify this information with the respondent at the start of the interview.

Questions for Trainees who Dropped Out

Module                 Main Question           Follow-up Questions
1.      Timing of      At what stage in        a) Did you attend any of the sessions? If so, how many? A
  dropout              the program did             “session” means one day of the AGI program.
                       you drop out?
2.      Reasons for    Why did you drop        a) Was it related to something in your life outside of the
  dropout              out     of    the          program, or to an issue with the program itself?
                       program?                b) Did you think the project was useful to you? Why or
                                                  why not?
                                               c) Did you have trouble attending the sessions? Why?
3.      Impacts of     Did           your      a) Did you learn any skills or information that has been
  program              participation    in        useful to you or will be useful to you in the future? What
                       the AGI program            did you learn?
                       impact your life at     b) Has your employment status changed in the past 6
                       all?                       months? In what ways? Why?
                                               c) Has your social life or relationships changed in the past 6
                                                  months? In what ways? Why?
                                               d) Has your ability to support your children or other family
                                                  members in the past 6 months? Why?
                                               e) Have your goals for the future changed in the past 6
                                                  months? Why?
                                               f) Has your self-confidence changed in the past 6 months?
                                                  In what ways? Can you give me an example?
4.      Since          What have you           a) Have you worked for pay since dropping out of the
  dropping out         been doing since           program?
                       you dropped out         b) Have you done any sort of training since dropping out of
                       of the program?            the program?
5. Suggested           If    you    could      a) Is there anything you would change about the life skills
changes                change anything            component? Is there anything you would change about
                       about the AGI              the entrepreneurship component?
                       program,      what      b) Is there anything you would change about the trades


	                                                                                                       47	  
                     World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                would          you       offered? What trades would you add or take away?
                change?               c) Is there anything you would change about the way the
                                         program is managed?
                                      d) Would any of these changes have prevented you from
                                         dropping out of the program? Which changes? Why?
6. Additional   Please share any         -
comments        other comments
                or feedback you
                have about the
                AGI program or
                this evaluation.




	                                                                                        48	  
                                 World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                IV. Semi-Structured Interview Guidelines: Program Staff
Instructions

The purpose of these semi-structured interviews is to conduct a thorough process evaluation of the AGI
program over the first 6 months of implementation for cohort 2. We will conduct semi-structured
interviews with: school managers, training center support staff, trainers (such as trainers from Gayaha
Links or Frontiers Great Lakes), career mentors, and WDA program managers (1 interview). Interviews
will vary significantly from one respondent to the next given the different roles, so questions are meant
only as a guideline.

These interviews will be conducted by a team of 2: a research analyst and a translator. The research
analyst will begin each module by posing the main question and recording the response as the translator
speaks. Depending on the direction of the conversation, the research analyst will then pose relevant
follow-up questions, recording as much information as possible for each topic. The length of each module
will depend on the respondent.

Informed Consent

Read Aloud: Hello, my name is __________, and I am from Laterite Limited. Laterite is a Rwandan
research firm that has been hired by the World Bank, MIGPROF, and WDA to conduct research on the
AGI project in Rwanda. We are now conducting a midline evaluation that includes a close analysis of the
implementation process. The purpose of this interview is to learn about your experience implementing
this program and to ask for your opinion on ways to improve the process moving forward. The
information you share is entirely voluntary and will not be circulated beyond the management team. You
will neither gain nor lose anything from participating in this interview. If you agree, we may contact you
again in the next 6 months for follow-up questions, so it will be important for me to find out the best ways
to contact you in the future.

The interview will take about 60 minutes. Please let me know if you have any questions before we
proceed, and feel free to interrupt at any time if you have questions or concerns about answering
questions.

Background Information on Participants

Name:
Position (job title):
Location:
Interview Date:
Contact phone number(s):

Questions

Module                  Main Question                         Follow-up Questions
(respondents)
                                                              a) Which parts of your job have gone the most
1. Role     (all        What are your responsibilities in        smoothly? Why?
   respondents)         the AGI program?                      b) Which parts of your job have been the most
                                                                 challenging? Why?



	                                                                                                      49	  
                            World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                                 c) When you encounter a process challenge in
                                                    your job, whom do you report to? How often
                                                    does this happen? Do you feel that your
                                                    supervisors take on board your suggestions?
                                                    Have you faced any challenges in
                                                    communicating with other members of AGI
                                                    staff?
                                                 d) What have you done to address the challenges
                                                    you encountered on the job?
2. Comparison                                    a) What changed? Why do you think it changed?
   with cohort 1                                 b) Did your training center receive additional
                    How does your experience
   (school                                          funding or support during cohort 2? How was
                    implementing this program in
   managers,                                        this used? What was its impact?
                    cohort 2 compare with your
   training
                    experience in cohort 1?
   support staff,
   and WDA)
                                                         a) How active were the trainees?
                                                         b) How inquisitive were the trainees?
                                                         c) How well did the trainees understand the
                                                            content of the training?
                                                         d) What were the reasons for good/poor
                                                            performance?
                                                         e) What are the characteristics of girls who are
                                                            the most likely to benefit from this program?
3. Trainee
                                                            Why?
   performance
                    In your view, how was the            f) If you could design the next round, what
   (school
                    overall performance of the              characteristics would you look for in the girls
   managers,
                    trainees in class?                      would you select?
   training
                                                         g) Would you say the performance was the same
   support staff)
                                                            level across the whole class or very different
                                                            between girls? What was the reason for the
                                                            difference?
                                                         h) What was the role of the life skills program?
                                                            How did life skills training impact the girls?
                                                            Was it long enough? What training
                                                            approaches used by the life skills training
                                                            worked the best?
                                                         a) What efforts did you make to make the
                                                            training center girl-friendly? Did you face any
                                                            challenges in doing so? How were these
4. Training
                                                            challenges handled?
   center
                                                         b) How was the issue of dropouts handled? Why
   manage-ment      Can     you    describe  any
                                                            do you think the girls dropped out?
   (for school      challenges that arose in the
                                                         c) Were there any challenges related to starting
   managers         management of the training
                                                            cohort 3 while cohort 2 was still in process?
   and training     center where you work?
                                                            How were these challenges handled?
   center
                                                         d) Did you hire additional teachers or staff
   support staff)
                                                            members to assist with the additional
                                                            students? Who recruited them and how? Did
                                                            this go smoothly?



	                                                                                                      50	  
                          World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                                e) Were there any challenges related to taking
                                                   attendance or distributing stipends? How were
                                                   these challenges handled?
                                                f) Were there any challenges related to trainees
                                                   with babies/children? How were these
                                                   challenges handled?
                                                g) Which trades are offered at your training
                                                   center? Were all of them of equal quality? If
                                                   not, why? Where do you see room for
                                                   improvements?
                                                h) What would you change about the
                                                   management of the training center where you
                                                   work?
5. Overall        What would you change about a) What additional support would have been
   manage-ment    the overall management of the    useful to receive from WDA or MIGEPROF?
   (all           AGI program? Why?
   respondents)
6. Other          Please    share  any    other a) We’re interested in learning about both
   comments       comments or feedback you have    resolved and unresolved process challenges
                  about the AGI program or this    that you have faced in implementing this
                  evaluation.                      program.




	                                                                                           51	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                       AGI Qualitative Midline: Interview Transcripts
	  
	  
Site 1: Kigali, General                                                                   53
       SSI 1: Christine Turabamariya, Program Manager at Frontiers Great Lakes            53
Site 2: Gahaya Links, Kigali                                                              56
       SSI 2: Janet Nkubana, Co-Founder of Gahaya Links                                   56
       FGD 1: Beneficiaries at Gahaya Links                                               60
       SSI3: Participant at Gahaya Links                                                  70
Site 3: Gacuriro VTC                                                                      72
       FGD2: Participants at Gacuriro VTC                                                 72
       SSI4: School Manager at Gacuriro VTC                                               81
Site 4: Nyarugunga VTC                                                                    85
       SSI5: Former Trainee 1 at Nyarugunga VTC                                           85
       SSI6: Former Trainee 2 at Nyarugunga VTC                                           87
       SSI7: School Manager at Nyarugunga VTC                                             89
Site 5: Shyorongi VTC                                                                     91
       FGD3: Participants at Shyorongi VTC                                                91
Site 6: Bushoki VTC                                                                      100
       FGD4: Participants at Bushoki VTC                                                 100
       SSI8: Participant at Bushoki VTC                                                  109
       SSI9: Food Processing Trainer at Bushoki VTC                                      111
Site 7: Rushaki VTC                                                                      113
       FGD5: Participants at Rushaki VTC                                                 114
       SSI10: School Manager at Rushaki VTC                                              122
       SSI11: Participant at Rushaki VTC                                                 125
       SSI12: Former Trainee at Rushaki VTC                                              127




	                                                                                        52	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Site 1: Kigali, General

SSI 1: Christine Turabamariya, Program Manager at Frontiers Great Lakes

Interview conducted at Brioche in Gacuriro on 16 June.

Module 1

Asked about her responsibilities in the AGI program, Christine lists: preparing curriculum, organizing
activities with the centers, employing staff, contacting Frontiers, communicating with center managers
and WDA, and training students.

(b): Asked about which parts of her role have been challenging, she says that the curriculum has been
challenging because of the need for updates. She needed to readapt the curriculum to the level of the girls.
Frontiers Great Lakes (FGL) had higher expectations of the girls’ level; the girls’ needs were not what
FGL had originally expected. In particular, entrepreneurship was a challenge because the girls needed to
seek out more information to update their business cases.

Asked which lessons needed to be adapted, Christine refers to the self-esteem lessons. Originally, these
lessons contained a lot of content; FGL needed to change the focus to talking about personal experiences
rather than giving notes. The program was adapted to have an increased focus on experiential activities.
Asked to give examples, she lists presentations, talking about personal challenges, going on a ropes
course, and other group initiatives. Group initiatives involve mobile activities in which girls are
sometimes asked to lead a small team. These activities bring together leadership and self-esteem: “You
expose these girls to an activity where they will lead the activity with a team. And then from there they
talk on behalf of the team, how was the activity and how did they experience it.” These activities are
about leadership but self-esteem also comes in. Christine explains that team initiatives work well because,
after 1 week of training, you can “find the girls are totally different. If a girl stands in front of a group to
talk, you find quite a big difference between the beginning and the end.” Girls have gained confidence to
talk in front of people. FGL used more of these participatory activities with cohort 2 than with cohort 1.
These activities are used mostly for self-esteem, problem solving, and reproductive health lessons.

(c): Asked about collaboration with WDA/MIGEPROF, Christine says that collaboration is smooth
although it can be slow between WDA, the centers, and the trainers. “Anytime that we had to collaborate,
it is smooth.” Her first point of contact is Winnie.

Module 2

Asked about differences between cohort 1 and cohort 2, Christine explains that FGL made adjustments in
the curriculum. They moved the lessons on reproductive health earlier in the program so that the girls are
aware of it sooner. “We realized that, with cohort 1, some girls did not really manage to decide for
themselves about sexual and reproductive health so you find there are challenges, some of the girls




	                                                                                                          53	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



became pregnant, so we moved it forward…So we find that girls are aware of what they are supposed to
do and they are able to decide.”

Module 3

Asked about trainee performance, Christine says that the trainees are doing well. The methods are about
the girls participating and not about feeding them knowledge. “They apply the training to their daily life.
If you ask them how they applied this to their daily life, you will hear about a specific situation where the
girl sees herself changed.”

(a) Asked if the girls are active, she says that they are very active and happy.

(b) Asked if the girls asked a lot of questions, she responds, “In reproductive health, they will ask you –
you may even stay there all day – questions you never thought about. Because there are so many myths,
and then the culture, their lack of knowledge sometimes, the rumors and things they hear here and they.
They will ask you – up to the last question, they don’t fear [speaking with the teachers].” Asked what
makes this possible, she says that “There is a created spirit, when we train them – you can say that we are
very close, so that they feel sharing with us is like sharing with a colleague. We are not very far from
them, so they will share very deep experiences. And the climate in the training is so good. And also, the
first thing we do is trust – the first topic, after expectations. So you feel like there is a lot of trust.” The
girls do not feel like they are being judged.

(c) Asked if the trainees understood the content of the training well, she says that they understand. “In
cohort 2, it came to their level.” Cohort 1 was more difficult because the program was still searching to
find the right material. Cohort 3 is going well, too.

(d) Asked about the characteristics of the girls who benefit most from the program, she says “Single
mothers. Girls who are single months…Because when you give birth and you are still a girl, you are in a
way marginalized. And the self-concept is almost marginalized.” So these girls need opportunities. “Also,
girls who are dropping out of school because of poverty….But also, I was wondering whether – so far we
have talked about girls who did not go to secondary.” Those who are left out of school – “There are many.
Even with the system that takes all students to primary and secondary, there are still some left out.”

(g) Asked if there are differences in the level of understanding, she says that some girls do understand
better than others. For example, those who completed S3 understand more than those who completed P3,
particularly if there are any activities that involve writing. However, she says “I would not leave out those
[who completed P3] because they are the ones who really need the program.”

(h) Asked if there was one training approach that works best, she says “I think the participatory way of
teaching works very much better. In some centers where I trained in leadership – I talk very little. If they
are doing it by themselves and I go to see what they are doing, they learn better than if I talk…you make
them part of the training.”

Module 4



	                                                                                                          54	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Asked if the can think of any management challenges, she mentions the issue of adapting the program to
the level of the girls. There is also “the challenge of numbers.” The approach that she uses should usually
be with a group of 12; in a group of 20, she already feels that some are missing out. 12-15 would be a
good number. She has worked with groups of 30 girls in AGI. “If we have maybe 100 participants, we
divide them into 2 – 50 and 50. For me to manage 50, it is even more challenging but good because then
the girls do more leadership because they manage groups. I make groups or teams with 1 or 2 girls. I
debrief them, then they go to the group and follow the activities. So that is how I try to manage numbers.”

(a) Asked if she thinks the training centers are girl friendly, she says that, for her, girl-friendly means that
the girls feel at home. Some of the center managers try to do things like providing things that are specific
to girls or to use female trainers to be closer to the girls – “like it is not the man who would go to lead a
participatory discussion, it would be a lady who is a trainer.”

But she says that some of the training centers are not girl-friendly because they are two small – Kinihiara,
for example. It is not girl-friendly “because there is not enough space…[they need] space to be. It is
[shared with] another school and they are on a very small space.” Asked fi this situation is being handled,
she says that WDA has plan to move the girls from Kinihira to a new VTC that is being built there. “More
space is good for girls – I think so because, at our homes, most of the girls find their space is in the
kitchen. That is where we feel at home. So when you come to the sitting room where maybe there are
many people talking about important things, you feel shy. So in a program like this one, girls need space
where they can sit – they need to feel this is space for me, this space is made for me. I find this very
important. Because you find there are spaces for boys – playgrounds, living rooms at home. When girls
are together in enough space, then that is girl-friendly.”

(b) Asked about how the issue of girls dropping out is being handled, she says that there are some who
dropped out to go back to school. Maybe they were in S3 when the registered; then when they passed the
national exams, they decided to go back to secondary school.

(c) Asked if there were any challenges related to starting cohort 3 while cohort 2 was still in process, she
says that the girls in cohort 3 are sometimes tired in the afternoon. It is already hot when they begin their
training.

(d) Asked how they handled the combination of cohort 2 and 3, she says that the trainers from FGL go to
the centers more often.

(f) Asked if there were challenges related to trainees with babies, she says that some girls brought their
babies on the first day, which created challenges, but then they began leaving their children at home.

Module 5

(a) Asked what would have been useful had they had additional support, she says that they would have
spent more time with the girls. The budget for the training means she goes there, teaches, and then leaves.
If there could be more follow-up and more time to talk with the girls, she could follow-up with issues.



	                                                                                                          55	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked about which issues, she cites issues of justice such as girls being mistreated, beaten, or kicked out
of their homes. Normally they give advice and ask how she is and how they can help, but she would
prefer to be able to follow-up more. Asked if there is a lesson on accessing justice, she says that there is
an activity in the gender-based violence lesson about what to do to come out exploitation. She says that
not many, but a few, of the girls face these problems in their life.

Module 5

Asked about the most useful pieces of the curriculum, she lists: reproductive health, problem solving &
conflict management, financial literacy, and goal-setting. Problem solving is about personal problems and
problems in their relationships, homes, village, school, center. It helps them know that if they have
problems in their lives, they can find soluations – they learn that “it does not end here.” Financial literacy
is about ways of using money; how to use it and reduce costs – “They get surprised, because the first
thing we tell them is that they do have money. We ask them what they buy and they say they buy airtime,
they buy clothes, so we tell them they have money…We talk about how to reduce costs.” Goal-setting is
applied to the program – the girls set a goal for 6 months (i.e. purchasing a goat).

Christine teaches both life skills and entrepreneurship. Asked which part of entrepreneurship is the most
important, she says it is the business canvas. A business canvas is used by start-ups – business plans are
used by more established businesses. The business canvas is a tool that involves idea generation and
planning. For example, some of the girls have the idea of starting a restaurant – the course takes them
through the planning about things like who their customers will be, what activities they will do, etc. Most
of the girls plan business related to their studies. The girls in cohort 1 have started businesses

Asked what she would change about the program, she says that she would add more coaching and follow-
up with the girls to make sure they get the right information. She says that the evaluation should also
focus on ownership – i.e. asking the girls about new things that they own, as many have saved up and
purchased things.


Site 2: Gahaya Links, Kigali

SSI 2: Janet Nkubana, Co-Founder of Gahaya Links

Interview conducted at Gahaya Links office in Kicikiro on 16 June.

Module 1

Janet’s responsibility within AGI is as a service provider; she provides training in the arts & crafts trade.
Her program is training a total of 500 girls across the 3 cohorts.

Training centers with arts & crafts include: Nduba, Shyorongi, Rushaki, Kinihira, Kibali, Rutare, and the
Kigali center (where girls from Nyarugunga and Gacuriro are trained together. Asked if they are similar,



	                                                                                                        56	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Janet explains that all of the training centers have the same resources. The girls are given beads of
different colors to distinguish between the centers but, otherwise, the materials are the same.
Asked how the specific subjects of training were selected, she explains that WDA/MIGEPROF specified
jewelry and tie-dye for the girls’ work. This decision was based on their analysis of what would sell.

(b) Asked about which parts of her job have been challenging, she says that the level of education is not
the same across the girls. “I can’t say that it is a challenge – it’s only that I had to learn and know how to
handle different levels of education.” Asked if these girls have a lower level of education than the people
she would normally hire, she specifies that the challenge is working with girls of different levels in the
same classroom. They have had to redo and redesign some modules. Asked what she changed, she
explained, “When you have learned people, you do a lot of theory. But when you don’t have people are
are ‘learned,’ you do a lot more theory. So you have to work with an individual rather than a class.”
Asked if it is an issue that the girls didn’t learn the theory, she says that they do learn theory but they
learn it through going through the steps. They learn when they practice.

(c) Asked what she would do if any challenges came up, she explains that WDA has a focal point and also
works with the center managers. “Their communication is swift is fast so I have never encountered
anything. They call me when there is something, I call them. I think the best thing that happens between
us is the center managers. When I want to take my report, no problem.” She does monthly and quarterly
reports.”

Module 2

Asked if she observed differences between cohort 1 and 2, she explains that cohort 1 was a pilot so it was
a lot more stressful. “We had not done the training. But in terms of the level of training, I did not have
any problems. The only problem I had was in one center, in Shyorongi, where they had a module that
really was challenging to them, which they had to retake before they graduated. So the challenge was that
in 1 center in cohort 1, when they saw the module was really hard they did not want to do it. So when we
broke off for Christmas, they started dodging it. So I went back and said you can’t graduate without this.
So they had to redo it….Then there was Kigali. Kigali because I think the challenges in the city are
different from the rural community. So, with Kigali students you cannot have 100% attendance.” Asked
why, she says that this is because of their environment. There are often 10% absentees in the Kigali
center. It took longer for them to complete all of the modules. A small number of girls (2 in a group or so)
have other jobs outside the program. “They came to Kigali for a living, so they may be housed by
somebody who needs services for them – they need to subsidize something, so sometimes it becomes a
challenge for them…Others tell you they sent them somewhere, like to the market to buy food…So the
Kigali students have more to do than the rural.”

Asked about the usefulness of childcare services, she says “But in the villages, we don’t have children
issues. The second cohort, actually, they are younger. In the first cohort we had many of them who had
children. But this cohort they are younger; second cohort and third. The younger ones in Kigali become
more stubborn. If you look at them, those are city issues. If you see them together, you will see them with
lipliners…whereas those [other] ones are real girls from the villages.”




	                                                                                                        57	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Module 3

Asked about trainee performance, she says that the girls perform better than they expected. “You know,
when you see somebody who is hungry to learn, you can even tell from her face. Like, when they come
here in the morning, the way they interact, the way they ask you, the way they engage with their teachers.
And sometimes when you tell them, this one we are not going to do now then you see how they really say
‘oh, please,’ so things like that. So there are ways to test them to know – are they really enjoying what
they are doing or are they just here.” She explains that she can test how interested they are by asking
whether they want to move to the next module; many say no.

She explains that many girls from cohort 1 are making money. “Even in the villages, there are some who
got orders.” When others see this, they are inspired.

(b) Asked whether the girls tend to be inquisitive, she says that they mainly asked questions during
practicals. “So they engage – in practicals, they engage trainers a lot.”

“We have what we call innovation week – innovation week is when we rate them. So we allow them to
take what they have learned and do their own style. So when they do that, you look at them and you know
where they engaged you and understood what you taught them. Or they can go beyond what you are
teaching to create more, using the technique.”

(d) Asked whether performance varies a lot between the girls, she says that you can see differences. You
“see it in practicals” that some of the girls “don’t get it.” There are some girls who are “very nervous” and
others who “click.”

Asked about the impact of the life skills programming, she says “I think, first of all, the role number 1
was them being together and working as a team. I think that showed them we cannot survive by ourselves.
For me, when they were in recreation, talking, because they work as a team, I think it really brought the
girls together to know one another and be free together – I think it is really important.”

Module 4

Asked about issues with program management, she explains that the time frame for the practical part was
too short given the girls’ level of education. “The practical part is short, based on their level of education
they need more practical than others. Because, for them, it is hands on. It is not where you would give
notes and read – it is what I took in my head practically. So that is where we looked at it and said it is not
going to work. But because we have the mentoring time, it becomes like training also.” Asked about the
ideal length of time for the program, she says that 6 months of practicals would be useful. She said that it
is currently about 4 months because the first few months are mentoring – “its like they want to find
themselves, they are finding themselves.”

(a) Asked if she needed to do anything to make the training centers girl-friendly, she says that they
requested a room with more light in some of the centers, such as Byumba. They also requested better
furniture because the existing furniture was for schools and writing.



	                                                                                                        58	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




(b) Asked if she faced any issues of girls dropping out of the program, she said that some got married.
There was one participant in Shyorongi who died from sickness, and then the other dropouts were
marriages. Asked if she encouraged those who got married to come back, she says that 2 did not come
back but they successfully encouraged the others to come back.

(d) Asked if there were challenges with bringing in cohort 3, she says that cohort 2 comes in the morning
and 3 comes in the afternoon. Asked whether this left enough time for training, she said that “by within
next month, I will know if we will be on time.” Cohort 2 is delayed because they did two weeks of life
skills training (with two separate groups).

(e) Asked about the stipend and attendance process, she explains that Gahaya Links takes attendance and
gives that information to the cashier. The cashier distributes the stipend. “There is no problem with that
because we have our attendance sheet, then after that we do our weekly and monthly attendance.” We
negotiated that with the girls who don’t attend, money goes to their cooperative; we advised WDA.

Module 5

Asked what she would change if she could change anything about the program, she says that she would
change the time frame of the training.

Asked if she would change anything about recruitment, she says that she would still recruit the most
vulnerable girls; there is nothing wrong with this. She explains, “Recruitment, because they do it with
grassroots leaders, I think there is nothing wrong with the recruitment. Because we got somebody who
couldn’t write but she performed very well. So I wouldn’t dwell on that. I would give equal opportunity
to anybody who is vulnerable and is willing to learn. We have so many women who can’t read and write
but they can learn…I would really base it on the vulnerability of the person who wants to be trained.

(a) Asked what she would do if there was additional support for the program, she says that she would add
    more skills to the training. “Because, like, you see these girls are doing tie-dye. If we add people who
    are doing tie-dye so they wouldn’t stop at making material but at making dresses.”

Module 6

Asked if there were any other challenges in implementation, she mentions the delay at the beginning of
the program.

Asked if she can think of challenges in scaling up the program, she says that the numbers would be too
much. “they will get more people because you still see people here coming to ask to be given a chance to
learn. So, they will have a challenge of finance, I think, because many people would be wanting to do the
program. I was looking at the trades they did, and arts and crafts is the most popular.” Asked why, she
says that it is popular because it goes throughout the year if you get access to the market; it is not a
seasonal trade.




	                                                                                                      59	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked if the market is growing, she explains, “Yes, but the level of graduation is not up to the
international market. And I think that the challenge in scaling up is not not leaving graduates – is to keep
building their capacity. They have learned skills, they are going to the market; to keep them so that they
keep improving because arts and crafts is practice. So if they keep finding markets, practice, then market
connections for them; scaling up, I think they should add in a marketing component.”

Asked about their skill level at graduation, she explains, “They have no capacity. Nobody should lie to
you. They are still shy. They can’t approach anybody, so they need to create a marketing component of
AGI.” Asked what that would include, she says that it would involve WDA, MIGEPROF, and anybody
involved so that “after training these girls – in Kinihira, where you will go? I’m trying to sell my products
in a hotel, Muhabora, Gisenyi. The way I go there myself is not they way I would go there if I was
MIGEPROF. So they should add a compoenent of marketing strategy for these girls.”

Asked whether she hires the girls here, she says that she already does. “There are people from cohort 1
here working.” She explains that, if they are smart, they can execute the techniques anyway. In February
through April, they earned more than 3,000,000 Rwf in total. Cohort 1, in February, 27 girls made
705,590 Rwf net income. In March, they made 774,000. In April, they made, 1,700,000. We pay per piece
so that we encourage hard-working. On top of that, their take-home was 2,700,000; now these 27, they
contributed to the government 477,506 in contributions as professionals and then they deposited 254,671
in their social security because they earn more than 30,000 per month.

Other comments: Janet described conducting a separate baseline study among the participants in her
program. She asks them about their age, level of education, whether their parents are alive, whether she is
working, if she has siblings, if she goes to school, etc. She gets to know the girls at all of the centers this
way. She goes back to them throughout the program.


FGD 1: Beneficiaries at Gahaya Links

Interview conducted at Gahaya Links at on 17 June.

Before going to the center, we randomly selected 8 beneficiaries from the Gacuriro VTC and 8 from the
Nyarugunga VTC (from the list of participants in the baseline survey), with the intention of having the
FGD divided evenly between the two groups (3 participants from each center). We over-selected because
did not have information on which trade the respondents had ended up in. It turned out that many of our
selected respondents were not present at the center: many of them were in other trades at their VTCs and
some were absent. We still tried to have an evenly divided group by reading down the list of names (in
order of unique id) of people in our baseline sample from the two centers. In the end, only one member of
the baseline sample from Gacuriro was present at Gahaya that day. The other five participants in the
focus group were from the Nyarugunga center.

R#     Unique ID    VTC                 Age                     Trade                   Phone #
1      50304        Gacuriro            23                      Arts & Crafts           0725196740
2      30161        Nyarugunga          18                      Arts & Crafts           0789625028



	                                                                                                         60	  
                                  World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



                                                                                           0727677343
3          20925        Nyarugunga         24                      Arts & Crafts           0722060268
                                                                                           0785060268
4          30168        Nyarugunga         24                      Arts & Crafts           0786931014
5          10879        Nyarugunga         18                      Arts & Crafts           0722255788
6          20100        Nyarugunga         22                      Arts & Crafts           0722255788
                                                                                           0727050191

Topic 1: Attendance

Asked about obstacles and challenges in attending the program each day, the participants respond as
follows:

       •     R1 says that the challenge in attending the program is that most of the participants are married.
             They would sometimes have household challenges and could not attended. Also, they were
             promised money for transport but there were delays in the distribution of this money. So, when
             they didn’t have adequate money for transport, they would not attend the program due to poverty.
             Asked if they agree that this was a challenge, R2, R3, and R6 say that they agree.
       •     R2 explains, “For me, I didn’t face a lot of obstacles except where I was live.” She said that she
             was doing housekeeping and her boss allowed her to attend but other girls faced obstacles. Other
             girls who were doing housekeeping were facing challenges with completing household chores in
             the morning. Some had obligations at home and came late to school; they were late because of
             activities they had to complete in the morning.
       •     R3 says that she agrees with R1.
       •     R4 says that she did not face any challenges.
       •     R5 says that she did not face a lot of challenges but at home others are gone and she is the one to
             be at home. Sometimes she arrived at the bus too late and there was a queue so this made her very
             late for the program.
       •     R6 says that the challenge was where she lived. She moved to Nyamigogo. The program provides
             transport fees but it isn’t sufficient for her. Sometimes she would skip because she couldn’t
             purchase soap so she could not clean herself or her clothes before coming to school. Asked how
             much her daily transportation costs, she says that it is 700 Rwf in total per day.

(a): Asked how long it typically takes them to get to the center, R6 says that she walks to the bus and her
trip takes a total of 2 and a half hours in the morning. R1 says that she spends 5 hours total traveling to
the center. Asked to explain more, she says that she leaves the house at 5am to arrive at the center at 9am;
then she leaves the center at 12 and arrives home at 3pm. Other respondents say she is lying. R3 says that
it takes her 1 hour to get to the center.

(c): Asked if they moved during the program, R4 says that her whole household moved during the
program because one person she lives with was obliged to move for her work. This made it more difficult
for R4 to get to the center each day. R1 says that sometimes her baby is sick so she has to take the baby to
the hospital before school. Other times, she does not have enough money so she skips school to look for a
job so that she can take care of her family.


	                                                                                                          61	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Topic 2: Program Impacts

Asked about how the program impacted their lives, the participants respond as follows:
   • R6 says that the impact on her life is that she now knows how to make earrings, necklaces, and
       bracelets. Another impact is that she faces the challenge of not having enough materials.
   • R5 says that same thing as R6.
   • R4 says that she can now make jewelry and clothes, but faces the problem of not having enough
       materials. The other issue she now faces is that she does not have enough money to be a member
       of a cooperative.
   • R3 says that she can make jewelry and clothing now.
   • R2 says the same as R6.
   • R1 says that the impact is that she now has new friends and relations and, “in general, they work
       as if part of the same society.” She says that her knowledge has increased as compared with
       before. She is now sure that if she can get enough means she can be part of a cooperative and
       work for income; she is better off compared with others who didn’t have the training. She says
       that she now has value whereas before they were only seen as dropouts. Now they are seen as
       students.

(a): Asked about which part of the program had the biggest impact on their lives, all of the respondents
say that it was the trade training (rather than life skills training, entrepreneurship training, mentorship, or
something else). Asked why, R4 explains that the reason is that she is planning, when she has enough
financial means, to buy materials and use her hands to make products and sell them for income. This will
solve her problems.

(b): Asked how the way they spend their time has changed, the participants respond as follows:
     • R6 says that she now spends time revising what she studied at school.
     • R4 says that she now knows how to manage time, because before she had enough time and didn’t
        have a schedule but now she manages her time.
     • R1 says that she now does her household chores on the weekends.

Asked to clarify whether their IGAs have changed, all agree that they have. R2 explains that, before
starting the training, she worked as a housekeeper but because she started attending she stopped. After
this program, she will buy her own materials and earn income that way. Asked whether she continues to
do some housekeeping, she says that she is not doing it because she is busy with training but after the
training, she is planning on joining a cooperative. She continues to live in the house where she used to
work but her bosses were generous to let her come to training. She still takes care of the baby and washes
clothes, but she does not earn a salary.

R6 says that before coming to the training, she sold fish in the morning. Now she no longer sells fish. On
weekends, she has household chores and revision to do so she does not have time to sell fish. She says
that it is a challenge because she does not have an IGAs o she does not have enough money, but she hopes
she will earn more in the future.



	                                                                                                         62	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



R4 says that, before going to the center, she had part time jobs. Now, because of class, chores, and
revising, she cannot do them. Her jobs included washing clothes and working in a tea factory.

(c): Asked whether it will be easier for them to find work after training, respondents say that it will not be.
R6 says, “No, it will not be easy.” R4 says that they cannot all find a job. Asked to explain this, R6 says,
“Joy said that they first have to be a member of a cooperative and they don’t have the means. They need
to follow a process before they are allowed to start functioning.” R1 says that it will not be easy because
they are required to be part of a cooperative.

(d): Asked if they had even taken out loans before the AGI program, 3 respondents (R1, R3, and R4) say
that they had taken out a loan from a boutique. Two respondents (R4, R6) say that they had borrowed
money from a friend. Two respondents (R1, R6) say that they had borrowed money formally, from an
MFI, Sacco, or bank. Asked about whether they plan on taking out loans in the future, all said that they
planned to take out a loan from an MFI, bank, or Sacco. Asked why, R4 says that she will need funds to
put into practice what she has learned. R2 says that she agrees. R3 says that she has the same needs – to
start a cooperative and buy materials.

(e): Asked if their social lives or relationships had changed at all during their time in the program, R6 says
yes, because she lives with another person who is working and who provides for her sometimes, but
sometimes refuses because he is the only one to work. Sometimes she does not have enough to eat or
needs to borrow soap. R4 says that her social life changed because she used to be a housekeeper and was
prepared everyday but now nothing is organized and sometimes she is told that she is useless. R2 says
that she has the same issue. R5 says that her relationships changed because she used to be at home all of
the time but now people don’t find her and they ask where she is.
(f): Asked if their relationships with their mentors have changed, the participants respond as follows:
     • R1: She has no mentor. She lives with her husband, who she says could perhaps be considered
         her mentor.
     • R2: Until now, she had not mentor.
     • R3: Had no mentor before the program.
     • R4: Yes – her mentor is the person she lives with. Their relationship has not changed.
     • R5: Her mentor is her mother. Their relationship has changed. She used to help her mother during
         the day; now her mother asks her what she studied and asks her to apply is.
     • R6: She used to have a mentor but now she doesn’t because her mentor fired her. (Her mentor
         was the person for whom she worked as a housekeeper).

(g): Asked if they think other people’s opinions of them have changed, the participants respond as
follows:
    • R4 says that other people now see them going to school and do not think they are useless
        anymore. They are respected.
    • R1 says that that they are seen as hopeful.
    • R6 says that they are respected because they have much more knowledge.
    • R5 says that those giving them jobs value them; they know they are students.




	                                                                                                         63	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(h): Asked whether they got married during the program, the participants all say no. However, R1
explains that she legalized her marriage during the program. Asked whether the program influenced this
outcome, she says that the program had influence because her husband saw that she was confident and
could do an income-generating activity. Asked how she feels about this, she says that she feels happy
about it.

(i): Asked if their ability to support their children has changed as a result of their participation in the
program has changed, the participants respond as follows:
     • R6 says yes. Because she lives in town and her family lives in the country, she used to send them
        money. She cannot send it anymore.
     • R5 says that what changed is that she was previously working for money and could provide for
        her family but she is not anymore. R2 agrees – she used to provide for her mother but now her
        mother provides for herself.

(j): Asked whether their goals for the future have changed during the program, the participants respond as
follows:
      • R3: She is now planning to do a new IGA.
      • R2 explains that, for all of them, their lives will change after completing this training. It will not
         be the same as before. Everyone can work and do something after this program.
      • Asked whether R2’s comments are still true if they cannot afford to start a cooperative, R4 says
         that she will start a project of selling beans if she cannot start a cooperative. Asked if this is
         better than what she was doing before, she says that it is because she studied this project so she
         knows how to buy at a lower price and sell at a higher price. She will use her earnings to solve
         her problems.

(k): Asked whether their level of self-confidence has changed during the program, R1 says that she has
more self-confidence because, before she was a dropout and now she is a student. She knows that if she
uses her efforts to learn she will have a better future. R2 says that her self-confidence has changed
because she has more knowledge.

Skipped (l) because the respondents have already implicitly explained that they think the program’s
impacts will be lasting.

(m): Asked what they used the stipend for, all respondents say that they only used it for transport. It was
not enough, and it was frequently delayed. All except for R2 say that they would not have been able to
attend the program without the stipend. R2 explains that she could have attended the program without the
stipend because she sometimes walks. She comes by bus when she is tired. It would have been difficult
without the stipend but she still would have come.

(n): Asked what they plan to do with their savings, R1, R3, and R2 say that they will join a cooperative.
R6 says that she will purchase mutuelle [health insurance]. R4 says that she will start her beans business.
R2 says that the savings are not enough to begin a cooperative. R1 and R3 then explain that they will
supplement their savings with a loan.




	                                                                                                        64	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Topic 3: Trade Training

Asked to reflect on the quality and usefulness of the trade-specific trading, the participants respond as
follows:
    • R1: It was good and, if she has the opportunity to apply it, she will have a better future.
    • R2: For now, I no longer do housekeeping. I am planning to join a cooperative and work
        independently.
    • R3: I no longer do housekeeping. I will join a cooperative. The training was very useful.
    • R4 & R5: debating cooperatives. R4 says that she will never become a member. She will work
        alone because she comes from a different district. If she has enough means, she will go to work in
        her own district. She will work in the country-side and sell products she makes.
    • R5: In training, she learned that working in a team is good because in a team other may know
        something she doesn’t know and they can help you. R2 agrees that it is good because someone
        can teach you something you do not know.
    • R6 says that the training was useful because she can sell earrings and earn income.

(a): When asked if they are glad that they studied this trade, the participants respond as follows:
     • R2: "For some, because they cannot afford tickets to learn culinary, they chose this.” Asked why
       it is difficult to afford tickets for culinary, she says that it is far away. She says that she would
       have chosen culinary but now realizes that arts & crafts is also good.
     • R4: She says that she didn’t know the differences between the trades but now she likes it and
       knows the benefits.
     • R6: She chose it because it is the only trade for which she filled the criteria. She couldn’t do
       culinary because she didn’t know other languages.

(b): Asked what they would have studied if they could have studied a different trade that was not offered,
the participants respond as follows:
     • R1, R3, and R5 would have studied hair-braiding. Asked why, R1 explains that there is a good
         market for it. R2 would have studied food processing because fruit can be purchased cheaply in
         the countryside. She didn’t chose this because the training center was too far. R4 and R6 say that
         the would choose tailoring; R6 says that this is because it is very income-generating.

(c): Asked whether the trade-specific training met their expectations, the participants respond as follows:
     • R2 says that there was not enough training. If they had more means, they would continue with the
        trading. She would continue and choose another option. The problem with arts & crafts is that it
        is difficult to find customers.
     • R5 says that it was not enough training because she comes from far away but is told that they can
        only find customers here (in Kicukiro), so it is not income-generating for her.
     • R6 says that the trainers taught them very well and covered everything.
     • R1 says that they will learn the rest while practicing; they will continue to do it if they can find a
        job at the center.
     • R4 says that they probably will not find a job at the center, although the teacher said that they will
        get jobs if they train well.



	                                                                                                       65	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R1 says that she thinks it is unlikely that they will get jobs because there are many students and
           already a lot of employees there.

(d): Asked about the most useful module or lesson, R6 says that tie-dye was the most useful because
people are more likely to buy it. R2 agrees that customers buy these; it is popular. R1 says that necklaces
were a useful lesson.

Skipped follow-ups (e) through (i) because they had been implicitly answered and because of time
pressure.

(k): Asked if they think they will end up working in arts & crafts after the training is over, R1 says that
she will work so she can earn enough and choose a job with many customers. She will do other studies if
she earns enough. Asked to clarify whether this will include arts & crafts, she says she might do it before
if she has enough means she will look at another job. R5 says that she cannot apply all of what they’ve
learned but she will apply some. She will make clothes, but will not make necklaces. R6 says that she will
apply what she learned so that the knowledge will not be useless.

Topic 4: Life Skills Training

Asked to reflect on the quality and relevant of the life skills training, the participants respond as follows:
   • R6 is happy about it because she learned how to use money more effectively.
   • R5 is also happy because she learned how to use less money to make more income. She learned
       how to spend money effectively.
   • R4 says that she learned how to manage what she has and use it effectively. R3 agrees.
   • R2 says that she is happy with the training.
   • R1 says that she formed new relationships and learned how to have effective relationships and
       behave in society when she meets new people.

(a): Participants are presented with a list of modules covered in the life skills training: (1) Trust, Problem
Solving, Team Building, and Setting Personal Goals; (2) Self-Awareness, Self-Esteem, and Leadership;
(3) Family Skills; (4) Communication in the Workplace; (5) Managing Stress, Anger, and Conflict; (6)
Personal Hygiene, Nutrition, and Healthy Lifestyles; (7) Sexual and Reproductive Health; (8) Sex,
Gender, and Violence. Asked to reflect on which modules were most relevant to their life, the participants
respond as follows:

       •   R6: 8, 6, and 1
       •   R4: 2, 6, and 1
       •   R3: 2, 8, and 7
       •   R5: 1, 2, and 5
       •   R1: 1, 3, and 6
       •   R2: 1 and 5 (she could not choose a third)

Asked to explain these choices, the participants respond as follows:



	                                                                                                        66	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R6 chose module 1 because “a person has to trust herself” and 6 because “its useful in society to
           be hygienic” and 8 because “its useful to know about sex.”
       •   R5 chose 1 “because you cannot achieve with trust,” 2 “because you have to be self-aware and
           choose yourself what is useful,” and 5 “because you cannot work well if you are stressed.”
       •   R4chose 6 “because in normal life you have to be hygienic,” 2 because she needs to be more
           aware in life, and 1 because “others cannot trust you if you don’t trust yourself.”

(c): Participants explain that all of the topics/lessons were relevant to their lives.

(e): Participants say that everything they learned was new. R1 says that for her, some of it was not new.
Asked what parts were not new, she does not elaborate.

(f): Participants say that they will remember what they learned.

(g): Asked if the training met their expectations, all respondents say that it did. R4 says yes, but that “if
they had new training on this, they would be happy to receive it.” R4 says that the training was not very
long. Asked whether it was too short, R6 says that it was. R1 says that it was neither too long nor too
short.

Topic 5: Entrepreneurship Training

When asked about the quality and relevance of the entrepreneurship training, R6 says that she is happy
because she got new information. All other respondents agree.

(a): Asked which topics were most relevant to their lives, R6 explains that the entrepreneurship training
taught “how to be self-employed and provide customer care to gain something, how to communicate with
others, and how to advertise products.

(skipped (b) because of specific examples given above)

(c): Asked whether there were any topics or lessons or modules that were not relevant to their lives,
respondents say that all modules were relevant to their lives.

(skipped (d) because participants had indicated that everything they studied was relevant)

(e): The participants all agree that the material was new.

(f): Asked whether they will remember the things they learned in entrepreneurship training, R4 says that
they will because they will continue to work on it.

(g): Asked whether the entrepreneurship training met their expectations, R1 says that it did not meet her
expectations because they had such a short time to study it. “If they could add 1 week, it would be
useful.”




	                                                                                                       67	  
                                 World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Topic 6: Quality of Teachers

Asked about their opinion of the teachers they worked with, participants respond as follows:
   • R6: “For me, it was ok.”
   • R3: “Their knowledge was enough.”
   • R4: “I could understand what they were teaching with me.”
   • R2: “When I came here I had no knowledge, but I learned.”

(a): Asked about whether the life skills teachers were knowledgeable and communicated well, R5 says “It
was ok.” R6 agrees that it was “OK,” explaining that the teachers were visibly hygienic so it was clear
that they could teach hygiene.

(b): Asked to describe the most effective training approach, R6 and R1 both give examples of
participatory approaches. R6 talks about a lesson when the teacher used eggs to show them that they have
to be self-confident and not break the eggs. R1 describes another lesson that involved a wall, a rabbit, and
matches. The purpose of the lesson was to demonstrate that, when you can see that you are going the
wrong way, you can change your mind and come back.

(c): Asked whether they felt the teachers in the trade classes were knowledgeable, R6 says that they were
sufficiently knowledgeable. She didn’t know how to make things before, and the teachers communicated
very well.

(d): Respondents agree that their teachers encouraged them to ask questions in class.

(e): Asked whether they prefer male or female teachers, R1 says that both male and female teachers were
present, so it was ok. R5 and R6 say that they prefer male teachers. Asked to explain why, R6 says that it
is “easy to despise female teachers but not male teachers; male teachers are serious,” so this encourages
their efforts. R2 says that she likes both male and female teachers.

(f): Asked whether the teachers attended the class on a regular basis, the respondents agree that they did.

(g): Asked if their teachers were available for extra support when they needed it, R4 says that they were
available if you had a problem. R6 clarifies that the teachers were not available if you had problems
outside of school.

(h): Asked whether they would change anything about their relationship with their teachers, the
respondents agree that they would not change anything because they had good experiences with their
trainers.

Topic 7: Transition to Part II

Asked to reflect on how they feel about the transition from training to the future, R1 says that she feels
happy and confident about the future. Asked whether she knows what she will be doing in the second half
of the program, she says that she will start a cooperative with others and put into practice what she


	                                                                                                       68	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



learned. Asked whether she will have support from AGI in starting a cooperative, she says that there will
be no support from AGI. Asked whether they all have the same plans, respondents say that they do.

R2 says that she hopes that she can have the opportunity to be a part of a cooperative and have someone
who can advocate for them, advertise their products, and tender for them. Asked whether they have any
expectations for support from AGI in the next part of the program, the respondents say that they do not
have any expectations.

Topic 8: Program Management

Asked about whether they think the training center was well managed, the participants all say that there
are no problems. R1 says that the center is safe and good. R2 says that it is a good school and that people
sometimes come to visit. R4 says that their teachers also provide them with advice. R5 says that the
discuss any issues that come up. Asked what types of issues have come up, she says that one time there
were two people fighting for materials, so they sat and helped them work it out. R6 says that there are no
problems with the management of the training center and that they feel loved there.

(b): Asked whether classes started on time everyday, respondents say that they did.

(c): Asked whether the distribution of stipends worked correctly, the respondents say that there were
significant delays. R1 says that the delay was 2 months. She is the only respondent from Gacuriro; the
others (from Nyarugunga) say that the delay was 1 month.

(d): Asked whether childcare services were provided at the center, the respondents say that they were not
allowed to bring children to the center. Asked whether childcare services would have been useful had
they been provided, R1, R3, R4, and R6 all say that they would have been useful. Asked why, R1 says
that it would have been helpful because she could be sure that her baby is safe. R2 disagrees, explaining
that “here they study difficult things, so it would be difficult to take care of a baby if they bring one in.”
The other respondents say that R2 is only saying this because she does not have a child.

(e): Asked whether there are counseling services available at the centers, respondents ask for clarification.
When it is explained that counseling relates to mental health, R1 says that there are no counseling services
apart from the advice given during training.

(f): Asked if they feel the training center was girl-friendly, the respondents say that it was. R4 says that it
was comfortable. R6, however, points out that “they lied that when someone has periods they would
provide hygienic pads; they didn’t [provide them].”

(g): Asked whether there is a girls’ room at the VTC, the respondents say that there is not. There are only
toilets.

(h) Asked what they would change if they could change anything about the management of the training
centers, R2 says that she would not change anything. R4 says that she would provide girls’ rooms. R6
says that there is nothing else she would change besides that.



	                                                                                                         69	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Topic 9: Other Comments

Respondents express their gratitude for the AGI trainings. One respondent asks how the interviewers
intent to follow-up with them in 6 months, and we explain that we will call them.


SSI3: Participant at Gahaya Links

Interview conducted with respondent 6 (unique ID 20100) immediately following the focus group
discussion at Gahaya Links. Her name was randomly selected from the sub-group of 3 girls in the focus
group who said that they would be available to stay for about 45 minutes more.

Module 1

Asked if there is anything that she can add about her experience with the program, she says that there is
nothing she can add apart from saying that she learned how to make clothes and jewelry.

Module 2

Asked if it was difficult for her to attend the program on a regular basis, she says that her “challenges are
that they fired me where I was living and it took long for me to find another place.” Asked what she did
while she was looking for a new place, she says that she stay at a friend’s house. She was fired because
she was studying here and her bosses said that she no longer cared about her household chores.

Asked if she has any children, she says that she has a child who is 4 years old. This was not an obstacle
for her during the training because the child lives with her mother in the country-side. She has not been
pregnant during her time in this program. She has also not experience gender-based violence during her
time in this program.

Module 3

Asked about the overall impacts of this program on her life, she says that it is “in the middle.” She says
that there are “positive and negative impacts,” and that the negative impacts were unexpected. Asked to
describe the negative impacts she says “I couldn’t have food during the night and day – before, I didn’t
face this problem.” Asked if she thinks other students also faced this problem, she says that she thinks “a
lot” do. However, she says that she is still “kind of optimistic” about her future.

Asked whether her self-confidence or self-esteem have changed during her time in the program, she says
that the program increased her level of confidence. She dropped out of school in P6 so life was difficult
and she didn’t have any hope. “Now, I am confident and happy about life.” She says that she is hopeful
for income-generating activities to help her solve her problems and take care of her baby without
requiring money or begging for money outside.




	                                                                                                       70	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked whether she thinks the impact of the program will last, she says that she think they will because
she is learning practical things.

Asked whether she made any friends in the program, she says that she did. Asked whether this had a
positive impact on her life, she said that it did because “When I don’t have transport fees, I can borrow
from them.”

Asked whether the program had other impacts on her life she says no “other than that I learned new
information here.” Asked what she plans to do next, she says that she will produce clothes, dye fabric, and
make products that make her friends and customers happy.

Module 4

Asked about the usefulness of the trade training, she says that she had originally chosen culinary but it
was not possible because one of the criteria is that you have to be able to speak other languages and she
cannot. Asked why she wanted to study culinary, she says that she wanted to know how to cook well for
her relatives, child, and parents. Asked whether she thinks her training will have a positive economic
impact on her life, she says, “At the time I thought it was best because I didn’t know about arts and crafts
but this is also great.”

Module 5

In the life skills training, she says that modules 8, 6, and 1 were the most useful. Module 8 was about Sex,
Gender, and Violence. Asked why she thought it was useful, she explains “The reason is that it will be
useful to have education on sex and how you can behave with boys and girls. It is useful to know about
sex.” She also says that she learned how to apologize if she has done something wrong to others. Asked
whether she has applied anything she learned in the life skills training, she says that she has applied what
she learned about personal hygiene. Asked if she ahs visited any family planning services, she says that
he has not but she will do so when she is getting married.

Asked her opinion of the different training approaches, she says that she liked when there were studying
about trust with the eggs on spoons, and you had to travel distance to show that you could achieve better
things with confidence and trust.”

Module 6

Asked what she would change about her teachers, she says that she wouldn’t change anything. “There are
a lot of positive things. Teachers value and love us. They care for us so that we may also know to work in
the future. They encourage us to learn.”

Module 7

Asked about her worries for the next 6 months, she says that she is worried about having enough money
to start the cooperative and to cover transport from where she lives in Nyabogogo to where she works.



	                                                                                                      71	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



She says that she has been told she should work in Kicukiro. Asked how much she expects it to cost to
start the cooperative she says “it's a lot because we have thought about it and the minimum per girl is
50,000.” Asked what she might do instead, she says that she will continue to do housework or sell fish.


Site 3: Gacuriro VTC
FGD2: Participants at Gacuriro VTC

Interview conducted at Gacuriro VTC on 18 June.

At this center, we provided a list of 8 randomly selected trainees to a member of the program staff and
explained that we needed to interview 6 of these girls if they were present. He went to their classrooms
and identified the following 6 participants to be interviewed:

R#     Unique ID    VTC                 Age              Trade                          Phone #
1      50323        Gacuriro            22               Culinary                       0727497818
2      50227        Gacuriro            19               Culinary                       0722381752
3      50408        Gacuriro            19               Culinary                       0727351151
4      50368        Gacuriro            20               Culinary                       0727300967
5      50456        Gacuriro            22               Culinary                       0783444497
6      50297        Gacuriro            23               Culinary                       0725499781

Module 1

Asked about obstacles and challenges in attending the program each day, the participants respond as
follows:
    • R2: “It was difficult to come here because we could not afford transport, but now they are
        providing it.”
    • R3: (agrees with R2)
    • R4: “For me, it was difficult. Without transport fees, I could not attend.”
    • R5: “For me, it was not very difficult because it was a long time that I had gone without attending
        school. I am very happy about this opportunity so I couldn’t miss it due to transport.”
    • R6: “It looks difficult but I didn’t care because I wanted to study. Later, the government gave
        transport fees. Then it was very easy.”

(a) Asked how long it typically takes them to travel to the center and how much it costs, 3 respondents
    answered:
    • R5: 45 minutes, costs 200 Rwf on the bus each way
    • R3: It is not too far. It takes 30 minutes and costs 100 Rwf each way
    • R1: 1 hour, 300 Rwf each way

(b) Asked whether it was difficult to commit time every day to the training:



	                                                                                                    72	  
                                 World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R6 explains that she “normally had to carry out several HH choirs so respecting the school
           schedule was difficult but now she is used to the schedule. She arranged so that they might arrive
           on time.”
       •   R5 agrees that “first it was difficult because I was not used to the school timetable, but now she is
           used to it so she is able to arrive on time.”
       •   R4 says that “because I had forgotten school life, I was not thinking about again going to school
           so it was difficult to arrive on time. But, slowly, I have now gotten used to the schedule.” Asked
           how she was otherwise spending her time, she says that she was doing household activities.
       •   R2 says that she had the same experience – she was not used to the life of coming to school
           everyday, so coming on time was difficult but now she is used to it and arrives on time.

(c) Asked whether they moved to a new home during the program, R5 says that she moved because her
whole household moved. They sold their family home to get money so now she is living farther away
from where she was when the program started.

Module 2

Asked to reflect on how whether and how their involvement in the AGI program changed their lives,
participants respond as follows:
    • R6: “Before coming here, I couldn’t afford to go to school. So, comparing then to now, there are
        a lot of changes because now my knowledge as increased compared to before. I have new
        information that can help me achieve something and provide self-employment that can help with
        my development.”
    • R5: “For me, the change is that my knowledge has increased like in culinary arts. Now I have
        knowledge on how to prepare different plates. I learned 3 different ways of preparing foods like
        starts, main dishes, and desserts. Before that, I didn’t know that, even though I could eat it. Now I
        have new information on eating effectively.”
    • R4: “It was useful to come here because I gained a lot of things. Now I know how to prepare
        different plats. At home I live with a few people and now I have new friends and I am
        comfortable with them. School life makes me happy.”
    • R3: “Before having this opportunity, when I was thinking about my future, I was not hopeful. I
        had no confidence about a better future. But now, due to the confidence about information I got
        here, I think my future will be better.”
    • R2: “Coming to study makes me happy. I thought I would never go back to school. Now, I can
        make plates of food and I can create a cooperative. I am very happy.”
    • R1: “My involvement was very useful because before I was at home. I could look for a job and
        when they asked what I studied, I wouldn’t know what to reply. Now, I can go to a hotel to apply
        for a job and tell them I have studied culinary arts.”

(a) The respondents are asked to select which element of the program was most important for generating
change in their lives. They are given four choices: life skills training, entrepreneurship training, trade
training, or their relationships with mentors in the program. R1, R2, and R4 choose the life skills
training. R3, R5, and R6 choose the trade training. Asked why they made these choices, the respondents
answer as follows:


	                                                                                                          73	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



        •   R1: “The reasons it that, when studying [life skills], we studied about health. You cannot
            achieve something great if you are not health. Another reason is that, in culinary, health is
            very important because at work they will ask you for a certificate showing that you are
            healthy.”
        •   R4: “The reason [I chose life skills] is that they teach us how to live in society. This
            complements culinary because if you do not live in society you cannot practice. They taught
            games to learn and solve problems if you have problems.”
        •   R2: “The reason I chose culinary arts is that it was very useful because now I can go where
            there is a wedding and I can prepare cakes.”

(b) Asked how the way they spend their time has changed, respondents answer as follows:
    • R1: “Before coming to school, I would stay at home doing household activities. Now I arrive in
        the evenings and I can only wash dishes and sweep the floor so that in the morning I won’t be
        late. Before, I didn’t do any activities at night.”
    • R6: “Before coming to school, I couldn’t plan how to use time or organize activities. I didn’t have
        a schedule. Now because I am coming to school, after school I organize activities. Before coming
        to school, I fetch water. I organize myself so that I can wake up early to organize household
        activities and arrive at school on time.

Asked if their income-generating activities have changed in the past 6 months:
   • R1: “It changed. Because now I am not able, because of studying and carrying out chores. Before,
        I was selling tomatoes, but I have stopped.” Asked if she continues to sell them on the weekends,
        she says that she does.
   • R4 explains that she and her friends were preparing coffee and working on coffee plantations but,
        after coming here, she no longer does that because it is too far. Now she only studies. She dos not
        do work on the weekends.
   • R5 explains that, before coming here, she would do construction activities. Now she is not able to
        due to her studies; she only spends her time studying. She does not do work on the weekends.

(c) Asked if it will be easier for them to find work now that they have finished the training, all of the
respondents say that it will. R6 explains, “the reason why I am hopeful to have a better job than before
that will help me earn income is that my knowledge has increased.” She says that, once you have a
certificate saying you have completed your studies, it is easy to get a job. R2 explains, “The reason why
I’m hopeful to have a better job is because I have knowledge in culinary so I am looking for a job in
culinary. I know how to do it, so that’s why I am hopeful.

(d) Asked about the types of loans that they took out before the program began, R2, R4, and R6 say that
they took out loans from boutiques. R6 says that she also borrowed from a friend. None of the
respondents borrowed from a Sacco, a bank, or an MFI. Asked if they plan to ever take out a loan, the
respondents answer as follows:
    • R3: “If I complete my studies here, I am planning to look for a job. If I earn some amount of
       money, I am planning to start my own restaurant so at that time I will go to apply for a loan.”
    • R6: “After completing my studies, I will look for a job. After having a certain amount [of
       money], I will put it in an account. If it is enough, I will start my own canteen and I will look for


	                                                                                                      74	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



           information about the money it requires to start a canteen. I will apply for a loan to add to my
           savings and start a canteen so as to own my own business.”
       •   R5: “For me, after completing my studies because it is now difficult to apply and have a job, I am
           dreaming of being self-employed. I can apply for a bank loan to start a restaurant and be self-
           employed.”

(e) Asked whether their social lives and relationships have changed during their time in the program,
    • R1 says, “My social relationships have changed due to the life skills training because they taught
        us how to live with others, solve problems you have with a friends, and listen to others so as to
        solve their problems. That training helped me improve my relations.” Asked if she could specify
        which relationships it helped her with, she says, “Before, I didn’t like to be with a lot of people
        but now I am happy to be with people and have relationships.”
    • R6: “Life skills was very important and useful. I used to have very few relationships, living only
        with relatives and family members. But, after arriving here, I have met new students. Life skills
        helped us learn to be together, complement each other, provide advice to those who have
        problems, and live better in society.
    • R4: “Life skills was very important because before it was hard for me to forgive someone who
        did something, but they told us how to solve issues and be tolerant of others so as to improve
        relationships. Before, if someone made a mistake, it was hard for me to forgive and understand
        them, but now I understand their reasons and it is easy to forgive them.”

(f) Asked if they had mentors before the program began, none of the respondents say they did. Asked if
they have mentors now, R6, R1, and R2 all say that their family members are their mentors. {This seems
to represent a misunderstanding of the first question – it seems that their family members were also their
mentors before the program started.} Asked if there have been any changes in their relationships with
their brothers, participants answer as follows:
     • R6 says that her brother is her mentor. “After I started this program, there were positive changes
         in my relationship with my brother due to household chores like taking care of the baby,
         sweeping the floor.” He increased those activities so that she can revise; he is happy that she is
         studying.
     • R1 says that her mentors are her family relatives and the members of an organization called
         Never Again. She regularly meets with that organization for discussions. There has been no
         change in her relationship with them during her time in the program.
     • R2 says that her parents are her mentors. Her relationship with them has changed – before, she
         was only doing household chores and didn’t have time to revise. Now, they are happy to give her
         time to revise.

(g) Asked whether other people’s opinions of them have changed:
    • R3: “It has changed a lot. Before, people saw us as dropouts. They thought of us like useless
        people. Now, after coming to school, they trust us and see us as people who will be useful in the
        future.”
    • R5: “It has changed a lot because, before, when I was at home, people would have nicknames for
        me about me misbehaving or saying I don’t like to study. Now it has changed a lot – I am



	                                                                                                        75	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



           valuable because I study. People can see that our lives have changed – we don’t misbehave
           because we are students.”
       •   R6 says that there has been a positive change compared to how people were thinking about her
           before, as someone who didn’t have chances or opportunities in her life. They thought she would
           never study again because she couldn’t afford it. “Now, when they look at me they say that I have
           filled a gap and they now understand that my future is better and they consider that my level has
           increased. They see I can achieve something in society.”

(h) None of the participants got married during their time in the program.

(i) Asked if their ability to support their family has changed during their time in the program, respondents
say that it has not.

(j) Asked if their goals for the future have changed during their time in the program:
     • R6: “My future goals have changed a lot. Before coming here, I didn’t believe I could start my
        own business. Now, due to the knowledge we got, we are hopeful that our future will be better
        because knowledge has increased. Now we have a lot of opportunities to change.
     • R5: “My goals have changed. I was shy before and I couldn’t go to apply for a job. Now, because
        I will have knowledge and a certification, I am confident that I can achieve.”
     • R3: “No, my goals did not change. Because even before this opportunity, I was planning to study
        culinary and this was an opportunity, coming here. So I have stayed with my goal.”

(k) Asked whether their self-confidence has changed during their time in the program:
    • R2: “Yes, it has increased because before I didn’t have knowledge but after my involvement, my
        knowledge has increased. Now I am able to do a lot of things.
    • R4: “My self-confidence has increased a lot because before I didn’t believe I would have a job
        but after studying I am confident that I will have a better job and a better life.”

(m) Asked what they used the stipend for:
    • R3 says that the stipend sometimes came late (like after 1 month). She used most of it for
       transport fees and the rest to pay for sanitary pads.
    • R2 says that she used it to pay for body lotion and pads. She saved the 1000 Rwf to keep if she
       has an unexpected problem.
    • R2 says that she used the majority for transport and she also bought body lotion and pads.
    • R4 used it for transportation, lotion, and shoes.
    • R5 bought a rabbit in the countryside “because I am planning for self-employment.” The rabbit
       helps her to have an income.
    • R6 says that she uses it to solve problems. “Nowadays I have no income-generating activities, so
       when the stipend comes I solve problems like buying pads, lotion, shoes, and clothes.”

Asked whether they could have done the program without the stipend, R6 says, “For me, it wouldn’t be
possible because in my life, even though I live with my brother, I am an orphan. There is no one else to
help and my brother does not have enough capacity to solve all of my problems. I might have had to skip



	                                                                                                       76	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



a lot of classes. Maybe I could have come but I would have to study in bad conditions and skip class. The
stipend helped me to study in good conditions.”

(n) Asked what they plan to do with their savings:
    • R4 says that she started a cooperative. They have started having meetings. At those meetings,
        they contribute a certain amount so that it can start functioning.
    • R3 says that, like the others, the idea is to put the savings together and use it in a cooperative.
    • The other respondents all agree.

Module 3

Asked about the quality and usefulness of the trade training, the respondents answer as follows:
   • R1: “It helps us manage our lives. Before, you could go to a wedding and there were a lot of
       meats and you would only eat meats. Now we are aware that our body only needs 250g of meat
       so it helped us know what the body needs.”
   • R2: “It helped me because if I go to a hotel I would ask for anything; now I know the specific
       menu that I want.”
   • R3: “For me, the benefit is that culinary is a wonderful profession. If you complete studies in
       culinary, even without a job, based on the knowledge you have you can stay at home and use a
       room to cook something and sell it.”
   • R4: “It is a wonderful profession because you learn to prepare plates of food. We learned to
       prepare food in a sanitary manner.”
   • R5: “It is wonderful. Before coming here, I didn’t know how to cook. I can now prepare foods in
       3 manners – like for potatoes, I only knew 1 way but now I know several ways for rice, potatoes,
       and salad. I know how to be a baker. So I plan that after completing even with a small amount of
       money I can start.”
   • R6: “It is very wonderful. Because I know it's the base of life when you learn it will you find it
       helps you to have a good life. You can protect your body against sickness, strengthen your body,
       and have good health.”

(a) Asked if they are glad that they studied this trade, all respondents say that they are happy with their
    choice.

(b) Asked if the would have studied a different trade if they had had the choice, R3 says that she would
    not have because she was planning to study culinary anyway. R4 says that she would choose to study
    hair-dressing. R6 says that she would choose culinary.

(c) Asked if the trade-specific training met their expectations:

       •   R1 says that it did because “I didn’t know anything before coming here but now I know a lot, like
           how to prepare a cake and bake everything.”
       •   R2 says that she is also happy about it because she didn’t know how to cook before but now she
           does.



	                                                                                                       77	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(d) Asked what was the most useful thing that they learned, R3 and R6 both say that it was learning how
    to prepare a cake. Asked why, R3 explains that it is because cakes are needed at a variety of events,
    such as weddings and birthdays.

(f) Asked if there was anything that was not useful, the respondents all say that everything was useful.

(h) Asked if they think the course lasted for the right amount of time:

       •   R5: “The time is appropriate but 6 months is not enough because when I am studying I am
           interested. They could extend the 6 months because in culinary there are different parts such as
           working in a restaurant or your own kitchen, so they should provide enough time.
       •   R2: “For me, they could extend the period of studying but the [daily] classes took the appropriate
           time.”

(i) Asked if they would change anything about the course, the respondents say that they would not make
    any changes.

(k) Asked what other topics they would have liked to have learned about:

       •   R5: “They could add more about studying restaurants and preparing bedrooms.”
       •   R4: “They could add more about customer care service.”
       •   R3: “We only study more about culinary arts but could add French, English, and Swahili.”
       •   R1 agrees with R3 that they could add languages.

Module 4

Asked their opinion of the quality and relevance of the life skills training:
   • R1 says that it seemed like a game at first because they first taught games about rabbits and other
       games when people closed their eyes and others directed them. After that, though, she knew that
       it was all useful because she was learning about problem solving. She says that it was also useful
       to learn about helping each other.
   • R2: “For me, it was useful because I didn’t know how to speak in public but now I know. Also,
       they taught me how to live with others and be self-confident, about entrepreneurship. It was very
       useful.
   • R3: “For me, life skills training helped. For example, if you have a goal, you have to do all that is
       possible to achieve it even if it takes a lot of effort. I also learned about creating my own
       employment.”
   • R4 says that, at first it looked like a game but she learned her level of strength for different things.
       She learned how to face things in life that are stronger than she is.
   • R5: “As my colleague says, we learned a lot of useful things in life skills. We learned how to
       behave in general. We took and egg and it was compared to our own lives. The game with the egg
       was to break it or take it before it is broken to learn to protect your life. They also taught us how
       to be an entrepreneur and how an entrepreneur behaves. This is very important and complements
       what we learned in culinary.”


	                                                                                                         78	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R6 agrees that the training was useful. “As we learned it, we liked it more and got more
           interesting information.” She says that the teacher explained that the games represented their
           lives. She also says that she learned about being an entrepreneur, starting and expanding her own
           business.

(a) Asked to select the 3 modules that were most relevant to their lives, the respondents selected the
following:
    • R6: 1, 6, and 5
    • R5: 5, 8, and 1
    • R4: 5, 7, and 1
    • R3: 8, 1, and 4
    • R2: 1, 5, and 6
    • R1: 1, 8, and 3

Asked to explain the reasons behind these choices:
   • R6: “The reason why I chose 1 is because, based on what we studied in life skills, they said the
       first thing to be a good entrepreneur and reach goals it to trust yourself. Also, they taught us how
       to solve problems and work in teams. I chose 5 because when you are stressed you cannot achieve
       something. So they taught us how to manage stress so as to be healthy and fight against diseases
       that come as a result of stress.”
   • R1: “The reason why I chose 1 is because if you are to achieve your goals you have to have this
       trust to be helpful. I chose 3 (family skills) because you have to know what family members like
       and dislike in life – for example if they don’t like you to come home late, to have a good
       relationship you should come home on time. I chose 8 because I have to have knowledge about
       sex.” Asked for an example, she adds, “We learned about family planning like contraception,
       when you can get pregnant, and to know how to count your periods.”

(d) Asked if they learned anything in the training that was not relevant to their lives, the respondents all
    say no.

(e) Asked if most of the information was new to them or if they knew most of it before, R3 says that they
    knew some of it but most of it was new. The others agree with her.

(f) Asked if they can remember what they learned, R6 says that “the topics we learned cannot be
    forgotten because we need it in our usual life. It is very useful; we know how to behave in society.
    We won’t forget because we use it a lot. R3 agrees.
(g) Asked if the life skills training met their expectations, all of the respondents say that it did.

Module 5

Asked their opinion of the quality and usefulness of the entrepreneurship training, respondents answered
as follows:




	                                                                                                       79	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R1 says that she learned how to be tolerant [with customers] and passionate [about her work.
           “When a customer comes to you they may insult you but you cannot also insult them; you are
           passionate in giving them what they want because they are bringing in money.”
       •   R2 says that she learned to seek advice, to be passionate, and to live well with others.
       •   R3 says that she learned that “if you want to create your own business, first of all you have to
           consider the location and identify the needs of customers.”
       •   R4: “For me, I learned to identify if customers are enough for the business you want to create
           based on location, and how to have customer care skills and ensure that products will arrive
           safely.”
       •   R5 says that she learned that to seek opportunities to make money and to gain customers. She
           learned that you have to convince customers to pay and also have good customer care skills.
           Rather than an advertisement on the radio, you can attract customers with good customer care
           skills.
       •   R6 says that it was very useful. She learned about starting capital, about how to get information
           about a business before starting it, about how to identify customers around the location and how
           to know their characteristics/criteria, how to identify and know the products you need to offer,
           how to start a business and gain a reputation through friendships with customers, how to have
           good customer care skills, and how to expand the business.

Module 6

Asked about their opinion of the quality of teachers, the respondents answer as follows:
   • R6 says that the teachers are kind and there was no problem.
   • R5 says that the teacher is knowledgeable and has adequate skills.
   • R4 says “Our teacher is the best. She understands well what she teaches and she has taught in
       several institutions so she understands.”
   • R3 says that the teacher understands what she is teaching and “those who came to teach life skills
       taught us well.”
   • R2 says that the teachers have adequate skills and knowledge, and also provide advice for them.
   • R1 says that there are no problems with the teachers and that the teachers are passionate.

(h) Asked if they would change anything about their experience with the teachers, the respondents say
that they would not.

Module 7

Asked how they feel about the transition from training to the second half of the program, R5 explains,
“For us as a whole class, we will use the stipend. We have taken a certain amount and gathered it together
in a bank account. After completing studies we will set together and look for something we can do
collectively and then start it.” Asked if it will be related to culinary, she says that it will.

Asked if they will receive support or mentorship from AGI in this process, R6 explains, “We think that a
cooperative, after studying and after using that money in the account, we will use it for a certain goal. We
will sit and look at the required money for that goal and if it is not enough, we will ask WDA to fund it.”


	                                                                                                       80	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked if this cooperative was their own idea or the teacher’s, she says that it was their own idea and they
will use their own money. “Our teacher is helping us; we go to her and ask advice.”

Asked if they have any worries or concerns about the next part of the program, R1 says, “The worries that
I have are concern for us. For example, I think that we have gathered our money but we need other funds
and I am worried if we don’t have those funds.” The others agree that they have the same worry.

Module 8

Asked about the quality of management, delivery of stipends, and girl-friendliness of the centers, the
participants repond:
    • R4 says that there was a delay in the distribution of the stipends but the management apologized
        and excused themselves, and it was ok because the girls were passionate. She says that the girl
        room was useful because if she left home and then had her period at school she could go in there
        and use materials – it made things easier because she could then return to class.
    • R5 agrees with R4. She says that the girls’ room is useful because it has pads, soap, and body
        lotion, so it helps them solve problems without returning home. Asked about the stipend issue,
        she says that it is “always delayed” but that the management have explained it.
    • The others agree with R4 and R5.

Module 9

Asked if they have any other comments about their experience with the program, R5 suggests extending
the length of the training beyond 6 months so that they can learn more subjects. R1 says, “For me, about
the stipend – before coming here they promised it each Friday so when it took a month it was very
difficult because of transport fees. So if the stipend could arrive on time, that would be better.”

SSI4: School Manager at Gacuriro VTC

Interview with Gad NIYITEGEKA at Gacuriro VTC on 18 June.

Module 1

Asked about his responsibilities within the AGI program, he explains that he is usually the director of this
VTC, which includes not only the AGI program but also other training programs. In AGI, due to the
specific problems and challenges the girls are facing, his VTC put in place a specific teaching
methodology for the program. His VTC also makes additional efforts to accommodate the girls in the
program, which we goes on to describe in more detail.

“Apart from the teachers provided by the AGI project, we also hired a teacher. We hired a female teacher
because they have girl students, so she can take care of them. Also, they are far away from education. For
example, before AGI students could come with their child at school and the center would provide
childcare services so that the girls could study well. Those childcare services no longer exist, but the
center helps those with children to have a job so as to take care of their children. For example, there was a



	                                                                                                       81	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



student with a child who came to the center; the student could not afford milk for the child so they
provided a job for that child.” Asked to explain if this was in addition to AGI training, he explains that the
participant had classes until 12 and then the center provided a job for her after the training ended. “And
also, they have a girl room here. This is to ease the education of the girls because they are from poor
families – they do that so that it will be convenient for them to come to school.”

Asked why the childcare services were closed, he explains that it was difficult to have childcare services
because girls would bring babies and they had trouble finding people to take care of those babies. Asked
who decided to close the childcare, he explains that it is not closed forever but for now “the place exists
but it is only for the students who cannot find someone else to take care of their child.” Asked how many
of the AGI participants use the childcare services, he says that in cohort 2 there are no girls with children
below the age of 1 (if they are above 1, they stay with their families); in cohort 1, there were students who
used those services.

He goes on to explain that the program provides stipends for students. They also provide advisory
services for girls on how they can use those stipends. “For example, if the girls live near the school, we
advise her to walk in the morning to save that money. They use the money to solve their problems.”
Asked who provides those advisory services, he says that it is the female teacher who the center hired to
look after the girls.

(a)-(b) Asked which parts of the job (concerning the AGI project) have gone well and which parts have
been challenging, he says that the job was easy. “What we look at is to see if the materials that students
use are provided. So the materials are in three types: equipment, materials, and consumables.” He
explains that consumables are the things used in culinary arts like rice and meat; equipment are the things
that last, like machines; materials include things like knives and plates. “The majority of the students are
poor so, because they have that stipend, it is easy for them to come on time. For example, if I tell them to
come at 7:30, they come because they have the stipend.”

On challenges, he explains that the students come with difficult problems that are beyond the normal
education. For example, the VTC is used to working with students that do not have children. “Now, for
the girl students, if they have children it is difficult for them to manage.”

(c) Asked who he reports to when he encounters a challenge, he says that they have a channel of reporting
challenges. It starts with the teachers. Then there is a prefect in charge of education. In between, those,
there is the female teacher who knows the girls. So, what the three levels cannot solve, they report to the
school manager. He solves what he can and, what is impossible for him, he reports to the WDA (either
Winnie or Sam). Winnie and Sam also report those problems to the higher levels of WDA. MIGEPROF is
on the same level of WDA.

Asked if they faced any challenges with communication, he said no because they were using phones and
WDA visited the school frequently.

Module 2




	                                                                                                        82	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked if he noticed differences between cohort 1 and cohort 2, he explains that “There is a difference
because, before, you could find that the project was just starting – it was the first time. The students were
expecting to have a lot of facilities because it was the first time. They were expecting the project to rent
houses for them but because cohort 1 has completed their studies, they are like ambassadors – they talked
to other cohorts, showed them what is there, and explained it to them.”

(b) Asked if the training center received any additional support with the budget reallocation, he says that
some problems were solved. “Now, there are operating funds and before there were no operating funds.
Now, they have sent it. For example, before there were no computers and now they have provided a
computer and a printer. So that eases communication – now it is easy to send reports.

Module 3

Asked about trainee performance, he says, “Compared to the job market: For now there are students that
are part of a cooperative. They are producing juice and they say that all of the products – the juice – has
been sold. You find that if their products are popular on the market, it gives the management the trust that
what they are doing has quality.”

(a)-(b): Asked if the trainees are active and inquisitive in class, he says that they want to learn and are
interested. They make a big effort. “Because the students, before coming here, faced the problem of
affording school. They wanted to study but the problem was affordability, so they are very interested.”

(c) Asked if the trainees understand the content of the training, he explains that the trainees chose trades
in advance but it changes when they start. For example, a student might choose food-processing because
she thinks it is the easiest, but the management considers this because they know the differences (such as
the fact that there is math in food processing). So the management considers this for the students,
evaluates whether they have the right criteria, and chooses for the students; so, when the students arrive at
the VTC, their goals change. For this reason, the numbers of students varies from one trade to another.
(e) Asked about the characteristics of the girls who are most likely to benefit from the program, he says
that the first characteristic is for the student to like the trade that she chose. Secondly, the student must
have a goal or a dream. Thirdly, especially for female students, “the girls must learn to protect themselves
because when they come here the share the space with boys. There are boys, so they must know how to
protect themselves.” Asked to explain what he means by “protect themselves,” he says that they must
know because, at their place of work, there are a lot of obstacles that hinder them from studying very
well. For example, “if they complete their studies here, they can find a job in a factory. In a factory, there
are several people who are different so they must learn to say no at the appropriate time. The reason I am
saying that is because their lives can change due to a little thing – for example, if they get pregnant, their
life will become worse due to that. Because most of the girls are poor and do not have enough means to
take care of their baby.” Asked to explain further about the meaning of “protect themselves,” he says that
“Here at school with boys, there is no difficult issue, but they must learn it for their future. The most
difficult thing is outside because, outside, there are more attractions compared to the boys here. Because,
here, boys and girls do not have enough time because after classes they have games, and then clubs after
games. They have a lot of activities so they are kind of busy.”




	                                                                                                        83	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Module 4

(a) Asked if he thinks the center is girl-friendly, he says that he does. They have a lot of facilities,
workshop rooms, classes, different workshop rooms, and facilities. They have employees specifically
focusing on female students. Asked if he thinks the girls feel comfortable, he says that they do.

(g) Asked if he felt the performance of the trainees was similar across the class, he says that it varies a lot
because the girls’ levels of education vary. “For example, there are girls who have completed their
secondary school in the same class with girls who have completed only primary school so their levels are
very different. And also, that different in performance is more in theory compared to practice. In practice,
it is almost the same. Because, in practice, even those who are very weak can perform well in comparison
to those who were strong before. Because the theory is only 20% of the total marks, you can say that the
difference in performance is only in theory; the total marks are very similar.”

(f) Asked how he would suggest improving the recruitment criteria, he responds, “If there are enough
materials for the students, the recruitment criteria are not important; materials are important.”

(h) Asked his opinion of the life skills training and its impact, he says that “Normally, students don’t only
need to learn about their trade – for example, to learn only about culinary. That’s what I said before about
girls needing to know how to say no for protection. They need to learn this in life skills, so life skills is
very useful to them. For us, the management, we consider that not all of the girls will have a job after
completing their studies. Those who are planning to be entrepreneurs, they need to know the values of
entrepreneurs, so it is very useful for them to study entrepreneurship so they can also be entrepreneurs
outside – not only in what they have studied but also in other things. For example, there are some students
who are owning small businesses – so they can improve their businesses.” Asked to clarify if students in
cohort 2 already have small businesses, he says no – in cohort 1.

(b) Asked if there was an issue of drop-outs in this training center, he says that there are not usually drop-
outs from his training center, except for in the case of pregnancies. Asked whether this was also true for
his experience in AGI, he explains that some of the students moved during the training because their land
was appropriated. This was true for 2 or 3 girls. They moved to the countryside. There were no other
dropouts.

(c) Asked if there were challenges in bringing in cohort 3 during cohort 2, he says that there were
challenges because the students were not used to studying in the afternoon. However, they became
accustomed to this over time and it is no longer a challenge.

(d) Asked if his VTC hired additional staff when cohort 3 began, he says that they did not. He also
explains that “AGI teachers were not enough, so [this training center] used other teachers from the VTC
staff.” This was “not a major issue” since the teachers were already public employees, so they could work
on this project. It helped to have more teachers.

(e) Asked if there were any challenges in distributing stipends, he says no. Asked if they had trouble
distributing the stipends on time, he says that the only issue was when there was a problem in banks so it



	                                                                                                         84	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



would take 1 extra day for the transfer. This is because of the structure of the transfers from WDA to the
school and then to the students.

(g) Asked if the trades offered at his training center (culinary, food processing, and arts and crafts) are of
equal quality, he says that they are. Based on two parameters – first, whether it is possible to be
employed, and second, whether it requires high capital to start. He says that it is possible to be self-
employed in food processing and arts & crafts; in culinary, the hotels in Rwanda need employees. He
adds that these trades do not require high capital to start, especially compared with trades like being a
mechanic, which requires a large amount of capital.

Module 5

Asked what he would change about the AGI program, he explains, “For me, there are a lot of programs
that are meant to help students, such as internships. So the program could provide internships or specific
institutions where students can go for internships.” He explains that the program should provide an
assurance for students that they will be able to provide internships. He is currently doing this through his
VTC’s existing program.

In addition, he explains that, since they are teaching students to start cooperatives, they need to consider
that the materials the students need are expensive. He says the program needs to help provide materials,
with the schools supervising; this would be helpful for the students to have a better future. In addition, he
says that jobs are always changing and technology is always changing, so tf they could find a way to
improve the knowledge of those who have completed their studies, that will be helpful as well.

Finally, he says that the current contract is only 3 years long and suggests that it be extended because the
training centers have equipment and materials; only the consumerables and teachers’ wages are lacking.
There are a lot of students who need them.




Site 4: Nyarugunga VTC
SSI5: Former Trainee 1 at Nyarugunga VTC

Interview conducted with participant (unique ID 10920) on 18 June at the Nyarugunga VTC.

Module 1

Asked about the timing of when she left the program, the respondent says that she left after 2 weeks of
training. She did that training in Kicukiro and then here. Asked whether she attended all of the sessions,
she says that she skipped 1 class during those 2 weeks. Asked why, she claims that it was the first session
and she didn’t know that she was supposed to be there.

Module 2



	                                                                                                        85	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Asked about why she dropped out, she explained that it was due to poverty. She could not afford the
transport fees and the program did not provide enough. Asked how much it cost her to travel to and from
the program each day, she said that it cost 800 Rwf to go to and from Kicukiro and 600 Rwf to go to and
from the Nyarugunga center.

She was supposed to study arts & crafts. Asked whether she chose this trade, she says that the directors at
the center chose for them. For those students who had some experience with biology and chemistry, they
went to the culinary class.

Asked whether she told anyone about her difficulty affording the transport fees, she says that when the
manager called her, she explained that she stopped coming because she had lost her grandmother. She
also told him about the transport fees, but he did not reply. This conversation was with the Nyarugunga
school manager.

Module 3

Asked whether the program had any impact on her life, she says that it did not.

(a) Asked if she learned anything useful during her time in the program, she says that “They gave us an
example that we could carry something in a team. For example, they gave us wood and showed we could
push it as a team.” She also mentions that studying reproductive health was useful. Asked what she
learned about reproductive health, she says that the learned “how to know when you will have periods”
and “how to protect yourself from AIDS.”

(b) Asked if her employment status has changed in the past 6 months, she says that it has. Asked how, she
explains that, while she was studying, she did not have time to do income-generating activities. She is still
not doing any income-generating activities but, before going to training, she was cultivating vegetables.
She has not continued to do so because “Before, she had money to lease a piece of land but now she
cannot find that money.” Asked where she previously found the money, she says that she used to go to
her neighbors to weed their land and they would provide money. Now, those jobs are hard to find – they
are rare. Asked how she provides for herself now, she says that her mother provides for her when she has
money. She does not have any children. Asked how she currently spends her time, she says that she
cultivates with her parents during the season but now she does not do anything.

(f) Asked whether her self-confidence has changed at all in the past 6 months, she says that it has. Asked
how, she says that it has changed “because she no longer studies and she no longer discusses with her
friends with whom she studied. They used to provide advice for her.”

(e) Asked if her goals for the future have changed in the past 6 months, she says that they have not. Asked
why, she says that “Before, I had a goal of finding a way to have a better future. I still have the same
goal.” Asked if she has any ideas for ways to do this, she says “I will try to work for something that can
help me be developed and be something great. That is the only way to have a better future – by working.”




	                                                                                                       86	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(c) Asked whether her social life and relationships have changed over the past 6 months, she says that
they have not. She is trying to have better relations without having issues with her friends. Asked for an
example, she says that she listens to whoever comes to talk to her and whoever addresses her.

Module 4

Asked whether she has done any types of training since she dropped out of the program, she says that she
has not. Asked whether there is any training that she could do, she says that there is training she could do
in Masaka. She wants to complete her secondary education, but she lacks the financial means. Asked how
much it would cost, she explains that in S4 she was studying physics, chemistry, and math. She passed
her exams but she did not have the financial means to continue. Where she wants to go in Masaka, it
would cost her 10,000 Rwf per term.

Module 5

Asked whether there are any changes she would suggest to the program, she says that she would suggest
providing internships to students who have completed the whole program. She does not have suggestions
for improving the life skills training, the trade training, or the management. She would add hair-dressing
to the trade choices “because it is an opportunity to earn a lot of income.” Asked if there are any changes
that would have helped her stay in the program, she suggests “giving the stipend on time.” She studied for
2 weeks without receiving any stipend.

Module 6

Asked whether she has any additional comments or suggestions for the program, she says, “My
suggestion is that there are times you take a loan or debt to pay transport fees and they delay to pay the
stipend, yet those who lend to you want their money. SO I am suggesting to them that they give the
stipend on time.” She explains that she still owns money to someone who gave her a loan to cover
transport costs when she was still in the program. She adds, “Also, I have heard that students go without
signing for that stipend because it is too late for them to stay at school. They leave without signing and
then the manager says that they will not get the stipend.

Asked if she knows anything about whether girls at the training center had to purchase uniforms, she says
that while she was studying, the center requested that they buy uniforms. She was told to go to the tailor
to get a uniform for food processing. However, she was supposed to be in arts and crafts because culinary
and food processing were for those who had studied chemistry and biology. There was no uniform
requirement for arts and crafts.

Asked if she knows anything about the requirement of having a savings account, she says that you were
required to have a savings account to participate, and to open a savings account at the Sacco you had to
have 10,000 Rwf.

SSI6: Former Trainee 2 at Nyarugunga VTC




	                                                                                                      87	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Interview conducted with participant (unique ID 10919) on 18 June at the Nyarugunga VTC.

Module 1

Asked about the timing of when she left the program, she answers, “We had just begun the studies after 2
weeks of trainings. I was supposed to give money, but I didn’t. They asked us to buy uniforms. They said
that those who didn’t study chemistry would go to Gahaya instead. I couldn’t afford transport to Gahaya
so I dropped out. I am now living at home with my children. I am willing to study but the problem is that
I am poor.”

(a) Asked whether she attended all of the classes during those two weeks, she says that she attended
everyday. She didn’t skip any classes – she was interested. The problem was that she could not afford to
go to Gahaya. Asked if she told anyone about this issue, she says that she did not. Asked if others had the
same problems, she indicates that her friend outside the room (the other former trainee from Nyarugunga
who we interviewed) had the same issue.

Module 2

Asked about the cost of her transport to Gahaya, she says that it cost her 700 Rwf total for both ways.
Asked if she ever received any stipend for the classes she attended, she says that she did not. The other
students received stipends a week after she dropped out.

Module 3

Asked whether her participation in the program had any impact on her life, she explains that the two
weeks that she attended were useful.

(a) Asked whether she learned anything during those two weeks, she says that she learned about
protecting herself, using contraceptives, driving a car, sexual health, and personal hygiene. Asked if she
learned anything about entrepreneurship, she says that she did, and explains that she learned about arts &
carfts and how to make clothing. “During entrepreneurship week, we leraned how to make clothes out of
materials. We also learned the benefits of vocational trainings.”

(b) Asked if her employment status has changed over the past 6 months, she explains that it has not
changed. She has been making clothes out of materials, which is what she was doing before the training
as well.

Asked if she feels that the training would have improved her ability to get a good job, she says that it
would have “because they explained the benefit of doing arts and crafts to earn and sell income.” Asked
what she would have chosen between arts & crafts and culinary, she says that she chose arts & crafts at
the time.

Module 4




	                                                                                                     88	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked whether she has done any other type of training since dropping out of the program, she says that
she has not.

Module 5

Asked what she would change if she could change anything about the AGI program, she says that there is
nothing she would change since the program is aimed at developing young girls. Asked if she can think of
any changes that would have facilitated her participation, she says that “They would have provided new
information to her and they would have shared knowledge” (misunderstanding of the question). She adds
that she would “change the location of the arts & crafts so that everyone can access it for only 200 in
transport fees.”

(b) Asked if she would add or take away any trades, she says “They can add hair-dressing, because it is
also income-generating and it would be useful to learn it.” Asked if there is anywhere she can go to learn
it, she says that she could go to Kabuga but she lacks the financial capacity. It costs 15,000 Rwf per
month.

(a) Asked whether there is anything she would add to the life skills training, she says that there is not.

Module 6

Asked whether she has any additional comments or questions, she says, “They asked us for uniform fees
and I couldn’t afford those. And they say opening an account is 13,000 Rwf. They said everyone had to
get a uniform from a tailor.” Asked how much that costs, she says it costs 5000 Rwf. She explains that
they were supposed to open their account at the umurenge Sacco. Asked whether other people did so, she
says that she doesn’t know – maybe those who stayed did it. Also, she did two weeks of training at
Kicukiro so she took on debt to go there. Asked whether she borrowed money to do that, she says that she
borrowed from her husband. She requested debt from her husband and her husband was obliged to take
care of the children. “He is very willing for me to continue my studies but, at the end, there was a major
problem for him to find the transport fees.” She asks us whether she can get the money that she was owed
by the cashier for the days that she attended the program.

SSI7: School Manager at Nyarugunga VTC

Interview conducted with Martin Mukundabanin at the Nyarugunga VTC on 18 June, following the
interviews with trainees. This interview was not planned, but we decided to add it in order to clarify some
of the comments made by the former trainees.

Module 1

Asked about his main responsibilities in the program, Martin explains that he follows up with lessons and
training, and reporting any challenges found at the center. When there is a challenge, he sits with a
teacher and trainer to discuss it, and then follows up with local authorities to learn and know the
background of the trainees.



	                                                                                                           89	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




He also works to try to find community connections where girls can go for more training and experience.
He explains that this program is a gateway for the girls to get jobs. Working with cohort 1, he visited
cooperatives to check on them. They are doing business in Masaka. To assist them, he spoke with local
leaders and asked that they exempt the cooperatives from paying taxes to help them get started. The
official in charge of social affairs in Masaka agreed.

He also explains that they provide simple counseling at the center, acting as parents or guardians for the
girls. He saw how Janet was working closely with the girls at Gahaya and getting to know them
individually, so they have tried to adopt this approach for the girls at the VTC as well.

Module 4

(b) Asked how they handled the issue of dropouts, he explains that the number of dropouts was very high
for the first and second cohorts. The main reason for dropouts in the second cohort was that the local
leaders did not problem follow the selection criteria during recruitment. More than 20 girls dropped out
immediately at the beginning of the exam. They had sad for ordinary level examinations and then they
were successful so they decided to go to secondary school. They had signed up with then were on
vacation waiting for their marks to come in, so the issue was that the local leaders hadn’t followed the
selection criteria closely enough.

Another factor that caused dropouts is that some of the girls had been housemaids and their bosses made
them stop studying. For the most part, their bosses had agreed that they could start studying but then, if
they made an error at home, the punishment was for them to stop going to study. In one case, the training
center hired one of these girls to clean at the center itself so that she did not have to drop out. She moved
in with two girls from cohort 1 who had gotten their own house.

Asked how the training center is helping participants prepare for the next step, he says that the training
center is working with the girls to try to help them set up cooperatives. They are given 300 Rwf per day
for five and a half months if they participate in cooperatives. They are asked to come to the center once
per month. Asked about what kind of support the VTC staff give the girls in setting up cooperatives, he
says that the teachers helped identify the best people (among the girls) to maange the cooperatives. They
explained to the girls how the cooperatives would start with nothing and then grow. Each month, the girls
come to the training center with a report of how far their cooperative has come, and then pick up the 6000
Rwf per month that each girls has earned. The VTC staff have also suggested to the girls that their
cooperatives meet every Sunday and that they ask members to make contributions to increase their share.
One cooperative from cohort 1 has gotten itself a small house where it makes and sells panckaes.

Asked whether the other centers are doing similar things, he explains that the other centers have used each
class as a cooperative (as opposed to helping the girls set up smaller groups). Another difference is that, in
the more rural areas, the centers have engaged officials from the sector or other local leaders to help set
up the cooperative. Here, he says it is different because the girls move around a lot so they cannot work
through local leaders in the same way.




	                                                                                                        90	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked whether the girls are away of the support they will receive when they set up cooperatives, he says
that the girls in cohorts 2 and 3 have learned that if they leave the VTC and set up a cooperative, they will
have continued support.

Asked whether the girls have to purchase their own unifroms, he says that they need to wear a white top
and black or blue bottoms everyday. When they are doing practicals, they need to wear white coats, which
they purchase for 2500 to 3000 Rwf. The girls were given a month to find these uniforms.

Asked about the process girls have to follow to open a bank account, he explains that they are told to open
an account in the Sacco in their sector. 90% of the girls cannot afford the cost of opening their account, so
the AGI cashier helps them open their account on an installment plan. The first 3000 Rwf is deducted
from their stipend over the first month of the program. The remaining 8000 Rwf is deducted from the
savings they would have gotten at the end of the program. All of the cohort 1 members have accounts.

Asked about challenges with stipend distribution, he says that there were “no big challenges.” There was
one time when the money was delayed for two weeks; this happened in the middle of the training period.

Asked about the specific reasons for dropouts in cohort 2, he says that 3 girls dropped out because they
had to move. They had started the training and then their guardian or the person they were living with
moved, so they dropped out. Another 3 girls dropped out because they recently got jobs. Finally, another
3 girls dropped out because they got married. Other girls got pregnant and left the program completely.


Site 5: Shyorongi VTC


FGD3: Participants at Shyorongi VTC

R#     Unique ID    VTC                Age              Trade                          Phone #
1      15693        Shyorongi          20               Food processing                0789326105
2      15848        Shyorongi          18               Arts & crafts                  0789779985
3      15747        Shyorongi          18               Arts & crafts                  0787118895
4      15647        Shyorongi          20               Food processing                0728720776
5      15648        Shyorongi          19               Food processing                0728327722
6      15697        Shyorongi          17               Arts & crafts                  0786831410

Module 1

Asked whether it was challenging to attend the program on a regular basis:
   • R1: “It was not challenging to attend.”
   • R2 agrees.
   • R3: “It was not challenging because when you set a goal you have to achieve it.”
   • R4: “It was not challenging because I didn’t have anything that could hinder me from coming to
       school.”


	                                                                                                       91	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R5: “It was not challenging – it was my choice to come here and I was interested in coming.”
       •   R6: “It was not challenging because we live near the school and it was easy.”

(a) Asked how long it took to travel to the VTC and how much it cost:
    • R1: 15 minutes to arrive there. She comes on foot, and so do all of the other girls.
    • R2: An hour and a half walking each way
    • R3: 2 hours walking each way
    • R4: ‘’
    • R5: ‘’
    • R6: ‘’

(b) Asked if they had other obligations that made it difficult to commit time to training, all of the
    respondents say no. Asked if it was difficult to balance school with household chores, R4 explains, “It
    was sometimes difficult because I also have to do household chores. I tried to carry out my household
    chores in the morning before coming to school.”

(c) Asked whether they moved to a new home during their time in the program, all of the respondents say
no.

Module 2

Asked about whether and how the program impacted their lives:
   • R4: “For me, my life changed. I got some new information that I didn’t know.”
   • R3: “Also, for me, my life changed because I got new information that had a positive impact on
       my life. I also got a change to save money.”
   • R1: “My life also changed. I got new information and new relationships, new friends.”
   • R2: “I also got new relationships, got to know new people that I didn’t know.”
   • R5: “For me, my life changed because now I’m doing sports when I come here. Before this, I
       didn’t do sports.”
   • R6: “I got new information and new friends.”

(a) Asked which element of the program was responsible for generating change in their lives, R3 and R4
    chose life skills. R1 and R5 chose entrepreneurship training. R2 and R6 chose mentorship. None of
    the respondents choose trade training. Asked why:
     • R4: “I chose life skills because it helped me to live with my new friends and not be alone, to live
         well in the community.”
     • R3: “It is because I got knowledge on reproductive health and how to solve problems.”
     • R5: “It is because I got information on how you can start from a small amount of money and
         have an increased income and a better future.”
     • R1: “It is because I learned how to save.”
     • R6: “Because I respect teachers who teach a lot of things and provide advice that we follow.”
     • R2: “It is because they provide advice, especially advice on how to use money, how to use the
         stipend in an effective manner.”



	                                                                                                        92	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




(b) Asked how they way they spend their time changed:
    • R4: “For me, it’s changed. Because before I was only doing household activities but now I take
        the time to study. After school, I do household chores and revision.”
    • R3: “Now I have time to come to school. Before, I was only helping my mother with chores.”
    • R6: “Changed because before I was only helping my mother with household chores instead of
        coming to school.”
Asked if they were doing any income-generating activities before the program began, the respondents all
say no. Asked if they were helping their parents with cultivation, the respondents all say yes. Asked if it is
a problem that they have less time to help their parents with cultivation, all of the respondents say no.
Asked if they continue to cultivate on the weekends, they say yes. R2 and R3 clarify that, on the
weekends, they both cultivate and do household chores.

(c) Asked whether they feel they will have a better type of work now that they have completed the
    training:

       •   R4: “Yes – because now we got new knowledge that we will use in cooperatives. After this, we
           will form cooperatives where we will use our knowledge to earn more income.”
       •   R5: “I wanted to say that we will apply what we have studied here. You can partner with students
           in the same class and earn income.”

(d) Asked if they took out any loans before they started this program:
    • None of the respondents borrowed money from a boutique before beginning the training
    • R4 and R3 say that they had borrowed money from a friend before beginning this training
    • None of the respondents had borrowed money from a bank, Sacco, or MFI before the training
        began

Asked whether they plan to borrow money from a bank, Sacco, or MFI in the future, R4, R5, R1 and R3
say that they do. R1 says no and R2 says that she plans to open a bank account but not open money.
Asked why they plan to take loans:
    • R3: “So that I can start a business or a project.”
    • R4: “Because I will add it to my saved money and I can start to do an activity that will help me
        develop.”
    • R1: “Because I want to start a project and I will apply for a loan to fund it.”
    • R5: “I want to start an activity.”

(d) Asked if their social lives have changed at all since starting the program:
    • R3: “Yes, because before I was kind of shy and now I am no longer shy.” She says that she has
       new friendships with the other girls in her class.”
    • R4: “My relationships changed a lot because I no longer talk with the same people as before – I
       got new friends. I no longer have enough time to spend with my friends from before.” Her old
       friends were her neighbours; her new friends were her students.




	                                                                                                        93	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(f) (Asked whether their relationships with their mentors have at all, R6 says yes. “Before I used to ask
for my parents for money to buy lotion or clothes and now I no longer do.” She says her parents are her
mentors.

R1, R4, and R5 say that they had mentors before the program began. All of them say that their parents
were their mentors.

(g) Asked if other peoples opinions of them have changed from before the program:
    • R4: “It is possible that it has changed. Because the way we live has changed – for example now if
       I need something I can buy it myself instead of asking for money.”
    • R5: “Yes – before coming here I didn’t know how to sell something to earn money…now I know
       how to make something liquid from a solid input.”

(h) Asked whether they got married during their time in the program, none of the respondents say that
    they did.

(i) Asked whether their ability to support their children changed during their time in the program:

       •   R5: “It changed. Before now, I didn’t know how to save, how to not use something and save it for
           a greater use. Now I can advise my family on how to get something great.” Asked to share an
           example she says, “We use pineapples – I didn’t know that you could keep it for a long time.
           Now I know how to process it into a juice that lasts longer.”
       •   R4: “For me, it changed. Because my mentality changed as my knowledge has increased, I can
           provide useful activities. Now we are learning about entrepreneurship and how to save money.”

(j) Asked if their goals for the future changed:
       • R3: “It changed. Before, I had the goal of having livestock but I did not have enough means.
            Now I can do it.” Asked if this is still her goal, she says “I achieved it. I bought pigs.”
       • R1 says that she also bought livestock (a chicken). R2 bought a goat.
       • Asked if their goals changed, R4 says, “My goals also changed because I was planning to
            hhave livestock and also to increase what I earn.”

(k) Asked if their self-confidence has changed at all, R6 says “Yes – now I am hopeful that I can achieve
    something greater in the future.” Asked what, she says “For now I have started saving money and I
    will use that for something great.”

(l) Asked if they feel the changes in their lives will last, they all say that they will. R4 explains, “For me,
    it will last because I’m planning to apply my knowledge by being a member of a cooperative so I will
    apply it and continue to use it in a cooperative.”

(m) Asked how they used their stipend and whether they would have attended the program without it:
    • R6: saved it, did not use it; used some of it for buying clothes. She says that she would have
       attended the program even without the stipend.



	                                                                                                         94	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R5: Used it for basic needs and saved the rest of it. She would have attended the program without
           it because it interested her.
       •   R4: “For me, I used it for basic needs (clothing and body lotion) and saved the rest. I would have
           attended without it.”
       •   R3: used stipend for livestock, clothing, and body lotion. She would have attended the program
           without it because she wanted to increase her knowledge.
       •   R2: She bought livestock, lotion, and clothing. She would have attended without it.
       •   R1: bought livestock and clothing and saved the rest. She saved 5000. She would have attended
           without it.

(m) Asked what they plan on doing with their savings:
    • 4: “We will add on what we have saved. We will start a cooperative that produces what we have
       learned.” The other respondents all agree with her.

Module 3

Asked about the quality and usefulness of the trade training:
   • R6: It was wonderful “because it gives you an opportunity to apply it after.”
   • R5: “It was wonderful. I chose it because I liked it, because I was dreaming of applying it as a
       professional later in the future.”
   • R4: “It was very good because before I could give money to buy juice and now I can do it
       myself.”
   • R3: “I also think it was good because after completing my studies I will apply it and earn
       income.”
   • R2: “It was good because even If I don’t have the means of working in a cooperative I will work
       individually at home.” Asked if she is worried about whether she will have enough means to
       work in a cooperative, she says “Yes, because if we don’t agree on everything in a team then we
       will work individually.” Asked if they sometimes disagree in the cooperative, she says that they
       do.
   • R1: “What I chose is wonderful because before I would spend my money on buying a juice but
       now I make it myself.”

(a) Asked whether they are glad that they studied the particular trade they studied, they all say that they
are. R2 explains that she “chose arts and crafts because I like jewelry.”

(b) Asked what they would have studied if they could have studied a trade outside of what the AGI
    program offered, R3 says that she would have studied hair-dressing (“because I like it”) and R5 says
    that she would have studied food science “because I would complement food processing and add on
    top of the by studying food science.”

(c) Asked if the trade-specific training met their expectations, R4 says that it didn’t “because we study
    very few things and because the foods we studied in theory – like strawberries and applies – are not
    available in practice.”



	                                                                                                       95	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



        •    R2: “Yes, because what cohort 1 said that they learned is the same thing that we are
             learning.”

(d) Asked which module was the most useful, R3 says that the most useful in arts & crafts was tie-dye.
    R5 says that the most useful module in food processing was pineapple juice.

(f)Asked which was the least useful module or lesson, the respondents say that none of the modules were
not useful.

(g) Asked whether the course was the right amount of time, the respondents agree that it was.

(i) Asked what they would change if they could change anything about the course, R4 says “What I would
change is to provide more fruits that are used to produce juice – the ones that are available in practice.”
R6 says that they should add onto the styles that are taught in arts & crafts so that the trainees learn more
styles.

(j) Asked if they think they will end up doing the trade that they studied, R3 says yes, “but if there is an
opportunity to do other activities, we will also do them.” Asked what type of activities she is referring to,
she gives the example of cultivating vegetables. R5 says, “I am planning to do food processing after
completing my studies; for my other choice of work activities I could do something else.” Asked to
provide an example, she says that she could sell products made from food processing like a
businesswoman.

Module 4

Asked for their opinion of the quality and relevance of the life skills training:
       • R1: “We learned about personal hygiene.” She says that it was useful.
       • R2: “how to solve problems, and seek advice.”
       • R3: “It was very useful because they taught us how to solve problems and live better in the
            community, how to have good relationships.”
       • R5: “It was also very useful because I learned how to apologize, how to not become angry.”
       • R6: “It was also useful. When I have a problem or issue with my friends, I learned how to
            solve that issue.”

Asked which module were the most relevant to their lives, the participants respond as follows:
   • R3: 1, 6, and 7
   • R1: 1, 6, and 7
   • R2: 1, 6, and 7
   • R4: 1, 6, and 7
   • R5: 1, 2, and 7
   • R6: 1, 5, and 7

Asked why:



	                                                                                                       96	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R4: The reason why I chose 6 is because you cannot achieve something great if you are not
           healthy and hygienic.”
       •   R6: “I chose 1 because trust is very important. Trust is very important in life and also when you
           face a problem you have to know how to solve it. I chose 5 because you have to know how to
           manage stress and rest. If you work when you are stressed, you do not produce the bets outputs.”
       •   R3: “7 because we learned how to behave in day-to-day life. I learned how to handle unwanted
           pregnancies.
       •   R1: I chose 7 because I learned how to behave in life. Asked to be specific, she says that tshe
           learned how to prevent unwanted pregnancies, for example by using contraceptives when you are
           married.
       •   R3: I learned that “when you are not married, you don’t have to have sexual relations. If you do,
           you have to use condoms.”

(c) Asked whether there were topics or lessons that were not relevant, the respondents say no.

(e) Asked whether most of the information was new to them, R4 saw that they knew some things already
    but a lot was new. Asked what they knew already, she says that they knew the information about
    personal hygiene. The other respondents agree.

(f) Asked whether they can remember most of the things they learned, the respondents agree that they
    can.

(g) Asked whether the life skills training met their expectations, R4 says, “For me, it met my
    expectations. I learned what I wanted to know or what I was expecting to learn. I wanted to learn how
    to live in society, hygiene, trust, and self-confidence.” R5 agrees with her.




Module 5

Asked about their opinions of the quality and relevance of the entrepreneurship training:
   • R1 says, “For me, it was useful because I learned how to save.”
   • R2: “It was useful because I learned how to effectively make expenses so as not to waste money.”
   • R3: “I learned how I can be an entrepreneur. I learned how to apply for a loan if I don’t have
       capital so I can start from that loan.”
   • R4: “I learned that every amount of money is useful even if it is little because I can use it to earn
       more.”
   • R5: “I learned how to make expenses, how to only buy the basics needs and not use money for
       wants.”
   • R6: [I learned that] “if you have a little amount of money you can use it – it can help you to gain
       a lot of money.”

(d) Asked whether there were any topics or lessons that were not useful or relevant, the respondents say
    that there were not.


	                                                                                                       97	  
                                 World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(e) Asked whether most of the information was new to them, the respondents say it was.
(f) Asked whether they feel that they can remember most of the things they learned in entrepreneurship
    training, R4 says yes: “It will last and we will apply it so that we cannot forget it.”
(g) Asked whether the entrepreneurship training met their expectaitons, R4 says yes: “It met my
    expectations because it will help me development myself and my level.” R2 agrees: “Yes, because
    there was a lot of new information that I got there that I didn’t know.”

Module 6

Asked their opinion of the quality of the teachers they worked with:
   • R6: “My teacher is good, I don’t have any problem with her.” Asked if she has more than one
       teacher, she says that she has 2 teachers and they are both good.
   • R5 says that she is very happy. She has good relationships with her teachers. There aren't any
       issues, and her teachers provide advice to her.
   • R4 says that she has good relationships with her teachers – they teach her well and also provide
       advice when she is facing issues.
   • R3 says that she has good relationpships with her teachers.
   • R2 and R1 both say that there are “no problems.”

       (a) Asked if they feel their life skills teachers are knowledgeable, the respondents say that they are.
       (b) Asked about the most effective training approaches:
       • R4: “They were using examples and games to teach us.” She says that this was useful “because
           they were using a game to show how to solve problems.”

(c) Asked if they feel the teacher for their trade was knowledgeable and communicated well, they say yes.
(d) Asked if they feel that their teachers encouraged them to ask questions, they say yet.
(e) Asked if they prefer male or female teachers for life skills, R4 says that it isn’t an issue – anyone can
teach it. The other agree. Asked if they prefer male or female teachers for the trade training, R5 says that
anyone can teach it.

(f) Asked if their teachers attended the program on a daily basis, they say yes.

(g) Asked if their teachers were available for extra support when they needed it, R3 says yes. R5 aadds,
“For example, they were given a group assignment and if they didn't understand it they could go to the
teacher for a small explanation.”

Module 7

Asked how they feel about the transition from training courses to the second half of the program:
   • R1: “I don’t have any problem. I am well-prepared. I will practice what I learned with
       cooperatives [with others in my class].” Asked if she expects to receive any extra guidance and
       support or help from people in AGI, she says no. Asked if there is anyone in the group who is in a
       cooperative already, she says no.




	                                                                                                        98	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R2: “I am trying my best to make more efforts so as to be a part of a cooperative.” Asked if it is
           difficult to be a part of a cooperative, she says no. Asked why she feels she needs to make more
           efforts, she says that she needs financial means. She thinks the money in the savings will be
           enough and “even if I don’t have enough, I will sell livestock to have enough.”
       •   R3: “I am also planning to be a member of a cooperative. I am well-prepared because I am saving
           money.” Asked if she expects support from AGI, she says no. Asked if she expects to keep in
           contact with AGI, she says yes. “We will come to see them if we have any problems.” The other
           respondents all agree. Asked who they will come to see, R3 says that they will see their teachers.
           Asked if they have received any guidance yet, she says that “sometimes they teach us how to start
           a cooperative.” She says that she does not have any worries about starting a cooperative.
       •   R4: “I am ready to be a member of a cooperative and apply what I learned here.” She says the
           teachers have been helpful – they “told us how to save money and be able to start.”
       •   R5: “I am preparing myself so that I can work with other students.” She says that she does not
           have any worries about starting a cooperative. She will work in food processing and, if possible,
           look for other knowledge and apply it.
       •   R6: “I have not problem – I am ready to start a cooperative with others.”

Module 8

Asked whether they think the training center was well-managed, R6 says that it was. The other
respondents all agree.

(b) Asked whether their classes started on time, R4 says “sometimes there were obstacles like lack of
water and we went to fetch water before studying.” She says that this would take about 40 minutes.

(c) Asked whether the distribution of stipends worked correctly, R3 says that at one point the stipend was
delayed by 3 months. The others agree and explain that they were given 3 months’ work of stipend all at
once. Asked if this caused any problems, R4 says that it did – “it was difficult because I needed to buy
body lotion and other basic needs.” The respondents say that the distribution of stipends is working well
now.

(d)Asked whether there are childcare services available at the training center, the respondents say that
there are none. They are not allowed to bring children to the school. Asked whether it would be useful to
have childcare services, R4 says “Yes, because there are times that students skip class because they don’t
have someone to take care of their children at home.”

(e) Asked whether they were ever told about counseling services that might be available, the respondents
    say no.
(f) Asked whether they feel the training center was girl friendly, R5 says “The center is girl friendly
    because every service that a girl might need is provided here.” Asked for an example,e she says “You
    can come sick and then they don’t make it public but you go with your friends and discuss it in secret
    without making it public.” R4 adds, “What I can add is that it is very easy for girls to come because if
    you have your period at school there is a girls’ room here so you can clean yourself and go back to
    class.”



	                                                                                                       99	  
                             World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Module 9

Asked whether they have any additional comments, R4 asks for our phone number (and we provide it).
R5 asks whether we will still follow up with them even though they will no longer be studying in 6
months’ time. We explain that we will try to follow up with them anyway.


Site 6: Bushoki VTC

FGD4: Participants at Bushoki VTC

Interview conducted at the Bushoki VTC on 19 June 2014. Participants were randomly selected from
those present who had taken the baseline survey.

R#     Unique ID   VTC                Age              Trade                          Phone #
1      91688       Bushoki            22               Arts & Crafts                  0726166258
2      91686       Bushoki            19               Arts & Crafts                  0727545406
3      91631       Bushoki            19               Food Processing                0728722573
4      91640       Bushoki            22               Food Processing                0722252190
5      91637       Bushoki            21               Food Processing                0725711119
6      91678       Bushoki            17               Food Processing                0727380035

Module 1

Asked whether it was challenging to attend the program on a regular basis:
   • R1: “It was not very challenging because we were happy about the program.”
   • R2: “It was not challenging because they provided transport fees.” She walked to the program
       each day “and then I could use that money - for example, when I was hungry at school, I could
       use it to buy food.”
   • R3: “I live far from here and they provided transport fees for me to come.” She spent 150 Rwf
       each way, which got her halfway to the VTC and then she walked the rest of the way.
   • R4: “It was not challenging and I tried to arrive on time.” She says that she normally arrived on
       time.”
   • R5: “It was not challenging. We were very happy. Those who live very far had transport fees so it
       was not difficult.”
   • R6: “It was difficult on the first day but we are happy oabout the opportunity and interested in the
       lessons so we come on time.”

(a) Asked how long it takes them to get to the center and how much they spend on transportation:
    • R3 paid for transportation on a bicycle. It took 2 and half hours. Otherwise, she would walk for 3
        hours. She usually leaves her house at 5.
    • R1 spent 1 hour 30 minutes walking



	                                                                                                  100	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R2 spent 1 hour 30 minutes walking
       •   R4 spends 1 hour walking
       •   R5 spends 1 hour 30 minutes walking
       •   R6 spends 40 minutes walking

(b) Asked if it was difficult to commit time to training and balance it with other obligations:
    • R6: “No. We didn’t make time, we only wasted time on the first day because we didn’t know the
        location.”
    • R1: “No, it was not difficult.”
    • R6: “Because my family knows I am at school, they allow me to come to study and I postpone the
        household activities in the afternoon when I return home from school.”

(c) None of the respondents moved to a new home during the training.

Module 2

Asked whether their involvement in the AGI program changed their lives in any way, and how:

       •   R6: “For me, my involvement brought change. For example, before I didn’t know how to speak
           in public. Also, I used to see juices but didn’t know how it was made.”
       •   R5: The change is that I didn’t know how to work in teams, speak in teams, share my ideas in
           teams. Also, I now know how to produce jam and juice.” “
       •   R4: “I also know how to produce jam and juice.”
       •   R3: “I know how to make juice and jam – I can produce it myself without any help.”
       •   R2: “I didn’t know how to make earrings, necklaces, but now I Know how to produce those
           things. I now know how to work in cooperatives.
       •   R1: “Before, I was alone and didn’t have friends. Now I know how to be with others. I know how
           to produce bracelets, necklaces, earrings. I got a bank account.”

(a) Asked which part of the program was most responsible for generating change in their lives, 3
respondents choose the life skills training (R3, R4, and R1) and 3 respondents choose the trade training
(R2, R5, R6). Asked why:
    • R2: “The reason why is that we are working in cooperatives and I can borrow money in my
       cooperatives. That money helps me solve my problems. Also, training in arts and crafts helped
       me understand how to make earrings, bracelets, and other jewelry.”
    • R6: “I chose food processing – before, I would see juice and hear people saying that they
       produced it. I wanted to know how and now I know how. Before, I didn’t know what materials
       they were using. I thought they only used fruits but now I know they also add products and
       chemicals.”
    • R3: “I chose it because I learned how to behave in society, how to live with others, how to be a
       good listener. Like, if your neighbor says something, not to laugh but to listen.”

(b) Asked how the way they spend their time has changed:
    • “It has changed because they taught us how to manage time. Before we didn’t have something to
        do, activities to carry out. And even if they had activities they didn’t know how to plan or make
        schedules but now they do. After this training, we now organize ourselves.” She explains that she
        is more organized about how she spends her time outside of class.


	                                                                                                  101	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   “For me, before my involvement here I was spending my time at home. I had household chores,
           and then I would go to visit others even if it was not necessary. Now when I am at school, I start
           making necklaces and then when I am at home I continue.”

Asked if they had any IGAs before, all of the respondents say that they did not. Asked if they spent time
cultivating, R1 says that she would cultivate for her parents. All of the other respondents say that they did
the same. Asked whether it is a problem that she has less time to do this now, R6 says, “No, because
when we were only cultivating we didn’t have the means to buy body lotion or other basic needs. Now
that we started, we can use the stipend, so it is not a problem.”

(c) Asked if they think they will be able to have a better type of work, R4 says yes, “Because we will start
being members of cooperatives and will work in those.” R6 says, “ I hope that I will work individually
and I will go in a cooperative.” R1 says that she will be in a cooperative.

(d) Asked whether they took out loans before beginning the program, all of the respondents say that they
had borrowed money from a boutique. All of the respondents except for R5 say that they had borrowed
money from a friend. None of them had borrowed from a Sacco, MFI, or bank. R6 explains, “We didn’t
borrow because we didn’t have bank accounts.” Asked whether they plan to borrow from a Sacco, MFI,
or bank in the future, all of the respondents say that they do. Asked why:
    • R2: “I will borrow money in the Sacco to buy a cow and then pay slowly after buying that cow.
        That way, I will have milk to drink and sell the extra.”
    • R4 says that she is planning to work individually and in a cooperative so she will apply for a loan
        to add to her savings so that she has capital for a business.
    • R1 says that she will not apply for a loan because she will be in a cooperative – so she won’t
        apply unless it is a must to apply collectively with the cooperative.

(e) Asked whether their social lives or relationships have changed during their time in the program:
    • R6: “My relationships changed because we learned how to behave in society.” She says that, if
        someone makes a mistake, she learned to forgive them. If someone insults her, she forgives them
        and tells them that it is not good. Asked to give an example, she says, “Before, someone could
        insult me and I had the reflex of also insulting them. Now I no longer do it. I no longer reply and
        instead I provide advice that it is not good.
    • R2: “Before, someone could share his idea and I would laugh but now I listen before reacting. We
        all take time to listen and think about it.”

(g) Asked if they think that other people’s opinions of them have changed:
    • R6: “Before, I could ask for a loan and people refused due to their opinion of me. Now, if I ask
        for a loan from a seller in a boutique, they give it to me. People seek advice from me.”
    • R5: “yes, because before people didn’t seek advice from me but now they do.” Asked to provide
        an example, she says that people ask her information about the VTC, what foods they process,
        and how to produce juice.

(h) None of the participants got married during their time in the program.



	                                                                                                      102	  
                                 World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(i) Asked if they have children, R4 says she does. Asked if her ability to support them has changed, she
says “Yes – now I have some money. I can provide basic needs for my child.”

Asked if their abilities to support their families have changed, others respond:
   • R6: “Yes, it changed because before, at my home, we could lack soap but now I can buy it
        myself.”
   • R1: “Yes – before, my mom could provide food and lotion. It was hard for her to provide
        everything. Now I can be responsible to buy body lotion and al the family can use it.”

(j) Asked if their goals for the future have changed:

       •   R6: “Yes – I had the goal of buying a goat but I did not have enough means. Now I have bought a
           goat.
       •   R3: “Yes, my goals changed. Because before I had the goal of opening a bank account and now I
           have a bank account.” Asked if she had to pay to open her bank account, she says no. The school
           opened the account for her and used the money from her savings.

(k) Asked if their self-confidence changed during their time in the program:
    • R6: “It changed because I was not self-confident and couldn’t do things by myself and now I am
       very self-confident.”
    • R5: “My self-confidence changed. For example, when I was at home, I wanted to buy livestock
       but it was not possible. But now, after starting here, I have bought livestock.”

(l) Asked if they feels these impacts will last, R2 responds: “It will last because we have started giving
money in the cooperative and after completing studies we will start operating in cooperatives. We will
sell our products and earn income. We will still work.”

(l)    Asked whether they used their stipend to purchase livestock, all of the participants say that they did:
•      R1: 1 sheep and 4 rabbits
•      R2: 1 goat and 2 hens
•      R3: 1 goat
•      R4: 1 pig and 12 hens
•      R5: 3 rabbits and 1 sheep
•      R6: 1 goat

Asking what else they used their stipend for:
   • R1: “Before, I asked for everything. Now I provide body lotion and basic needs myself.”
   • R2 says that she bought hygienic pads instead of her parents.
   • R3 says that she used to ask for things from her parents but they took too long.
   • R4 says that she saved it in an account so that it will be easier for her to apply for a loan.
   • R5 says that she saves her money in a bank account and uses rent for basic needs like lotion
   • R6 saved the stipend and uses it to solve different problems.




	                                                                                                         103	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



All of the respondents say that they would have been able to attend the program without the stipend.

Module 3

Asked their opinion of the quality and usefulness of the trade training:
   • R6: “Studying food processing is very interesting. Now if you give me fruits, I can produce
       juices. I know how to produce juice and jam.”
   • R2: “It is useful because I can produce earrings and necklaces. Someone can give me an order
       and I can do it. They’ll pay me and I can earn income.” Asked if she chose to study arts and
       crafts, she says that she chose food processing but they she was assigned to arts and crafts. She is
       still happy with it anyway.
   • R3 says that the training has been useful because she now knows how to produce juice and jam.
   • R1 says that it is useful because she knows how to produce necklaces, earrings, and other things.
       She chose to study arts & crafts is “very happy” with this choice.
   • R4 says that studying food processing makes her happy because she can produce pineapple juice.
       She chose to study this.
   • R5 says that studying food processing makes her happy because she can take fruits and make
       juice. She chose to study this.

Asked if she thinks she would change trades if she had the choice, R6 says “I would remain in food
processing because I like it.” It was her first choice.

(b) Asked what trade they would choose if they could choose something outside of the choices currently
offered by AGI, R6 says that she would choose construction because she is interested in learning how
they do it.

(c) Asked if the trade-specific trading met expectations:
    • R3: “Yes, but I wish it would continue because there is still more information that I want to
        know.” She says she wants to know how to do bakery and make bread.”
    • R1: “Yes, because I was expecting to learn how to make necklaces from papers and now I know.”

(f/g) Asked which was the least useful module, the respondents say that everything they learned was
useful.

(h) Asked if the course lasted the right amount of time:
    • R1: “I had enough time to study.”
    • R2: “It was enough because there are some students who come from far and they still had enough
        time to travel home.”
    • After we clarify that this question was about whether they had enough weeks and months of
        studying, R2 says that it was not enough time because there is only a little bit of time remaining
        but still a lot of topics to cover. She says that it would be helpful if they added 2 months to the
        training. R4 and R6 agree.




	                                                                                                     104	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(j) Asked whether they think they will end up working in arts and crafts, R1, R6, and R4 say that they
think they will.

Module 4

Asked their opinion of the quality and relevance of the life skills training:
   • R1: “It was good because our knowledge increased a lot.”
   • R2: “Life skills training was good because I learned a lot of things. When we didn’t understand,
       we could ask a question and they would provide answers.”
   • R3 says that it was good because she learned new information
   • R4 says that it was good because she learned how to make decisions.
   • R5 says that it was good because it was very useful
   • R6 says that it was good because before the training, she would decide something without taking
       enough time to think about it.

(a) Asked which lessons were most relevant to their lives:
    • R6: 6, 2, and 3
    • R5: 1, 3, and 6
    • R4: 3, 6, and 7
    • R3: 1, 3, and 6
    • R2: 1, 6, and 7

Asked why:
   • R1 says that she chose reproductive health because it is very useful to learn that you can sex and
       get pregnant when you have your period – she didn’t know this before.
   • R6 chose 2 because she didn’t feel like a leader before but now she is confident that she can be a
       leader.

(c) Asked which topics or lessons were not relevant, the respondents say that all of them were relevant.

(e) Asked if most of the information was new, R6 says that some was new and some they already knew
but didn’t apply enough, such as the information on hygiene.

(f) Asked whether they will remember most of what they learned during the training, R6 says that she
cannot forget it because it was very useful and she has started to apply it.

(g) Asked if the life skills training met their expectations:
    • R2 says that it did “because they explained it to us well, like about reproductive health. They
        provided enough information and explained it well so that we could understand it.”
    • R5 says that it met her expectations
    • R6 says that it met her expectations as well. She was curious to learn about delivery and twins,
        which she learned about. She also now knows a lot of other information.




	                                                                                                    105	  
                                 World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R3 says that it did. It was very useful because before she was not a good listener. “I could be with
           someone who wanted to tell me something and I wouldn’t listen. Now I am a good listener.”

Module 5

Asked about the relevance of the entrepreneurship training:
   • R1: “It was useful because before I didn’t know how to manage money. I used to waste it.” Asked
       for an example she says that she used to buy body lotion for 1500 Rwf and now she considers
       everything and buys lotion for 800 Rwf so that she can use the rest of the money for important
       things.
   • R2: “Before, I used to think that I couldn’t sell things on the market and now I can produce
       something and go to sell it on the market.”
   • R3: “I used to think I could use all money for expenses: now I know to split it into 2 parts,
       savings and expenses.”
   • R4: “Before, I could waste my money. Now I know I have to mange it and only make expenses
       for basic needs.”
   • R5: “Before, I could earn and waste. Now I can sey, let me buy beans and I keep beans and save a
       higher                                                                                  amount.
       R6: “ I used to see people saving at a higher rate and thought it was complicated. Now I know I
       can do it.”

(c) Asked which topics or lessons were not relevant, the respondents say that all of them were relevant.

(e) Asked if most of the information was new, R6 says “It was new but we heard some of it before and we
didn’t know much about it.” The other respondents agree.

(f) The respondents say that they will remember what they learned.

(g) Asked if the entrepreneurship training met their expectations, R1 says that it did: “It met my
expectations and what I could not understand I asked questions about.”

Module 6

Asked their opinion of the quality and usefulness of the training provided
   • R6: “Teachers were helpful – we could ask questions and they provided answers.”
   • R2: “I agree with her because we felt comfortable with them. They showed us their support. We
       could ask things freely and comfortably.”
   • R4 agrees with R2.

(a) Asked if the life skills teachers were knowledgeable, R6 says that they were and that they provided a
lot of good information. The other respondents agree.

(b) Asked which were the most effective teaching approaches, R6 says that they enjoyed participating –
the teachers encouraged them to speak and they learned how to speak in public without fearing. “I can


	                                                                                                        106	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



now speak in public even in a meeting.” R3 agrees that it was great because she learned how to speak in
public.

(e) Asked if they prefer male or female teachers for life skills training, R6 says “We feel comfortable with
female teachers because you cannot ask a lot of questions to males regarding the reproductive system.”
R2 and R1 agree. Asked whether they prefer male or female teachers for the trade training, R6 and R4
both say that they don’t have a preference.

(f) Asked if their teachers attended the program on a regular basis, the respondents agree that they did.

(g) Asked if their teachers were available for extra support, all of the respondents say yes. R1 says “For
example, you can take materials home to work on the weekend. If you reach a time and odn’t know how
to proceed, you can call your teacher and ask how to proceed. Asked if their teachers ever gave them
personal advice, R4 and R6 say yes. R6 explains, “For example, I can suffer from a disease and then seek
advice from my teacher and my teacher can provide advice about what I am to do.”

Module 7

Asked how they feel about the transition from training courses to the second half of the program:
     • R5: “After completing my studies, I will start working in a cooperative. I can also work
        individual by selling beans.” The cooperative will work in food processing. She says that she
        does not have any worries about this; she feels ready. They have already set up the cooperative
        with the support of AGI. Asked about the process of setting up the cooperative, she says that each
        week the members give 500 and they have opened a bank account where this 500 Rwf per person
        is deposited. Asked if the cooperative will only do food processing, she says yes. Asked who
        from AGI is giving guidance, she says that it is the cashier.
     • R1 says that the process is the same in arts and crafts. She explains that they also have a
        cooperative where they save 500 per person per week. Their teachers and the cashier helped them
        set it up. They provided guidance and approved the approach to saving money each week, which
        had been the cashier’s idea. They will start working with the cooperative immediately after the
        formal training ends. She says that she does not have any worries because “we will work as a
        team.” Asked if there is anywhere where they can sell their products, she says that they have
        agreed on a place where they can sell them, but some members disagree. She says that she feels
        prepared.
     • R2 says that she feels prepared and she is not worried because she will be in a cooperative with
        fellow students. Asked if it is mandatory to be in a cooperative with other students, she says that
        it is not. “If you want to work individually, you can do it.” Asked if it possible to leave the
        cooperative she says that “maybe you have to sit with cooperative members and decide how to
        divide [the funds].” Asked if it was her choice to join the cooperative she says “It was not an
        obligation. They explained to us the benefits and we all decided to join.” Other respondents say
        that they had the same choice in food processing class.
(d) Asked if any of them have worries or concerns about the next part, R3 and R4 say that they do not. R6
says that she does not have worries because she contributes each week so “the saved money will help us
start.”



	                                                                                                      107	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




(e) Asked if they are prepared to leave the training, R6 says yes – “The teachers provide advice and
guidance on how we should operate.” She says they have already begun providing advice and they will
continue to do so, including helping them address obstacles should there be any.

Module 8

Asked if they feel the training center was managed well, all of the respondents say yes.

(a) The respondents say that there were no problems in the management of the training center.

(b) Classes started on time

(c) About the stipend, the respondents say that it was generally ok but sometimes there were long delays.
Asked if they faced any problems as a result of these delays, they say no.

(d) Asked if childcare services were provided, they say yes. They feel the services were useful, although
none of them had to use them. Asked whether the VTC should continue providing these services, R6 says
yes “because those who have children sometimes lack someone who can take care of them if they are
sick.” However, not a lot of the students use the childcare services.

(e) Asked if they were ever told about counseling services, R3 and R6 say yes. R6 says “They explained
things: for example, they explained how someone who has trauma can deal with trauma.” All of the
participants feel that it was a good thing that this service was provided. R6 adds, “Sometimes before,
people would have problems of mental illness and other people would leave them but now people don’t
leave them. They can provide hope for those people who have mental illness.”

(f) Asked whether the training center was girl-friendly, all of the respondents say that it was. R1 says that
it is girl-friendly “because when you have a problem, when you are sick, there is a place where you can
go to rest.” Asked whether they can think of any ways to make the training center more girl-friendly, R6
adds, “I think that what hey have done is enough because, as my fellow student said, when you are sick
there is a place you can go and then come back after when you feel good.”

(g) Asked if the center has a girls’ room, the respondents say that it does. There are pads, a sink, soap,
lotion, and a bathroom to wash. All of the girls have used it except for one of them, and they say that it
has made the training easier.

(h) Asked what they would change if they could change anythinga bout the management of the program
or training center, the respondents say that they would not change anything.

Module 9

Asked if they have any additional comments, R6 says that they should add tailoring to the existing trades
because it is also useful. R2 says that they should add hair-dressing because it has a lot of customers.



	                                                                                                      108	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




SSI8: Participant at Bushoki VTC

Module 1

Asked if there is anything else she can share about her experience in the program: “On my experience on
the first day, we came late and the teacher was already here. The other teacher welcomed us in – she was
very kind. We didn’t know the exact location as it was our first time here so we came all the way asking
for directions.”

Asked if she has a mentor in the program, she says her mentor is the food processing teacher. He taught
how to make sure and also provided advice on how to live in the community with other students. Asked if
she is generally comfortable with male teachers, she says yes.

(b) Asked if there is anything negative about her experience that she can share, she says no.

Module 2

(a) Asked if she had any obligations that made it difficult for her to attend the program, she said that she
didn’t have any specific responsibilities and her family was supportive of her studying.

(b) She has not been pregnant during her time in the program.

(c) She has not experienced gender-based violence during her time in the program.

Module 3

Asked about the impact of the program, she says that she learned how to behave well, count her periods,
and explain her ideas.

Asked about her role as a leader in the program (which she had mentioned during the focus group), she
says that she is the class monitor of food processing. She was chosen as someone who could provide
advice on life in general and explain things that others do not understand. Asked if some of the other girls
have trouble understanding things, she says “The reason is that you cannot understand everything so we
are complementary to each other.” She says that the level of teaching is appropriate – the students can
understand everything.

Asked about the types of challenges that the girls in the food-processing class faced, she said that some
had trouble going to speak directly to the director. Instead, they went to her and then she talked to the
director. For example,”Before they provided pads and students feared to use them,; so I provided advice
that they are free to use them, and brought them to the girls so that they could use them.”

Module 4



	                                                                                                     109	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Asked if she thinks the different trades were all equally useful, she says that she thinks so. “The girls are
happy with it because they based the trades on students’ choices.” She says that there were no criteria and
the girls ended up in the trades that they chose.

Asked what she knows about the agri-business class, she says that in agri-business, they learned how to
cultivate fruits (avocadoes) and vegetables (like tomatoes). She says that they have started contributing to
their cooperative and they are prepared. In all of the trades, they give 500 per week to the cooperative out
of the 2500 they get from their stipend each week. Asked if all of the girls are willing to start
cooperatives, she says yes.

Module 5

Asked which parts of the life skills training were most needed, she says that “solving problems in their
families was the most important thing; also personal hygiene.” Asked what types of family issues, she
said divorces, separations, families who argue over parcels of land.

Asked if she would add anything to the life skills training, she says no because they provided a lot of
information in the training.

Asked what she would want them to talk about if they added 1 week to the training, she says “I would
choose for them ot provide information again about working in cooperatives.” Asked if there is confusion
about that, she says “Some people didn’t understand it very well so it might be useful to provide those
trainings. Nothing was very complicated but the level of students to understand it is different.”

Asked if she every sought out any family planning resources or advice, she says no but she plans to do
when she gets married.

Module 6

Asked if she has heard about any negative experiences that girls may have had with teachers, she says no.

Asked if there is anything that she wanted to learn in food processing that they didn’t cover she says that
she wanted to also learn how to cook.

Module 7

Asked if she is confident that the cooperative will be successful, she says that she is because everyone is
committed. Asked if she thinks she will be a leader in the cooperative, she says that she thinks she will
still provide guidance and advice to those who bring issues or misbehave.

Asked what she likes about being a leader, she says “I like to see people listening to me, respecting me,
and giving value to what I’m saying.” Asked if she was ever a leader before coming to the program, she




	                                                                                                      110	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



says, “When we cam ehere in training, the explained to us not to be shy. I became a leader but I never was
one before.”

Asked if there have been any foreseen challenges in setting up the cooperatives, she says no.

Asked if there is a plan for when/how the cooperative will get advice from AGI, she says “we have
planned that we will look for a time to come here to school for advice, if possible once a week.”

Module                                                                                                      9

At the end of the interview, she asks why the project is only for girls. She thinks they should offer a
separate project for boys because boys “also want to have a greater future and be developed.” She feels
that boys face the same challenges as girls. They should learn construction and all of the same trades as
girls. Asked whether she has any other ideas to improve the program, she says no.

SSI9: Food Processing Trainer at Bushoki VTC

Module 1

Asked about his roles and responsibilities in the AGI program, he says that he trains students in food
processing. He teaches them how they process a variety of fruits and milk, and make it into something
else, because this trade is not usually done here. “It is not done here, and it can be done to make them
income.”

Asked if he has any mentoring responsibilities, he says that “being a mentor is also part of my
responsibility, so I provide advice. Especially since the students come from poor families and face a lot of
issues – I have to help them be ready for their life.” Asked if he can provide an example of how he has
advised students, he explains, “A lot of students are facing difficulties – when you start teaching you can
identify them because they do not follow. The teacher then needs to take them aside and help.” He says
that, like parents, the teacher can show students that they also face problems, and help them focus on their
future.

Asked if he has any role in helping the girls set up cooperatives, he says that there are other who help with
this – the Great Lakes Fronteirs mentors provide trainers.

(a/b) Asked which parts of his job have gone smoothly and which parts have been more challenging, he
says that the training in food processing has gone smoothly; “I studied it so I am qualified to teach it.”
Also, dealing with students with particular problems has worked out. “At the beginning, it was not easy.
There were issues with students who liked to be alone. They wer alone because they had a lot of
problems.” Asked how many students had this issue, he says that there were four in his class. Asked how
he handled this, he explains that he provided advice. He took those girls apart and listened to their
problem. He could see that this worked because thereafter the students changed. This issue existed at the
beginning only; now the girls are at the same level.




	                                                                                                      111	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked if there are any counseling services available at the training center, he says that he does not know.
“At the beginning, they provide trainings.” He says there were also trainings on counseling such as
trauma, but he does not know who provides those trainings.
(c) Asked who he reports to when he encounters a challenge in his job, he says that he reports to the
school manager. The school manager has been very helpful.

Module 2

Asked about the differences in implementing the program with cohort 1 and cohort 2, he explains that he
was not hired until the middle of cohort 2. He came to replace another trainer in the middle of cohort 2.
He does not know why the trainer from cohort 2 left.

Module 3

Asked about trainee performance, he says that the students did not have any problems. They understood
the subject matter he was teaching them.

(a) Asked how active the trainees are, he says that they are very active. “Food processing has two parts:
theory and practice, so in the practice part they are very active.”

(b) Asked whether the trainees ask a lot of questions, he says they do. “When they are in theory, they ask
a lot of questions because the material is new.” As a result, they understand it well when they go into
practical sessions.

(g) Asked whether there is variation in girls’ performance, he says that the girls are all on the same level
and it is a high level.

(e) Asked about the characteristics of trainees who benefit the most from the training, he says that most of
the students face problems and are poor, so they have high performance because they see this as a rare,
unexpected, and useful opportunity. Asked to clarify, he does not seem to understand the question.

Module 4

Asked if there were any challenges that arose in the management of the training center, he says that he
does not know about the management of the training center.

Asked if there were any challenges that arose in the management of the food processing class, he says
“There are students who faced a lot of problems and they did not drop out of school at the same level.
Some completed S3 and other started S4-S6. In food processing, there is a lot of science (biology,
chemistry, physics, and math), so it is difficult to take those students who drop out in different grades and
get them to the same level. Asked how he handles this, he says “First of all, I start from zero and give the
basics. Also, it is not captured on the timetable but he looks for time to recap to bring students on the
same level.”




	                                                                                                      112	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



He adds that another challenge is that they are using an English program. Since the girls come from
different grades, thye are on different levels. He tires to explain in Kinyarwanda but gradually they get
used to the English. It is difficult to explain scientific terms in Kinyarwanda.

Asked whether he feels they have adequate materials and equipment, he explains, “On their level, the
provided materials are enough.”

Asked whether their level of knowledge is high enough for the market, he says that, on their level, the
knowledge they get is enough for the market.

Asked if there is anything he would change about the curriculum or the way that the course is taught, he
says “On the curriculum, what is provided is good and useful but if you consider the job market there is
still a large gap to fill.” Asked what else would be useful for them to learn, he explains, “Here they teach
fruit and milk processing. If they could add more meat processing, bread processing or bakery, that would
fill the gap and help them on the job market.” Asked how much extra time it would take for the girls to
learn these trades, he says that it would take a full year – i.e. an extra 6 months on top of the current
training – to learn those things.

Asked whether there were any challenges related to trainees missing class or having outside obligations,
he said that there was a problem of sickness “but that is normal, that is not a big challenge.”

Asked whether he feels the trainees are prepared to run their own businesses, he says “It is possible.”
Asked what else the program could have provided to help them be more prepared, he says, “If you look at
knowledge, they have the required knowledge. The problem is about the materials, for example machines.
The girls come from poor families so they have very little money and some do not have means enough to
survive. Asking them to create a factory, even a small one, is beyond their means. If they can add on their
means so that they can afford the machines – even if it would be of low quality, they could start with
those machines of low quality.” Asked whether he thinks the cooperatives will be able to afford the low
quality machines, he says that it will depend on their level of commitment. If they are committed, it could
happen. Asked how much it costs to purchase the low quality machines, he says that it would requie
200,000-500,000 Rwf per cooperative.

Module 6

Asked if he has anything else to add, he says, “This program is very good. I’ve already said what can be
added if they can add on the program, it also means adding time. If they can add those machines or they
help – by helping them to have those machines, the loans will be adequate. It is feasible for them to pay
back that money, so it is the best way to provide those machines to provide some that they can pay back
by working. It also means providing guidance for the students who have completed, as well as materials.”


Site 7: Rushaki VTC




	                                                                                                     113	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



FGD5: Participants at Rushaki VTC

Interview conducted at Rushaki VTC on 20 June. Participants randomly selected from those in attendance
who had taken the baseline survey.



R#     Unique ID    VTC                Age              Trade                          Phone #
1      61463        Rushaki            19               Arts & crafts                  0731587627
2      61533        Rushaki            18               Agri-business                  078617652
3      61500        Rushaki            18               Agri-business                  0784478130
4      61499        Rushaki            20               Agri-business                  0731143334
5      61504        Rushaki            17               Arts & crafts                  None
6      61438        Rushaki            17               Agri-business                  0786099953

Question 1

Asked whether it was challenging to attend the program on a regular basis:
   • R1: “On the first day, it was difficult to come but after getting used to the program it was not
       difficult. Now there is no problem.” Asked why it was difficult, she says that it was because of
       household chore. She was looking for food for animals so it was difficult to come but no it is not
       a problem because she wakes up very early (at 4am) to do household chores and then she finishes
       them before coming to the VTC.
   • R2: “For me, it was challenging to come. It was difficult at first but then I realized it was also
       useful to study so I managed my time to be able to come.” She explains that she woke up early to
       do household activities so that she was ready by 8 to come. She did more household chores after
       class.
   • R3: “It was difficult to come here because it is far from my home.” She says that it takes an hour
       and a half to get here, but now she is used to it.
   • R4: “Also for me it was difficult during the first days.” She says that there are a lot of challenges
       because she is alone at home with a lot of livestock so she gets up early to get food for the
       livestock. She is done at 8. Now she is very organized in order to find time to come here.
   • R5: “When I came here it was very difficult. I thought it would not be possible because of the
       distance to my home.” She explains that it is a long distance from her home but now she is used
       to walking that distance.
   • R6: “For me, coming here was a problem because at home there are 3 children and I do a lot of
       household activities so it requires me to wake up very early.” She explains that she wakes up at
       4am to do household chores before coming to the center.

(a) All of the participants walk to the center each day. Asked how long it takes:
    • R1: 3 hours 30 minutes (round trip)
    • R2: 1 hour (round trip)
    • R3: 2 hours 30 minutes (each way)
    • R4: 2 hours (total)



	                                                                                                   114	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R5: 3 hours (total)
       •   R6: 1 hour 10 minutes (total)

(c) None of the respondents moved to a new home during their time in the program.

Question 2

Asked whether and how the AGI program changed their lives:
   • R1 says that it changed her life because before the program she could not speak in public. Due to
       her involvement in the program, she is now accustomed to speaking in public.
   • R5 says that what changed is that she can provide for herself – before, her mother used to buy her
       body lotion but now she buys her own.
   • R4: What changed is that before she needed money from her family to buy body lotion, clothing,
       and other things. Now she buys these things for herself.
   • R3 says that she was not used to living in a community before, and now she is. “I live well with
       my colleagues.”
   • R2 says that she didn’t like working in teams or living in a community with others. She didn’t
       play with others before, but now she does.
   • R1 says that before she needed to ask for money for clothing and body lotion but now even if her
       family doesn’t have money, she does. She also bought mutuelle, made new friends, and learned to
       work in teams.

(a) Asked which element of the program was most important in generating change:
    • R1 and R2 chose life skills
    • R4 and R5 chose entrepreneurship
    • R3 and R6 chose trade

Asked why:
   • R2: “The reason why I chose life skills is because before I didn’t live in a community with a lot
       of people. They trained us on how to live in a community and how to have better relationships in
       a community.”
   • R3: “Because in agribusiness, before I didn’t like agriculture but it changed me because now I
       like agriculture and I know how to live in a community.” She says that she used to stay home
       when others went to cultivate but now she likes it. Now she realizes it is important.
   • R4: “In entrepreneurship, I learned how to be an entrepreneur. We learned that we can use what
       we are studying to create our own business. I can cultivate potatoes for income generation and
       people would buy it. I know how to help those who seek me, how to use customer care skills and
       help them well. I know how to treat customers in order to develop and expand my business.”

(b) Asked whether the way that they spend their time has changed:
    • R4: “Before coming here, on Saturdays I didn’t have any activities to do. After coming here, on
        Saturday I go to help my parents.” She explains that this is because others advised her that she
        should start helping her parents more.



	                                                                                                 115	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R2: “For me, now only weekends changed but also when I leave here. Before, I could sleep up to
           7am but now I wake up at 5, carry out activities, and come to study. After leaving school at 1pm,
           I continue to do activities.”

Asked whether they were doing any income-generating activities before, only R2 says that she was. She
would do part-time construction jobs, for around 2 days. She has stopped doing this since she started the
program.

Asked whether they did household agriculture before starting the program, the respondents say that they
did. Asked whether they have continued, R4 says that she cultivates in the morning and the afternoon,
before and after class. R3 says that she cultivates only on the weekends because she is doing household
chores on the week days.

(c) Asked if it will be easier to find work now than before the training, all of the respondents say that it
will be. R4 explains, “I will apply what I have studied here and make my own business.” She says her
business will involve cultivating and selling potatoes. R1 says that before she didn’t know many things
but now she knows how to make necklaces. “Even though in the country-side we can’t find a huge
market, I will try to look for advocacy for a better place to find a large market.”

(d) Asked whether they had ever borrowed money before the program, all of the respondents say that they
had. None of them had borrowed from a boutique or from an MFI/Sacco/bank, but all of them had
borrowed from a friend. Now, they are all planning to borrow money in the future.
    • R5: “For example, if I need a lot of money I can apply for a loan in a Sacco.”
    • R1: “Sometimes you have little money and yet a lot of needs so you can apply for a loan in a
        Sacco.”
    • R2: “The reason why I will apply for a loan is that maybe I will start my own project like selling.
        If I don’t have enough money I will apply for a loan at a Sacco.”

(e) Asked whether their social lives or relationships have changed at all, R2 and R4 say yes. R2 explains,
“It is because someone could come to me and I wouldn’t listen. I didn’t value what they were saying.
Now, for example, when I find people with disagreements I go there to help them and provide advice.”
R4 says that at home, people would ask her to cultivate with them but she would refuse because she
didn’t want to. Now she has learned that it is useful to work in a team and that you earn more in a team
than you would on your own.

(f) Asked if their relationships with mentors have changed at all in the 6 months while they have been in
the program:
    • R4: “Before, for me, my parents were providing everything but now they say that II have changed
        a lot. I no longer require money from them.” For example, she says that her parent used to
        provide her mutuelle but now she provides it for herself.
    • Asked if they have a new mentor, R1 says: “Because I cam here, my teacher provides a lot of
        advice. For example, if I have a problem my teacher will help me solve it.” Asked for an
        example, she says, “Before, I was careless. I felt careless in everything and didn’t pay attention.
        My teacher helped me to pay attention to my studies.”


	                                                                                                     116	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R2 says that her mother is her mentor. Their relationship changed because she used to ask for
           everything from her mother and sometimes her mother got mad about that. She no longer needs to
           ask for everything, so that makes her mother happy.

(g) Asked whether other peoples’ opinions of them have changed since they joined the program:
    • R3 says yes “because we would pass without greeting people but now we are more disciplined so
        we greet people.”
    • R6 agrees.

(h) None of the participants got married during their time in the program.

(i) None of the respondents have children. All of them say that their ability to support their family has
changed during their time in the program.
    • R2: “It has changed cause before I didn’t know how to cultivate vegetables and other products nut
        now I know how to cultivate several things. I also know that vegetables are required to protect
        your body so they are useful.”
    • R3: “Before, we cultivated without fertilizer but after coming here we know how to use fertilizer
        and teach our family how to as well.”

(j) Asked whether their goals for the future have changed:
     • R2: “No – my goals didn’t change.” Asked what her goals are, she says that before this project
        she said that if they would chose her she would use whatever she learned to try to improve herself
        and become more developed. She has the same goal today.
     • R1 agrees.

(m) Asked what they use their stipend for:
    • R1: a goat, mutuelle, clothing
    • R2: soap, livestock, clothing, hens, other basic needs
    • R3: a goat, clothing, basic needs like body lotion and mutuelle
    • R4: a goat, mutuelle, clothing, hens, and body lotion
    • R5: a goat, a pig, clothing, shoes, other needs
    • R6: goats, hens, clothing, mutuelle

(k) Asked whether their self-confidence has changed during their time in the program, R6 says that it has.
“Before, I was not confident. I didn’t even believe I could have a mutuelle. But because I came here they
gave me money which I used to solve several things.” R1 says that she dreamed of having a goat but
didn’t have the means – now she does.

(l) Asked whether she thinks the changes will last, R2 says that it will last. “There will be other
interesting, great things to come. For example, a lot of great things will come because before I didn’t
know I could have money to buy livestock or solve issues myself. I am hopeful that other great things will
happen in my life.”




	                                                                                                   117	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(n) Asked what they plan to do with their savings, R4 says that she will start a cooperative – they will use
the savings to buy seeds to start cultivating. R1 agrees that they will start a cooperative. All of the
participants in the arts & crafts class will be in the cooperative together. The same is true for the
agriculture cooperative.

Question 3

Asked their opinion of the quality and usefulness of the trade-specific training:
   • R1: “In arts and crafts, there are a lot of things we didn’t know before but now we know them.
       We are expecting to know a lot of different things.”
   • R2: “We learned a lot of things in agribusiness as well. We didn’t know how to use fertilizer but
       now we do. We didn’t know how to cultivate a lot of things.”
   • R3: “In agriculture, what they taught us we will apply and also teach others.”
   • R4: “In agribusiness, I didn’t know how to produce different kinds of things. We were cultivating
       potatoes in bad ways – now we know how to increase production. We can teach others to increase
       their production – to use fertilizer in order to increase production and produce more things from
       very little.”
   • R5 says that she would see others wearing earrings but not know how they were made, and now
       she knows how to make them.
   • R6 says that she didn’t know how to cultivate vegetables but her teachers told her, and she will
       share this knowledge with her family members.

(a) Asked whether they chose this trade themselves, all of the respondents say that they did. They say that
they are happy – when asked whether they feel that they made the right choice, they say that they did.

(b) Asked what they would study if they could choose a different trade, R2 says that she would choose
culinary because she would like to know how to cook what she cultivates. She says that she would not
prefer this to agri-business, though, because she learned how to increase production in agri-business. R4
says that she would choose hair-dressing “because people often use hair-dressing services but here in the
countryside there is no place or salon. So if I knew how, I would be among the rare people to do it.”
(c) Asked whether the trade-sepcific training met their expectations, R5 says that it did “because I didn’t
know how to make earrings and different things but now I know.”

(d) Asked which was the most useful module or lesson, R1 says that it was tie-dye. R5 agrees. Asked
why, R1 says that in the countryside there is a market for tie-dye but not for earrings/jewelry. R5 agrees
that “a lot of women like to wear African fabrics so we can sell tie-dye here.” R2 says that the most useful
thing that they learned in the agri-business class was using fertilizers “because when you cultivate without
it, it takes time. When you use fertilizer, the time is less and you have more production.”

(f) Asked whether there were any modules that were not useful, the respondents say no.

(h) Asked whether the class was long enough, R1 says that it was not because there are still some things
that they don’t understand. “The time is very short, so we don’t understand well.” She gives the example
of learning how to make earrings with different materials. R6 says that the time spent on learning how to


	                                                                                                     118	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



cultivate vegetables is not enough. R3 agrees that the time is not enough – “we learned how to cultivate
potatoes but the time is short so we finished before harvest.” Asked how much more time they would
need, R4 says that they would need 1 month and R3 agrees.

(j) Asked whether they feel they will end up working in the trade they studied, R2 says yes. Asked what
types of materials they will need in order to do so, R2 says that they will need land, seed, fertilizer, a
machine for removing leaves, and other materials to use when cultivating. They will use their savings to
purchase these things. Asked whether the savings will be enough, she says that if it is not they will apply
for a loan.

R6 adds, “I will do arts and crafts and then continue with other activities including cultivating
vegetables.” Asked what materials she will need, she says that she will need fabrics to make earrings and
necklaces. She will use savings but that will not be enough so she will also take out a loan.

(k) Asked if there are other topics they would like to learn or to spend more time on, R1 says “We don’t
know very well how to make earrings using several fabrics.”

Question 4

Asked about the quality and usefulness of the life skills training:
   • R6: “For me, I got a lot of knowledge. For example, before I would have money and use it for
       bread and tea. Now they teach me how to manage money because I was wasting money. Now I
       know how to save it.”
   • R5: “I didn’t know how to live in the community – now I know. I didn’t know how to speak in
       public and now I do. Before, I liked to be alone because I had a problem, and now I know how to
       ignore that problem and laugh with others.”
   • R4: “ I know how to speak in public, share ideas, value others’ ideas, listen to others’ ideas, and
       when they have problems to help them solve those problems.”
   • R3: “I know how to save money so as to buy something very important. Due to the training, I can
       save money for better uses.”
   • R2: “What I learned that I didn’t know is how to save money. I know how to manage money. I
       also learned to value friends ideas – now I am a good listener and give time to understand others’
       ideas and speak in public. I also know a lot of other new information.”
   • R1: “Speaking in public was a problem for me. I wanted to share but I thought others wouldn’t
       respect or value me. I was afraid to speak. After training, this changed. I learned to respect and
       value my colleagues.”

(a) Asked which modules were the most relevant to their lives:
    • R3: 1, 6, and 3
    • R2: 2, 6, and 8
    • R1: 1, 2, and 6
    • R5: 1, 4, and 8
    • R6: 1, 2, and 6



	                                                                                                    119	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked to explain why:
   • R5: “I chose 1 because, first of all, you have to trust yourself.”
   • R4: “I chose 1 because you have to trust yourself. I chose 2 because you have to be aware. And 6
       because you have to be hygienic.”
   • R2: “I chose 8 because they teach us how to protect ourselves. And also in case we don’t abstain,
       how to use condoms or if you are married you can use contraceptives.” Asked to clarify this, she
       says that you do not have to be married to use contraceptives.

Question 5

Asked about the quality and relevant of entrepreneurship training:
   • R2 says that the training was good. The quality was sufficient and it helped them learn how to
       work and solve problems in teams.
   • R4: The training was good because they learned customer care, i.e. how to take care of customers
       so that they develop a good reputation and attract other customers.

(e) Asked whether most of the information was new, R4 explains that they knew some of it before but not
sufficiently – the training added on to what they already knew.
(g) Asked whether the training met their expectations, R4 says that it did because they learned a lot of
different things.

Question 6

Asked their opinion of the teaching:
   • R4: “For example, with Christine, who teaches about reproductive health, we felt we could ask
       questions. She explained things and she was kind – there was no problem.” Asked if they felt
       comfortable with male teachers, she said it was fine because the male teaches could also explain
       things. Asked if she had a preference, she said no. R2 agreed.
   • R6 says that the teachers were helpful. Asked if she would change anything about the teachers
       she said “They can improve on how they explain.” Asked if they agree, the other respondents in
       agri-business say they do.
   • R5: “The teachers who came to provide trainings could provide much more information than they
       did.” She clarifies that she is talking about the life skills training. She would have like to have
       heard more about how to work in cooperatives.

(g) Asked if the teachers were available for extra support, the respondents agree that they were available
to answer question within class hours but not necessarily otherwise.

(f) The teachers attended the program on a regular basis.

Question 7

Asked how they feel about the transition to the second half of the program:



	                                                                                                   120	  
                                World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



       •   R2: “After completing our studies, we will start working in cooperatives and start cultivating. If
           necessary, we will look for other activities while waiting for the harvest. After, we will sell
           products and earn income. I feel well-prepared.” Asked if she has any worries, she says no.
       •   R5: “For me, I am planning to work in a cooperative and do tie-dye and sell products.” Asked
           how she feels about this, she says “I am well-prepared and curious.” She says that she does not
           have any worries about it.
       •   R1: “I feel well-prepared because after completing our studies we will start working in
           cooperatives. If we don’t know how to do it, we will learn together in cooperatives so we will be
           able to start our own business. We will look for a market to sell our products.” She says that she
           does not have any worries and she is confident that they will be able to find a market.
       •   R3 says that she will work in a cooperative, apply what she learned, and teach others what she
           learnd. She feels well-prepared and is not worried.
       •   R4 says that she will start a cooperative and they will work together just as the previous cohort
           did. Those from the previous cohort are all in cooperatives. She says that she plans to do that too
           so that she can have a better future. Asked if she has any worries, she says that she doesn’t
           “because we see that the previous cohort didn’t face challenges.”
       •   R6 says that she will work with other students and cultivate. During the time they are waiting for
           the harvest, they will invest in other projects that can increase their income.”

(b) Asked if they have worked with a mentor or someone from the program to set up their work plan for
the next part of the program, the students say that they have. R2 says that the school manager has helped
them and R4 says that those in cohort 1 have helped them. The cohort 1 students looked for a parcel of
land for the cohort 2 students in agri-business and also looked for a market for the cohort 2 students in
arts & crafts.

Question 8

Asked whether they feel the training center was well managed:
   • R4: “What was well done, for example – for the stipend they distribute it and we can achieve
       great things using it because they told us to save.” She says that she set up a bank account.
   • R1: “It is well-managed because the school manager takes good care of us and when we have
       problems we report them to him and he helps us solve them.” Asked for an example, she says
       “We went to tell him that we want to be in a cooperative and there are some things we don’t
       know and he provides guidance.” Asked for an example of the guidance, she says, “We feel like
       we don’t have a market – we reported it to him and he looked for a market.”
   • R2: “It is well-managed. The school manager is directing us well. When we have problems, he
       solve them. For example, we told him that we wanted sports time because on Monday we can
       sometimes be tired, and it was done.”
   • R4: “This school is very well-managed. When you are sick or have periods at school, you would
       be embarrassed but now you can tell the cashier. He gives you hygienic pads, you wash yourself,
       and you are not embarrassed.”

(b) Classses started on time



	                                                                                                       121	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(c) Asked whether the stipend distribution went well, R4 says that it was sometimes delayed. R2 says that
it could be delayed a month and a half. In May and April, “they were saying that all accounts were closed
– they provided an explanation.” Asked whether this created any challenges for them, R1 says “people
didn’t have lotion but we could ask debt from friends who don’t study here and after the money arrived
we paid them back.”

(d) Childcare services were not provided. Asked if that would have been useful, R4 says that it would
“because when you have a child near you, you can go to see him and make sure he is safe.” R2 agrees,
because “among the students here there are some who have children.”

(e) Asked if they were ever told about counseling services, all of the respondents say that they were.
    • R2: “For example, when you have a problem or issues with family members, and then you come
        here and keep thinking about it, they told us you can go see the teacher and they will help you.”
        Asked which teachers they go to, she says they go to Christine and Ernestine. R4 and R2 agree.

(f) Asked if the training center is girl-friendly, they say that it is. R1 says that she can’t think of ways to
improve it, because they are comfortable.

(g) Asked whether there is a girls room, they say there is. Asked whether they use it, none of the
respondents say that they do. R1 says that their colleagues have gone there. R2 says that she hasn’t
because it wasn’t necessary for her – you go there when you don’t expect your period at school. Asked
whether they think it is useful, all of them say it isn’t.

(h) Asked whether they would change anything about the center, the respondents say that they would not.

Question 9

(no additional comments)


SSI10: School Manager at Rushaki VTC

Interview conducted at Rushaki VTC on 20 June.

Module 1

Asked about his role in the program, he explains that his responsibilities include the management and
direction of staff and personal, and the management of the things owned by the school.

(a) Asked about which parts of his job have gone smoothly, he says that working with staff has gone very
smoothly. There have been no problems in communication or partnering.

(b) Asked about which parts of his job have been the most challenging, he says that the implementation of
the program posed some challenges. At the beginning, the syllabi and programs arrived late, so they used



	                                                                                                        122	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



other documents that thee staff and trainers already had. Asked if there were any other challenges in
implementation, he says that there weren’t. Sometimes the stipend would come late. Asked how late it
arrived, he said it would be about a week late sometimes.

(c) Asked about the process he follows when he encounters a challenge, he says that they typically
restored at the center with other staff, What is beyond their control, they report to WDA and MIGEPROF.
Asked whether this system works well, he says that it does. WDA/MIGEPROF provide the centers with
money to cover transportation fees.

Module 2

Asked about the differences between his experience with cohorts 1 and 2, he says that, “When we started
with cohort 1, there were a lot of challenges but when we started with cohort 2 there were no problems."
Their experience with cohort 1 helped them avoid problems in cohort 2. Asked what types of problems
they had, he explained that there had been challenges in implementations but that they had resolved these
through meetings in Kigali that included all of the trainers.

(b) Asked about whether his training center received additional funding during the budget reallocation, he
explains that they received new materials including computers, a photocopier, and stationary materials.

Module 3

Asked about the overall performance of the trainees in cohort 2, he saysthat “they will have high results
compared to cohort 1 because with cohort 2 we have the materials we need.”

(a) Asked whether the trainees are active in class, he says that they are very active compared with cohort
1. Asked why they are more active, he explains hat the program improved over time with new programs
and materials, games, and clubs. Asked to elaborate on the clubs, he says that there is a cultural club, an
anti-AIDS club, and environmental protection club, and an anti-GBV club. Asked who started these clubs,
he says that some were started by the training center management and others were started because they
were required by partners. The girls are really happy about these clubs. Asked which is the most popular,
he says that the cultural club is the most popular. It involves traditional dance.

(b) Asked whether the trainees are inquisitive in class, he says that they are motivated to ask what they do
not understand well.

(g) Asked if the level of performance differs between the girls, he says that there is a difference but no a
wide difference. This difference is mainly because the girls dropped out in different grades. However, it is
not a wide difference, since the program is implemented in the local language.

(f) Asked how he would change the recruitment process he says, “It would be good if applicants were
required to complete 9 years of basic education, since their understanding level is a bit higher.




	                                                                                                     123	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(h) Asked about the impact of the life skills training program, he says, “The impact is that they can now
live well in the community, live well with each other, have good personal hygiene, and plan for their
futures.” Asked which training approaches worked the best, he says that the life skills teaching on
cooperative formation was good because “There is a problem that when you are alone you cannot have a
lot of ideas.”

Asked whether the program would help the girls in starting cooperatives, he explains that the program
provides materials and parcels and land.

Asked if the AGI program purchased these things, he says that “They save some amount of money for the
stipend and use it to purchase materials.” In addition, they provide support by bringing people from the
private sector to provide information. This includes some individuals and some existing cooperatives.

Asked whether girls in cohort 1 have helped girls in cohort 2 in starting their cooperatives, he says that
they have helped “Because they have acquired expertise, when there is a problem in cohort 2 they call
students in cohort 1 to explain it to the others.”

Asked whether the cooperatives from cohort 1 have been successful, he explains that the agriculture
cooperatives have been very successful but there are still challenges getting starting capital and materials
for the arts and crafts cooperatives. It is particularly challenging because the materials come from abroad.

Asked whether this issue is similar in other centers, he says that it is a common problem for students in
arts & crafts. Asked whether they have found any solution, he says that Gahaya has agreed to purchase
the materials and bring them to the centers. AGI provides the capital and Gahaya imports the materials.
Some of the materials will be used in classes and some will be given to the students to start cooperatives.
Asked whether they also do this for cohort 1, he clarifies that cohort 2 students are still in training so it is
the girls in cohort 1 who are waiting for materials (though they have received some materials from
Gahaya in Kigali).

Module 4

(a) Asked about the efforts they made to make the training center girl-friendly, he says, “We tried to make
the school like a family: the school manager like a family, the trainers like a mother, and the students like
children.” Asked what this meant in practice, he explains that “When students are problems, the training
center staff help them. It is like a family. They are there to support them. Those who are enjoying
themselves, the staff go to enjoy with them.”

Asked whether they faced any challenges in trying to make the center girl-friendly, he says that there
were no big challenges.

(b) Asked how they handled the issue of dropouts, he explains, “Sometimes we go to look for them and
find where they went. We try to work with the local authorities. They help us search for the girls and
bring them back. But the main challenge we have at this center is that we are located near the border,
meaning that some girls when they travel to other countries like Uganda, they move permanently or they



	                                                                                                         124	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



go to marry in Uganda.” Asked how many girls have moved to Uganda from the program, he says that 1
girl in cohort 2 moved. In cohort 1, about 8 girls moved but some got married locally and other abroad.

(c) Asked about challenges with starting cohort 3 while cohort 2 was in process, he says that there was a
lot of work and a problem of space. They tried to use some space from the sector office.

(d) Asked whether they hired additional teachers or staff to assist with additional students in cohort 3, he
says that they did not. Originally they had 2 trainers per trade per cohort, but then later with the parallel
cohorts they had 1 trainer per trade.

(e) Asked whether there were any challenges with taking attendance or distributing stipends, he says that
there was no problem.

(f) Asked whether there were any challenges related to trainees with babies and children, he says that
there were no challenges because the students come from far places so they leave their babes at home.
Only 3 students in the center have children; that is why they do not want to have childcare facilities there.

(g) Asked if some of the trades are better than others, he says that “each is independent.” He goes on to
explain that the problem is in arts & crafts, especially getting a market. The products need to be sold in
urban areas, which requires movement.

Module 5

Asked what he would change about the overall management of the AGI program, he says that he would
change the number of trainees selected and their study level. He would not select fewer but he would
increase the number of trainees because this program helps solve economic problems. Asked if the
program has sufficient capacity to accommodate more students, he says that they are building more
classrooms to accommodate more students.

Module 6

Asked if has any other comments on the program, he says that “Due to the benefits of the program, the
time should be increased because there are still other students outside who want this opportunity and
would benefit from it.”

SSI11: Participant at Rushaki VTC

Interview conducted at Rushaki VTC on 20 June with participant 61533.

Module 1

Asked whether she has anything else she would like to share about her experience in the program, she
says that she shared everything during the focus group discussion. Asked what her favorite thing about
the program was, she says “For me, my favorite part – and I am grateful for it – is that this project chose
all girls. Because we girls face a lot of problems like poverty or knowledge. But now I think it is fixed.”



	                                                                                                      125	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked whether she thinks boys face fewer problems, she says “Because a boy can go to work everywhere
and when necessary if they fire him, he can sleep in the road but a girl cannot sleep anywhere.”

Asked about her least favorite thing about the program, she says “nothing.”

Module 2

(a) Asked whether she lives with her family, she says yes. She takes care of them when necessary but not
as an obligation and it doesn’t always happen.

Asked if the program did a good job in selecting vulnerable girls, she says yes “because they help us a lot.
They provide stipends and girls use that money to buy durable things like livestock so if this program
ends the impacts will last.

(b) She is not pregnant.

(c) She has not experienced gender-based violence during her time in the program.

Module 3

Asked about the impact of the program on her life: “It changed my life compared to before. I didn’t have
financial means to buy what I needed before – if I had money, it would not enough. Now I have money so
I can solve problems in my life.” Asked if she will be ok after the stipend runs out, she says “I will have
no problem because I have saved. I will use the saved money and earn more.”

Module 4

Asked why she chose agri-business: “Because, even before I was cultivating but I wanted knowledge on
how to increase production. I can have a bigger harvest and that can help me.” Asked if there was
anything that she wanted to learn but didn’t, she says no.

Asked if she thinks it is better to study agri-business or arts & crafts, she says “The best option is to be in
agri-business because I have considered the fact that, if I go into arts, there is no market or customers.
Asked if she thinks the girls in the art & crafts class are happy, she says she thinks they are.

Module 5

(a) Asked which of the training approaches she prefers, she said “I liked the way that they teach how to be
hygienic during periods. They used explanations and gave information. If there wouldn’t something you
didn’t understand, they could provide answers.

(b) Asked whether she has applied any of the things she learned in the life skills training to her life, she
says that she learned about a lot about things to prevent pregnancy and that the best way to prevent
pregnancy is to not have sexual relations. She also learned about living in a community and about creating
her own businesses.

(c) She has not sought out family planning resources or advice but she says that she will use contraceptive
when she is married.

Module 6



	                                                                                                        126	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



(a) She says that she had a positive experience with the teachers – “our teachers are kind and provide
answers….If you are in need of something, they can provide what you need.”

Asked if there was anything negative about her relationship with teachers, she says no.

Module 7

Asked how she feels about the transition, she says “I am well prepared and don’t have any worries.”

Module 8

She says that she feels the training center is well managed and does not have any other comments.

SSI12: Former Trainee at Rushaki VTC

Module 1

Asked about the timing of when she left the program, she says that they were beginning to learn how to
make earrings. Asked about whether she had attended the life skills training, she says that she had – she
went to those classes and was taught by Christine. Asked about how long she had been in the program,
she says she attended 5 months of classes. Asked about how long she has been in her current training
program in tailoring, she says she has been doing it for two weeks.

Module 2

Asked about why she dropped out of the AGI program, she explains that her grandfather “told me to
study tailoring.” She is waiting for money from her grandfather, which he promised to give her if she
went to the tailoring training. Once he sends it, she will return to AGI. “He proposed I go to the tailor; my
mother said to respect him so that he sends money, but I am planning to go back to AGI after he sends
money.”

Asked why her grandfather wanted her to go to the tailor, she says that “He wanted me to study both – he
proposed I start so that I can complete both, so that if I don’t get a job in arts and crafts I can do
tailoring.”

Asked whether she is concerned about getting a job in arts and crafts, she explains that her grandfather
wants her to have both skillsets so that she can have a job in one area or the other – so that they will be
complementary. Asked whether she talked to anyone about learing, she says that she didn’t because she
didn’t expect to leave.

She explains that the school manager called her to the sector office to she why she left. Asked what she
said, she explains that “He came to the tailor on Wednesday. He was very angry and wanted to punish her
because she had a debt of a goat and didn’t pay it back. In May, they didn’t give them the stipend – they
obliged them to buy something instead.”




	                                                                                                      127	  
                              World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



She explains that she is part of a cooperative at AGI where everyone puts in money – she is supposed to
get money back in June. In May, it was turn her turn. She never got money out of the cooperative – she
was supposed to get it in June. Each month, the members all put in 1000 and one person gets 10,000. She
contributed 7 weeks so they owe her 7000 but her grandfather obliged her to study before they could get
that money. She was expected to get the 7000 and pay back 5000 that she owed for the goat; she had
borrowed this money in May or June.

Asked why the school manager was angry with her, she explains that she borrowed 5000 Rwf from a
friend in the cooperative. This friend reported the debt to the school manager so he came to her. He asked
her to come to the sector office on Thursday. They counted her due amount from stipends as 9500 so they
deducted her 5000 debt from this. They never gave her the other 4500 because it is not the time to pick up
stipends yet.

Asked whether everyone in AGI is part of this type of cooperative, she says that they all are except for
one person. Asked if they also get a regular stipend of 500 for each day they attended, she says that they
do get this stipend while they are studying.

Asked whether the tailor where she is training gives her a stipend, she says that they do not. Asked
whether she is working for free, she explains that “its like a school”; her grandfather will pay the school
fees but she is not paid. Her grandfather will send the money this week.

Asked whether her family was supportive of her participation in AGI, she explains that her mother is, but
her grandfather gave her the idea of starting to work as a tailor. Her mother advised her to respect him.

Asked how she feels about this decision, she says that she liked the AGI school because the tailoring is
very difficult. She misses AGI and she told her mother but her mother advised her to stay at the tailor
until her grandfather sends money.

Asked whether she is still friends with people in the AGI program, she says that she is. She still sees them
– after going from the tailor, she meets with them and asks them about where they are in their studies.

Module 3

Asked whether her participation in the AGI program had an impact on her life, she says that it did. “I got
new friends that I didn’t know before I went there. Now we are good friends. And also it is very useful – I
used the money to buy that goat.” Asked if the program had any other impacts on her life, she says that it
did not.

(f) Asked whether her participation in the program had any impact on her self-confidence, she says that it
did not. Her self-confidence remained the same but she explains that she is more hopeful now than she
was before she started the program and that her mentality changed. Asked why she is more hopeful, she
says that it is because “making the effort to learn arts and crafts could help her have a better future and
earn income.”




	                                                                                                     128	  
                               World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report



Asked whether they will join an arts & crafts cooperative with AGI, she says that she is planning to return
there after she is done at the tailor. She promised her friend that she would come back to AGI and pay her
back.

Asked whether she is concerned about losing some of the savings she would have otherwise earned by
attending AGI, she says that she “doesn’t hope to see that money.” Asked if she feels she will be able to
afford the cost of joining a cooperative she says, “If I go in that cooperative, they will open a bank
account and they will give her money.” Asked whether she thinks it might be a problem that she has less
savings than some of the other girls, she says “I am kind of worried – if they have a big amount that they
have saved, I will not be able to afford it.”

Asked whether the school manager punished her, she says “No, he didn’t punish me. He tore more shirt.
He never beat me, except pulling on my shirt.” Asked whether this scared her, she said “Yes, I was
actually scared to go to the office to see why he was calling me there.” Asked whether she told anyone
she says, “Yes, those in the tailor boutique saw it. The school manager said she would go to the sector
office with him but she refused and went the next day instead.” Asked whether she is afraid to go back to
the program, she says that she is “only afraid that others have studied a lot of things that I won’t be able to
recover and know.” Asked whether she would feel safe going back, she says yes.

Module 4

Asked whether she has been doing any income-generating activities since leaving the program, she says
that she has not. Asked whether she has done any household cultivation, she says that she cultivates on
weekends.

Module 5

(b) Asked whether she can suggest any changes to the AGI program, she says “I learned a lot of useful
things but if they could provide more information or lessons, it would be useful.” She says that hair-
dressing would be useful “because it promises a lot of income compared with other trades.” Culinary
would also becauseful “because in this neighborhood if you have a restaurant you can earn a lot of
money.”

(a) Asked if she would improve anything about life skills, she says that she learned in reproductive health
about how to protect yourself, to be prudent so that you do not get AIDS or become pregnant. She learned
about changing your own behavior. Asked if there was anything she would have wanted to learn, she
ways yes – “If they could provide more explanations because not all students understood the life skills
section. Some people skipped class, missed lessons, or didn’t understand.” Asked if she skipped any life
skills sessions, she says that she missed the reproductive health section because she was sick at the
hospital. Her friends were thereafter talking about things that she did not know.

(c) Asked if there are any changes that would have prevented her from dropping out of the program, she
says “she doesn’t mean that she didn’t want to study about arts and crafts, but if they could also add hair-
dressing and culinary.”



	                                                                                                        129	  
                             World Bank Adolescent Girl Initiative | Midline Report




Module 6

Asked if she has any additional comments, she says that “AGI is a good program. There were no
problems when I was there. But another issue is that I live from the school. It took 3 and a half hours to
get there and I had to arrive at 9.” Asked what time she left her house in the morning, she says that she
left at 5am.




	                                                                                                   130	  
