92831
                                                Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries




Table of Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms ........................................................................................................................... 2
Preface ............................................................................................................................................................. 3
Executive summary .......................................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................................... 6
A.         Asset classification systems ................................................................................................................. 7
B.         Defining non performing loans .......................................................................................................... 10
C.         Restructuring or loan forbearance..................................................................................................... 12
D.         Multiple loans to a single borrower ................................................................................................... 15
E.         Collateral valuation ............................................................................................................................ 16
F.         Write offs ........................................................................................................................................... 16
G.         Macro prudential aspects .................................................................................................................. 17
H.         Interactions between accounting rules and prudential regulations.................................................. 18
     1)    International Financial Reporting Standards ..................................................................................... 18
     2)    Provisioning........................................................................................................................................ 18
     3)    Accruing interest on non performing loans and reversing accrued interest ..................................... 23
Conclusions .................................................................................................................................................... 25
Annexes .......................................................................................................................................................... 27
Bibliography ................................................................................................................................................... 40




                                                                                                                                                            1
                   Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Abbreviations and Acronyms


      BCBS          Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
      EBA           European Banking Authority
      EL            Expected Loss
      ECA           Europe and Central Asia
      ECB           European Central Bank
      CRD           Capital Requirements Directive
      FSI           Financial Soundness Indicators
      IAS           International Accounting Standard
      IASB          International Accounting Standards Board
      IFRS          International Financial Reporting Standards
      IRB           Internal Rating-Based Approach
      IMF           International Monetary Fund
      LGD           Loss Given Default
      NPL           Non performing Loans
      PD            Probability of Default




                                                                                        2
                           Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Preface

Katia D’Hulster is a Senior Financial Sector Specialist at the World Bank Financial Sector
Advisory Center (FinSAC)

Valeria Salomao-Garcia is a Senior Financial Sector Specialist at the Finance and Markets
Practice of the World Bank.

Raquel Letelier is a Financial Analyst at the Finance and Markets Practice of the World
Bank.

The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of
the authors. They do not represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/World Bank and its affiliate organizations, or those of the Executive
Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The authors would like to thank Damir Odak, Deputy Governor of the Croatian National
Bank, Henri Fortin, Pascal Frèrejacque, Joaquin Gutierez, Fernando Montes-Negret (all
World Bank) and for their helpful comments and review.




                                                                                                3
                           Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Executive summary

This study attempts to shed light on the regulations and practices in the area of
identifying and provisioning for loans losses in 26 countries in EU countries and Emerging
Europe. Our analysis is based on the World Bank Survey 2011-2012. Banking supervision
responses were validated through a desk review of publicly available regulations.

This overview paper has three objectives. First, we analyze some important considerations
that make the comparison of NPL ratios and provisions across jurisdictions so challenging.
Second, we explain the interactions between provisioning frameworks based on prudential
regulations and accounting standards. Finally, we conclude by sharing some good practices
for NPL definitions useful for prudential supervisors who are considering aligning their
prudential frameworks more closely with IFRS. We also propose steps for further regional
work, knowledge sharing and harmonization.

In the area of NPL definition, we find that almost three quarters of the countries in the
region have some type of asset classification system in place covering all types of
borrowers, including sovereigns. Non performing exposures in the region are generally
defined by two criteria: 90 days past due or the unlikeness of the borrower to pay; and by
other criteria such as significant financial difficulty of the borrower, bankruptcy and
breach of contract. There is neither a unified definition of forbearance or restructuring,
nor a consensus when forborne exposures can be upgraded to the performing category and
what the specific conditions for this upgrade should be. About one third of the surveyed
jurisdictions allow an upgrade immediately after the forbearance and about half does not
require an assessment of the borrowers’ creditworthiness before upgrade. The European
Banking Authority has recently issued draft technical standards on loan forbearance which
could be used as a guideline for harmonization of some of the diverging practices across
the region. About three quarters of the supervisors in the region require that when a loan
is non performing, all other loans and credit exposures from the same borrower, or the
same economic group, are classified as higher risk, meaning that they apply a “single
borrower view”.

In about half of the countries surveyed, regulatory and accounting loan loss provisioning
standards coexist. With regard to regulatory provisioning, less than half of the countries
surveyed allow collateral to be taken into account in their regulatory provisioning. Of
those countries that consider collateral for provisioning purposes, the majority
differentiates between prime and non-prime collateral. In some countries, NPL ratios
include a high proportion of fully provisioned loans that remain on the balance sheet for
legal, judicial, tax or other reasons. These tend to inflate NPL ratios and the share of
provisions allocated to non performing loans; or what is commonly referred to as the
coverage ratio. The vast majority of supervisors do not have criteria at what point in time
these exposures should be written off.

As a general observation, regulatory provisioning frameworks are based on expected losses
(EL), are more forward looking and result in higher provisions than IFRS standards.
Divergence between accounting and prudential treatment also occurs in the recognition of
accrued and unpaid interest on non performing loans. A little less than half of the
supervisors in this analysis do not allow accrued and unpaid interest on non performing



                                                                                                4
                           Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


loans to be recorded in the income statement; the remaining explicitly allow it or their
regulations are non-specific.

Recently, some countries have come under pressure to do away with their traditional
regulatory provisioning and accrued interest adjustments and to rely exclusively on
accounting standards to determine provisions. In practice, the latter are often
implemented through the use of sophisticated risk management models that rely on
internally generated risk estimates and methodologies to calculate provisions. Substantial
supervisory resources should thus be allocated to analyze and benchmark banks’
methodologies and risk parameters before full transition to these accounting frameworks
can be made. It is also essential to maintain both accounting and regulatory systems in
parallel during this transition period.

There is scope for a deeper understanding, more regional cooperation and sharing of
knowledge on banks’ provisioning practices among supervisors in the region. This could
include data collection and benchmarking of internal risk estimates, sharing of reviews of
the provisioning methodologies and expected loss calculations applied by the banking
groups active in the region and efforts to further analyze and harmonize NPL definitions.
Home supervisors of major regional banks could also assist in this effort.




                                                                                                5
                                 Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Introduction

1.      Even though it is often stated that NPL ratios and provisions are not easily
comparable across jurisdictions, non performing loans and their provisions in the European
and Central Asian (ECA) region are frequently charted and analyzed across multiple
jurisdictions. As a result of the lack of harmonized regulations in this area, concerns
regarding the consistency of loan quality assessments are frequently raised, particularly
with respect to the distinction between performing and non performing exposures,
provisions for non performing exposures, as well as forbearance definitions.

2.      The objective of this study is threefold. First, we analyze some important
considerations that make the comparison of NPL ratios and provisions across jurisdictions
so difficult. Second, we explain the interactions between provisioning frameworks based
on prudential regulations and accounting standards. Finally, we conclude by sharing some
good practices for NPL definitions useful for prudential supervisors who are considering
aligning their prudential frameworks more closely with IFRS. We also propose steps for
further regional work, knowledge sharing and harmonization.

3.      With regard to NPL ratios, the IMF Financial Soundness Indicators (FSI) Compilation
Guide provides broad guidance for the identification of non performing loans by stating
that exposures are non performing if they are 90 days past due. 1 Implementing this
seemingly simple definition comes with a common set of policy choices; such as the exact
triggers for the classification as a non performing loan, the treatment of sovereign
exposures, the handling of forbearance or restructuring, customer versus product view,
the treatment of collateral, the timing of write offs and some macro-prudential aspects.
While the above criteria are important, they are not the only policy choices to be made.
They were selected for analysis in this paper because first; they are relatively simple to
compare across jurisdictions and, second; a variety of practices has emerged. Other
elements, for example the measurement of the non performing exposure – gross or net of
provisions, collateral or the performing part - are not analyzed in detail in this paper.

4.     When it comes to setting provisions, there are complex interactions between, on
the one hand, prudential provisions and, on the other hand accounting or IFRS provisioning
requirements. Differences in practice have emerged, with some supervisors relying on
accounting definitions, others holding on to the regulatory provisioning requirements and
some selecting the higher of both outcomes for prudential purposes.

5.     For the purpose of this study, we perform a desk review of the range of regulations
and practices on loan classification and provisioning in 26 countries on the European
continent. More specifically, the survey focused on Western Europe as well as ECA with 26
countries surveyed. For some of the analysis, a distinction has been made between
predominantly home supervisors in Western Europe and the more typical host countries in
the ECA region. The countries included in the analysis are Albania, Bosnia Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Georgia, Kosovo, Latvia, Lithuania,
Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia and Slovenia. Home countries

1
 The FSI compilation guide of March 2006 recommends that loans (and other assets) should be classified as
NPL when (1) payment of interest and principal are past due by more than three months (90 days) or more, or
(2) interest payments equal to three months (90 days) interest or more have been capitalized (re-invested into
the principal amount), re-financed or rolled over.

                                                                                                             6
                                 Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


for subsidiaries and branches operating in those countries, comprise Austria, Denmark,
France, Germany, Italy, Greece, Norway and Sweden. The main source of information is
the World Bank Survey 2011 – Banking Supervision responses, validated through a desk
review of publicly available regulations. For the countries in the sample that have not
participated in the World Bank Survey 2011, or where the responses diverged significantly
from the available regulation, clarification from the respective supervisory authorities was
obtained.

6.      This note concludes by providing good practice guidance on these key topics and
the main drivers for loan classification and provisioning. Importantly, the impact of
effective implementation of these criteria, often reflected in the robustness of the
supervisory approach towards early identification and timely enforcement, cannot be
underestimated. Robust and consistent implementation of asset classification and
provisioning rules, particularly the application of qualitative criteria for the early
recognition of problem assets, are key elements in ensuring comparability across portfolios
within a country and across jurisdictions.

7.      The classifications in the tables presented in the Annex are based on answers to
the 2011 Bank Supervision survey as well as a desk review of the regulations. Where the
definitions across countries are not easily comparable, expert judgment has been used and
the regulations have been interpreted to the best of the authors’ abilities. They welcome
any comments or suggestions from the individual authorities on this paper.

A.      Asset classification systems

8.      Prudential regulations often encompass asset classification systems, which require
banks to classify loans and advances into buckets. 2 Those buckets are usually defined by
days past due and/or creditworthiness. Such systems can then be used for provisioning,
classification of non performing or problem loans and non-accruals, as well as to deal with
loans highly likely to result in losses. These types of asset classification systems, if
properly implemented, are often perceived as a valuable tool for supervisors, providing for
a very broad understanding of the overall quality of assets, particularly on deteriorating or
problem loans, as well as a to benchmark banks against their peers.

9.      What underlines and drives asset classification and provisioning systems is credit
risk and, in particular, two of its key components, default and losses (which might result
as a consequence of the default). In that sense, those systems usually have a minimum
level of provisions that need to be recorded once the default materializes. Regulatory
provisions are required to cover the likely losses that might result from such default, in
some cases reflecting the value of the collateral. Usually, those systems are comprised of
a few buckets, where loans are classified depending on the likelihood of the default
turning into actual losses. Classification is based on number of days past due and/or
qualitative criteria- and as a consequence, requiring increasing levels of provisioning.

10.     About three quarters of surveyed countries in our sample have an asset
classification system in place for loans and advances within their regulatory framework

2
 Those systems usually target loans and advances but in some jurisdictions they are used to classify a much
wider range of assets. In the case of Serbia, for instance, the asset classification system covers almost all
assets but only requires provisions for loans and advances.

                                                                                                           7
                                  Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


(Chart 1 and Annex Table 1). Asset classification systems are less prominent in typical
home countries than in host countries. 3

    Chart 1. Do you have an asset classification system under which banks have to report the
                  quality of their loans and advances using a regulatory scale?

            A. Percent of countries                                  B. Number of countries




11.     Broadly speaking, the systems are comprised of five buckets, mostly roughly with
the same structure: pass/standard, watch/special mention, substandard, doubtful and
loss. Classification as substandard or equivalent ranges from 30 to 91 days and
classification as loss ranges from 150 to 361 days of past due (Chart 2 and Annex Table 2).

Chart 2. Minimum number of days past due for classifying as Substandard, Doubtful and Loss or
                                       equivalent:




3
 This reflects the early adoption of the United States Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
practices in numerous ECA countries, following the transition to market economies.

                                                                                                         8
                                  Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


12.    Those types of mechanical or “deterministic” frameworks have been in use for
decades worldwide and, if properly implemented, can be useful, although crude, tools in
monitoring the overall quality of loan portfolios. Nevertheless, such systems are focused
on problem loans and are not always granular enough for the segmentation of performing
assets. Good practice in asset classification has now evolved towards segmentation of
performing exposures with the objective to serve as early warning indicator before the
asset becomes non performing.

13.     In fact, the BCBS has for several years put efforts in fostering the use of internal
rating systems, reflected on its advanced approaches for calculating credit risk capital
requirements, which require more granular grading systems to be in place. More advanced
grading systems use statistical approaches to assess credit quality and estimate EL. 4
Irrespective of a bank’s complexity, the use of a more granular system that also covers
performing exposures is always recommended. While jurisdictions might decide not to
impose those types of frameworks for classification or provisioning purposes, banks should
still be encouraged through guidance on credit risk management to put in place
classification systems that enable them to differentiate performing loans by levels of risk.

14.    Exposures to the sovereign are often subject to special treatment from a regulatory
perspective. Particularly in the case of capital requirements, the Basel standards tie the
risk-weight to sovereign exposures to its rating, while also providing discretion to
countries to apply a zero risk-weight in case of exposures funded and issued in local
currency (discretion which is commonly exercised by countries). Asset classification for
loans and advances to the sovereign, on the other hand, is not subject to any particular
guidance. In addition, it should be noted that although the Basel framework allows for the
application of a zero risk-weight in the case of sovereign exposures in local currency, once
such exposure becomes past due or presents indications of deterioration, there are
grounds for using the appropriate classification and provision. Critics have argued that the
favorable treatment of sovereign risk has provided regulatory incentives for banks to
accumulate large sovereign exposures and that there is need to put an end to the fiction
of a zero risk weight for sovereigns. Not surprisingly in the majority of the countries
surveyed, with a few exceptions (Chart 3 and Annex Table 1), government lending is
subject to asset classification similar to other loans and advances.

Chart 3. Does the asset classification system cover all types of borrowers including government?




4
  Expected losses (EL) are generally calculated by multiplying three factors; the PD (probability of default),
the LGD (loss given default) and the EAD (exposure at default). Some banks apply more complex systems for
example, allowing cure rates and/or correlations between exposures to be factored in. As a general principle,
risk parameters should be continuously subject to rigorous statistical validation techniques and long-time data
series before they can be used.

                                                                                                              9
                                   Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



B.         Defining non performing loans

15.     The well accepted threshold for classifying a loan as non performing is when
obligations related to the loan become over 90 days past due. Multilateral organizations
define non performing along the same lines. The BCBS defines default for capital
calculation purposes 5 as follows: “a default is considered to have occurred with regard to
a particular obligor when either or both of the two following events have taken place: (i)
the bank considers that the obligor is unlikely to pay its credit obligations to the banking
group in full, without recourse by the bank to actions such as realizing security; and (ii)
the obligor is past due more than 90 days on any material credit obligation to the banking
group.” The IMF Financial Soundness Indicators (FSIs), which are vastly used for cross-
country comparability, also establishes as criteria for defining a loan as non performing
past due of principal or interest over 90 days.

16.     Basing the criteria only on the number of days past due would pose challenges for
balloon payment loans or overdraft type credits. Moreover, information can be available
that the borrower is likely to default, even if the loan is not yet past due. Thus, in
general, a loan is considered to be non performing when the probability of full repayment
is considered to be low or when a loan is in default or highly likely to default. Criteria for
classifying a loan as non performing are thus number of days past due, as well as the
overall financial performance/creditworthiness of the borrower, sometimes even
combined with the assessment of collateral. 6

17.     It should be highlighted though that in order to establish a certain number of days
as criteria for classifying a loan as non performing, countries should carefully assess local
practices and characteristics, which also might vary from portfolio to portfolio (e.g.
working capital versus mortgages). Even when counting the days past due, differences can
also occur as grace periods are usually granted to borrowers and the first day past due is
therefore not always the first day the payment was due.

18.     The majority of countries surveyed use the number of days as one of the criteria
for classifying a loan as non performing (Chart 4 and Annex Table 3). In the case of the
countries that do rely on number of days past due, 90 days is the criteria used by all
countries for classifying a loan as non performing. In addition, countries have in place a
set of judgmental criteria and bankruptcy criteria as reasons for automatic classification
of loans as non performing (Chart 5 and Annex Table 3).




5
    International Convergence of Capital Measurements and Capital Standards, 2006
6
 Some supervisors allow loans that are 120 days past due to be “upgraded” to 90 days past due because they
are well secured. Section E of this paper deals with the treatment of collateral.

                                                                                                         10
                              Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



    Chart 4. Is the number of days past due one of the criteria used to classify a loan as non
                                          performing?

           A. Percent of countries                            B. Number of countries




Chart 5. What other criteria are used to classify assets as non performing? (% of "yes" answers)




19.     The number of days past due is not the only indication that a loan is to be
considered non performing, and probably is not even the most accurate predictor of loss in
certain cases. On average though, days past due does provide strong indications of the
likelihood of default. While regulations should require the use of qualitative criteria for
classifying a loan as non performing, the establishment of number of days past due as
minimum criteria has important advantages, providing supervisors with an objective
measurement to assess and compare banks, as well to enforce compliance.

20.     NPL ratios are commonly calculated as total non performing loans over the gross
loan portfolio. Noteworthy is that in some jurisdictions, it is not the full outstanding value
of the loan that is recorded as non performing, but the net value (after deduction of the
provisions). Another practice is to include only the amount that is overdue in the
measurement of the non performing loan. These practices lead to downward biases in NPL
ratios. Similar adjustments are sometimes made for the value of the collateral (see
section E).




                                                                                                  11
                             Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


21.     While there is consensus on the 90 day “entry” criterion to the non performing loan
category, the “exit” criteria are generally more ambiguous. Judgment will need to be
exercised when part of the installments is 90 days past due and the borrower has started
paying again and under which conditions. Similarly, disputed fees and surcharges
sometimes cause a loan to go into the 90 days past due bucket even if the borrower has
resumed his monthly payments. In those cases, supervisors might choose to apply
materiality thresholds when applying the number of days past due, and also consider
specific characteristics of the loan (e.g. collateral, type of portfolio) to defer classifying a
loan as non performing. Other supervisors require banks to set particular policies in this
area and review and then rely on the banks’ policy.

22.     Irrespective of the quantitative criteria, regulations should ensure that banks are
required to classify loans as non performing whenever there are qualitative indications of
default and that clear exit criteria exist. While there is merit in establishing exclusively
qualitative criteria for classifying a loan as non performing, in practice, the resulting
burden to supervisors in ensuring that banks perform a proper and continuous assessment
of their loans cannot be underestimated. The reality is that it is quite common for
supervisors in our client-countries to order the bank to reclassify a significant portion of
its credits after a credit risk inspection. This usually results in higher provisions as a result
of a more conservative assessment of the condition of the loans.

C.     Restructuring or loan forbearance

23.     Loans that have had their characteristics altered, such as duration, maturity,
interest rate or others, due to the inability (or potential inability) of the borrower to fulfill
its contractual obligations should in principle be explicitly addressed by regulations on
asset classification and provisioning and be subject to more stringent classification
criteria. The rationale behind such recommendation is the fact that a loan that has been
restructured or forborne does not necessarily result in the loan being turned into a regular
performing loan. In fact, forbearance often means an increase in the riskiness of a loan.

24.     The regulatory definition of forbearance, if it exists, generally includes certain
“forbearance events” and their strictness and scope can vary widely among jurisdictions.
Broadly speaking, two constant factors in the various definitions are first: “a change in
contract terms” and second, “financial difficulty of the borrower”. Forbearance as a
result of other factors that are outside the control of the borrower are thus generally not
captured. The formal requirement for “change in contract terms” has incited some banks
to include embedded forbearance clauses in their loan contracts, which many regulatory
definitions do not capture. A number of authorities also require the bank to suffer a loss,
while others don’t mention this. Some jurisdictions do not consider a two to three years
maturity extension as forbearance as long as there is no reduction in cash flows, or no
principal or interest debt forgiveness. Others have a well-defined and exhaustive list of
events that are to be considered a “forbearance”.

25.    A particular issue arises when the borrower faces financial difficulty but requests a
renegotiation before the loan becomes non performing. In that case, when forbearance
occurs, some authorities require the loan to be reclassified as non performing, regardless
of the days past due. Others are more tolerant and allow the loan to remain in the
performing category. In those cases, the loan often does not remain flagged as

                                                                                                 12
                                 Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


“restructured” and when it gets past due it will not always be clear that the original loan
terms have already been modified once or more and the loan is in fact more risky than
similar loans in the same past due bucket.

26.     Several supervisors indicated that once a loan is restructured it cannot be upgraded
to the performing loans category immediately, and they have special criteria and steps to
follow to do so (Chart 6 and Annex Table 4).

Chart 6. Are banks allowed to upgrade the classification of a loan immediately after it has been
                                          forborne?




27.    One of the countries surveyed applies such criteria solely in the case of loans that
were classified as substandard/doubtful/loss at the time of forbearance, requiring a track
record of payment for prior upgrades or the passing of a certain period of time showing
good loan service performance. Less than half of the countries surveyed that allow
upgrades state explicitly the need to ensure the borrower creditworthiness (Chart 7 and
Annex Table 4). 7 Most of the countries surveyed indicated that restructured loans are to
be classified as non performing (Chart 8 and Annex Table 4).

      Chart 7. Do regulations require banks to ensure the              Chart 8. Do regulations require
    borrower’s creditworthiness to upgrade the classification         forborne loans to be classified as
                      of a forborne loan?                                     non performing?




28.     Overall, prudential supervisors should be very careful when dealing with
restructured loans. While in theory a good restructure might allow a loan to significantly
improve its risk profile, forbearance can also be used simply to defer payment, not
necessarily increasing the likelihood of payment of a particular loan (“ever greening”). As
a consequence, it can also be used to manipulate bank specific NPL ratios and reduce
provisions, by repeated forbearance of loans before they become 90 days past due,
masquerading the effective quality of loan the portfolios.

7
  For example, an assessment of the creditworthiness of the borrower may reveal that the borrower got a new
loan to pay off the existing debt.

                                                                                                         13
                             Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


29.     Adequate regulations and supervision are key tools in preventing ever greening that
undermine the quality of loan portfolios. In that regard, it is also of particular importance
to monitor the history of loans and recurrence of restructuring. Defining restructuring for
prudential purposes, collection of data on their number, as well as more stringent criteria
for classifying loans that have been restructured more than once can be useful monitoring
tools as well as the collection of loss numbers on first and second restructures.

      European Banking Authority technical standards on supervisory reporting on
                     forbearance and non performing exposures
 Given a slowdown in the economic recovery in the Eurozone area, high levels of NPLs in
 many EU countries and strong commitments of the EU governments to establish the
 Banking Union, a harmonized approach to the NPLs classifications is required. The
 Banking Union includes four pillars: a Single Supervisory Mechanism, a Single Prudential
 Rulebook, a Single Resolution Board and Fund, and a Single Deposit Protection Scheme.
 The mandate for a Single Supervisory Mechanism was given to the European Central Bank
 (ECB) which will assume its responsibilities in the Fall 2014. The other Pillars of the
 Banking Union are at various stages of implementation.
 Before assuming the mandate of the Single European Supervisor, the ECB is conducting a
 comprehensive assessment of approximately 130 systemically important Eurozone banks.
 The assessment started in November 2013 and will consist of three components: (i) a risk
 assessment; (ii) an asset quality review; and (iii) stress tests.
 EU banks base their problem loan definitions on two different sources; (i) International
 Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and (ii) bank regulatory requirements, the most
 recent being the Capital Requirements Regulation (EU) 575/2013 (CRR). Additionally, the
 European Banking Authority (EBA) has developed technical standards on supervisory
 reporting of forbearance and non performing exposure to (i) establish benchmarks for the
 ECB comprehensive assessment; (ii) perform harmonized overall data collection on asset
 quality; (iii) address market uncertainty over the financial position of EU banks; (iv)
 lower costs for international banks by gradually decreasing divergent definitions; and (v)
 address publicly stated concerns by other European authorities on the asset quality
 requirements for EU banks.
 The new definitions were designed as an umbrella concept, i.e. they cover some of the
 existing risk-related concepts, without superseding or modifying the way in which
 different jurisdictions implement them. As such, the proposed definitions will not have
 an impact on individual institutions profitability, capital requirements or ratios. They are
 thus purely reporting definitions. Although this approach is somewhat disappointing,
 harmonized reporting will provide this important information to prudential supervisors
 and could be used in scenario analysis or stress testing. Hopefully, this will be a first step
 in moving to a harmonized definition that will have an impact on the profit and loss
 account of banks at a later stage.
 According to the EBA technical standards, forborne exposures can be performing or non
 performing. Two essential criteria are required for an exposure to be forborne; first, a
 change in the contract and second, financial difficulty of the borrower. The standard
 introduces a 2-year probation period for the reclassification of a performing forborne
 exposure into the fully performing category. NPL definitions are based on the days past
 due concept and assessments of the debtors ability to pay its credit obligations. The NPL,
 and debt securities as well as off-balance sheet exposures, and all impaired exposures.
 However, they do not cover exposures held for trading. The NPLs are measured taking

                                                                                                 14
                             Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


 the total amount, without taking into account collateral. NPL exposures are assessed on
 an individual basis (transaction approach) or, when more than 20% of retail borrower’s
 total exposure is non performing, based on the debtor approach. The definitions state
 that NPLs become performing when: (i) the exposure meets the exit criteria applied by
 the reporting institution for the discontinuation of the impairment and default
 classification; (ii) the situation of the debtor has improved to the extent that full
 repayment, according to the original or when applicable the modified conditions, is likely
 to be made without further assistance; and (iii) the debtor does not have any amount
 past-due by more than 90 days.
 There is still a large scope for improvement, as the definitions do not cover important
 concepts, such as credit grading systems or internal rating systems for performing
 exposures; provisioning percentages linked to asset classification systems; treatment of
 collateral; write offs; macroprudential aspects; and calculation of NPL ratios and NPL
 coverage ratios. Nevertheless, the EBA’s definitions on non performing exposures provide
 a good starting point, also for non EU countries, for a much needed and timely effort to
 harmonize different approaches to NPLs classification.



D.     Multiple loans to a single borrower

30.     Good risk management requires that, in principle, when a loan is in default and
therefore classified as non performing, all other loans from the same borrower (or the
same economic group) are also classified as at higher risk. From a prudential perspective,
it should be expected that regulations would make explicit reference to those cases,
establishing minimum requirements, or providing guidance on how banks are expected to
deal with such cases.

31.     While in the case of economic groups there might be more flexibility on asset
classification and provisioning, regulations should, at minimum, clearly indicate the need
for banks to review the adequacy of classification and provisioning.

32.    The majority of the countries surveyed (Chart 9 and Annex Table 5) indicated to
have requirements to classify as non performing all loans, advances and other credit
exposures related to a particular borrower which has a loan classified as non performing.
The economic impact of this decision on the borrower could be significant, both in terms
of access to credit, as well as in terms of higher borrowing cost.

 Chart 9. Indicate if in case a customer has multiple loans and one of them is classified as non
      performing, are all the other exposures automatically classified as non performing




                                                                                                 15
                             Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



E.     Collateral valuation

33.    Apart from IAS 39, there are no internationally established standards regarding the
treatment of collateral for asset classification and provisioning purposes. Overall practices
vary widely in areas such as whether collateral should be included in asset classification,
whether it should be taken into account in determining the appropriate level of provisions
and on valuation criteria. In broad terms, the practice of many jurisdictions is not to take
into account collateral in classifying assets while considering it for provisioning purposes.

34.    More than half of the surveyed countries indicated taking into account collateral
for provisioning purposes (Chart 10 and Annex Table 6). The countries that do not specify
anything in their regulations, are likely not to allow collateral in the regulatory provisions.
Among host countries, almost three quarters that allow collateral to be taken into account
differentiate between prime and other types of collateral (Chart 11 and Annex Table 6).

      Chart 10. Do the minimum specific            Chart 11. Of those countries that consider
   provisioning rules allow for the value of      collateral for provisioning purposes, is there
collateral to be deducted from the amount of      any differentiation between prime and other
   the loan before provisioning is applied?       collateral in the regulation of host countries?




35.     On the other hand, it has also been observed that some supervisors allow well
collateralized loans to be “upgraded” in the past due classification. This happens when
supervisors try to fit two dimensions (the probability of default and the loss given default)
in a one dimensional system of days past due. In practice, this could mean that a loan that
is 120 days past due is reclassified to 90 days past due because of the existence of prime
collateral.

36.    When calculating NPL ratios, some countries take collateral into account although
most do not. Collateral is taken into account by deducting the assessed value of collateral
from the gross exposure, in some instances this is only allowed for government securities
or government guarantees. Nevertheless, the value of the non performing loan will thus
decrease and there will be downward bias in the NPL ratio.

F.     Write offs

37.     Heterogeneous criteria for writing-off non performing loans can result in important
perceived differences in terms of asset quality. For as long as non performing loans, even
fully provisioned, are maintained in the balance sheet, NPL ratios as well as coverage


                                                                                                 16
                            Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


ratios are affected. Some jurisdictions reporting high NPL ratios are characterized by large
parts of those NPL ratios consisting of fully provided balances that have been outstanding
for long periods and that are not written off for legal, judicial, tax and regulatory reasons.
For example, in a particular country, once the receivable was written off the bank’s
balance sheet, a judge declared the claim did not exist anymore. This leads to banks
keeping fully provided claims on their balance sheets for long periods.

38.    Nevertheless, it is good practice for prudential supervisors to encourage or even
force write offs of fully provisioned NPLs. Banks can be encouraged to do so by requiring
the Board to review the NPL portfolio every 6 months (Albania). Only 10% of the
authorities surveyed force non performing loans to be written off after a specific time
period (Chart 15 and Annex Table 7). Irrespectively of the criteria chosen, disclosure
requirements should be such to allow supervisors and stakeholders to perform meaningful
comparisons of fully provided but not yet written off NPLs among banks.

 Chart 12. Do regulators require banks to write off non performing loans after a specific time
                                           period?




G.      Macro prudential aspects

39.    While a common prudential approach for provisioning worldwide is not likely in the
medium and long term, some authorities have opted to have more complex frameworks,
incorporating a macro prudential element into provisioning regulations.

40.     Some countries, like Spain, have adopted dynamic provisioning approaches,
requiring additional levels of general provisioning in “good times” and releasing them in
“bad times”. There have been also cases of jurisdictions relaxing prudential provisioning
requirements (formally or informally) or loosening the enforcement of those requirements
as NPL ratios soared.

41.     While there are certainly good reasons to build-up reserves in various forms in good
times, in order to ease the bad times, care should be taken in order to avoid overly
complex regulations, which might not be transparent. Moreover, simply relaxing
prudential requirements in bad times might pose a serious threat in terms of moral
hazard, where banks might have imprudent practices, knowing that if things worsen there
will be relief.



                                                                                                17
                                Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



H.      Interactions between accounting rules and prudential
        regulations

     1) International Financial Reporting Standards
42.     Individual countries’ accounting standards are commonly established by a
dedicated standard setter. The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) issues
IFRSs, high-quality, accounting standards that are adopted and of mandatory use in many
jurisdictions worldwide, easing comparability and contributing to good quality reporting.
IFRS is also the main benchmark for countries wishing to modernize their own accounting
standards. IFRS is an accounting framework that is based more on principles than specific
rules, which requires a fairly sophisticated environment with the required checks and
balances to be effective. Any transition to IFRS thus requires a broad assessment and
management of the financial system.

43.     An effective implementation of IFRS requires the existence of some essential
preconditions in the financial system’s infrastructure. Factors that should be considered
when assessing this environment include (i) quality and quantity of specialized IFRS human
resources in the banks (accounting and controlling departments), with the prudential
supervisor and with external auditors; (iii) risk management and control practices in banks
(ii) the soundness of the legal framework in key areas such as corporate governance
insolvency and collateral enforcement frameworks; (iv) the degree of maturity of the local
external audit market; and (v) the sophistication of the financial markets and the financial
instruments used.

44.     All companies whose securities are admitted to trading on a regulated market in
the EU are required to prepare their consolidated financial statements in accordance with
IFRS. 8 Since this requirement was implemented back in 2005, many other jurisdictions
have followed suit. The EU does have a process of “endorsement” of the IFRS standards,
but the cases where the full standard has not been adopted or has been adopted with
amendments are very limited.

45.     In the case of banks, although there are cases where the supervisor also sets
specific standards for bank accounting, like the Bank of Spain, the leading practice among
the surveyed countries is the use regulatory powers to issue regulations on asset
classification, as well as loan classification and provisioning. Some EU countries have
required banks to report under IFRS on a standalone basis, regardless of their issuer
status, such as Italy.

     2) Provisioning
46.     There is no formal requirement for prudential regulations on provisioning and the
definition of non performing loans to be aligned to the accounting standards used. In fact,
it can be argued that the objectives and incentives of accounting bodies and supervisors
are not necessarily aligned, as supervisors have a clear conservative and prudent bias in
establishing prudential regulations, aiming at minimizing the occurrence of bank runs and



8
  Companies listed on non-regulated markets in the EU have no obligation to publish IFRS based consolidated
financial statements; they usually use national accounting standards.

                                                                                                        18
                                  Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


failures. Accounting standard setters, on the other hand, are driven by the usefulness and
relevance of financial statements to investors.

47.     That said, pressures on prudential supervisors to move away from their regulatory
provisioning models and rely exclusively on accounting figures for provisioning have been
increasing, particularly in Europe. Clearly, there are benefits in doing so. Perhaps the
main benefit is that the move to general-purpose accounting standards will align practices
among banks with those of listed companies, whereby the responsibility to prepare the
financial statements - which includes estimating provisions on reported assets –- lies
squarely with management and those charged with governance (board and audit
committee). This is a fundamental tenet of good corporate governance. One could
reasonably expect that those who run or oversee the business (if they do it well) know
what their estimated losses are. Also, it is less burdensome for international and domestic
banks to have a single set of provisioning figures for accounting and prudential purposes,
provisions become more transparent and more easily comparable across jurisdictions.

48.     There are, however, some important drawbacks for prudential supervisors which
should not be underestimated. On top of the list are the complexity of the accounting
standards and the flexibility in implementation practice allowed under the current
accounting frameworks. This should lead to significant expert supervisory resources being
allocated with the objective to understand the accounting standards and their
implementation. It is thus recommended to be well-prepared and keep bank’s regulatory
and accounting systems in parallel for at least a number of years before fully transitioning.
Once the decision has been made to rely on accounting standards, resources should also
be permanently assigned to keep up to date with changes in banks’ methodologies and
IFRS standards and guidance.

49.    International Accounting Standard 39 (IAS 39) is the current standard for
recognition and measurement of financial instruments; all countries surveyed have
formally adopted IFRS (as endorsed by the EU, adopted by the IASB, or a translation of a
previous version of IFRS, depending on the country).

50.     According to IAS 39, loans and receivables are to be measured at amortized cost. 9
IAS 39 addresses also the impairment of financial instruments in two steps: first, an asset
is considered to be impaired if there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of
loss events, and second, if these loss events have an impact on the estimated cash flows
of the asset. In such case, the amount of loss is to be calculated as the difference
between the carrying amount and the present value of the estimated future cash flows,
discounted at the effective rate, not taking into account not incurred future credit losses.
The loss is to be deducted directly or through the use of an allowance account. IAS 39 does
not establish quantitative criteria to classify a loan as impaired, to cease accrual of
income, or to require provisioning.

9
  Amortized cost is the amount at which a financial asset or financial liability is measured at initial
recognition, less principal repayments, plus or minus the cumulative amortization using the effective interest
method of any difference between the amount at initial recognition and the maturity amount, minus any
reduction for impairment or un-collectability. The effective interest rate in a financial instrument is the rate
that exactly discounts the cash flows associated with the financial instrument through maturity or the next re-
pricing date to the net carrying amount at initial recognition i.e. a constant rate on the carrying amount. The
effective interest rate is sometimes termed the level yield to maturity or the next re-pricing date, and is the
internal rate of return of the financial asset or financial liability for that period.

                                                                                                              19
                              Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


51.     IAS 39 allows the concept of “incurred but not reported” (IBNR) losses. This means
that banks can provide for losses that have not yet occurred but are likely to have been
incurred at the balance sheet date, based on past experience. Under IFRS, banks have to
identify the events that have occurred before balance sheet date which will cause
impairment. The bank will then have to provide evidence that correlates these events to
the likely level of loss. The accounting standard gives two examples of triggers: one
relates to changes in economic conditions and the other to changes in the payment status
of borrowers. For example, a rise in unemployment before year-end can give rise to a
provision if the bank can demonstrate that in the past losses have increased when
unemployment rose. A trigger event is thus required before a provision can be recorded.
Losses that are expected as a result of future events, no matter how likely, cannot be
recognized under IAS 39.

52.    Since the implementation of internal rating based (IRB) approaches under Basel II,
banks have used internal risks parameters, such as Probability of Default (PD) and Loss
Given Default (LGD), in the regulatory capital calculation. Similar estimates are also being
used by banks to calculate EL and/or provisions using statistical approaches. For
prudential supervisors, it is crucial to fully understand the inputs and methodologies
supporting these calculations before allowing banks to rely fully on IFRS for prudential
purposes. This is a complex and time consuming task that requires a scarce combination of
expert accounting and regulatory skills.

53.     The first step of this analysis would be a deep vertical analysis by individual bank
of the methodologies, provisioning levels and the risk parameters used in statistical
provisioning models. A second step would consist of a benchmarking exercise or horizontal
assessment of the parameters and methodologies used by the entire banking population.
This exercise would ideally be performed at a regional level for example by benchmarking
PDs and LGDs across different asset classes and borrowers. Third, supervisors should
consider, as part of their regulatory provisioning, spelling out to supervised institutions
their expectations and even possibly the “acceptable ranges” for some or all of these
parameters. In order to enhance comparability across banks, prudential supervisors could
require them to run scenario analyses with predetermined parameters. 10

54.     Loss and probability estimates for the capital calculation are different from the
inputs used for provisioning models in many respects. For example, there is a difference in
time horizon. The Basel II framework calculates EL over a one year horizon while IFRS
calculates the losses over the lifetime of the loan. Also, the Basel II quantitative estimates
should be measured as averages over the economic cycle or “through the cycle”
estimates. Under IFRS, impairment is measured as the loss that the bank expects to
realize in the current economic conditions or a more “point in time” estimate. In practice,
however, many of the methodologies used have been hybrids with characteristics of both
measurement assumptions.



10
  We are not advocating setting fixed values that would feed into the IFRS provisions. Rather, we
are encouraging supervisors to establish a range of regional or country-specific loss estimates that
would be used when assessing IFRS provisions. Banks should be required to explain why they deviate
from these estimates and if they are unable to do so, adjustments to the capital adequacy ratio or
the provisions should be considered.

                                                                                                  20
                            Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


55.     Since the first date of application of IAS 39 on 1 January 2005, its approach to
impairment has been controversial among banking supervisors. Several jurisdictions have
favored what is perceived to be a more conservative approach by having a set of relative
homogeneous criteria for requiring the suspension of income accrual and the
establishment of provisions to cover potential losses.

56.    The IASB has replaced IAS 39 with IFRS 9 “Financial Instruments”, which should
become applicable around 2017-2018. In November 2009, the first new set of chapters was
issued, covering the classification and measurement of financial assets. The new IFRS
standard bring significant changes by replacing the incurred loss model by an expected
loss approach, thus allowing ex ante provisioning. IFRS 9 has a “three bucket” approach
for impairment provisions. In simple terms, the proposal suggests that loans would migrate
from bucket one to bucket two if evidence supports a deterioration in financial
performance, which leads to an increase in uncertainty about the ability to fully recover
the cash flows. Loans would migrate from bucket two to bucket three when there is a
further deterioration of the financial performance of the borrower and expected non-
recoverability of the cash flows. Loans in bucket one would carry a provision of 12 months
EL. Loans in buckets two and three would carry provisions of full lifetime EL, and bucket
three would see loans impaired individually. Under the expected loss approach, losses are
recognized earlier than under the incurred loss model. Proponents of the expected loss
model believe it better reflects the lending decision and is more forward looking.

57.    While some supervisors choose to accept and implement the IFRS criteria in full,
several other jurisdictions, albeit implementing the IFRS for financial reporting purposes,
have chosen to maintain their own prudential criteria for loans and receivables,
particularly for provisioning purposes and accrual of income. This results in two sets of
accounts; regulatory accounts and financial accounts in accordance with IFRS. The
regulatory accounts are then used for the calculation of capital requirements as well as
the calculation of other prudential thresholds. In those cases, banks will be required to
deduct the regulatory excess provisions from regulatory capital or to account them
through the P/L account. In most countries prudential requirements result in higher levels
of provisioning when comparing to IFRS. In some countries though the application of the
IFRS standard for provisioning purposes has not resulted in material differences from the
regulatory approach.

58.     In the case of countries that do have specific regulation for asset classification and
provisioning, it is not unusual for banks to disclose (or to be required to disclose)
information on asset quality based on prudential requirements, encompassing asset
classification, definition of non performing loans and provisioning requirements, which
lead to adjusted figures for balance sheets, prudential capital ratios and/or the profit and
loss accounts.

59.     The slight majority of surveyed countries set minimum levels of provision (Chart 13
and Annex Table 8) and, with the exception of Poland, all countries have asset
classification systems associated with provisioning requirements. Provisioning
requirements are applied to all commercial banks in all jurisdictions surveyed and mostly
cover all types of borrowers, exempting government loans in only a couple of countries.




                                                                                                21
                            Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


    Chart 13. Are there minimum levels of specific provisions for loans that are set by the
                                        regulator?




60.    Percentages of provisioning applied to each bucket vary among the surveyed
countries, albeit all of those that do require provisioning having specific provisions for
loans and advances classified as substandard, doubtful and loss or equivalent. The vast
majority requires 100 percent provisioning in case of loans classified as loss, except for
two countries which require 70 and between 70 and 100 percent, respectively. For the
remaining buckets, percentages vary (Chart 14 and Annex Table 8). In all cases the
calculations of regulatory provisions are resulting in discrete and not continuous provision
outcomes and can thus result in cliff effects.

                 Chart 14. Minimum provisioning required as loans become:




61.     It should be highlighted that although regulations commonly refer to minimum
levels of provisions, they rarely provide guidance or criteria for applying higher levels of
provisioning. As a result, in principle, banks have no incentives to book more than the
minimum. Although it is comprehensible that supervisors might want to offer discretion to
banks, or have discretion for corrective action purposes, they should also ensure that
adequate levels of provisions are being held and regulations should explicitly require banks
to do so.

62.     A periodic review of the minimum regulatory provisioning percentages based on
loss data may also be recommended. The long list of obstacles in the legal, judicial, tax,
and regulatory areas that is currently holding up NPL resolution in the region should be
considered when determining provisioning percentages for non performing loans or
assessing bank’s business models and underwriting practices.




                                                                                                22
                                    Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


63.    Regular practice is to give an indication of the level of provisions using a coverage
ratio. Generally, the coverage ratio is defined as total regulatory provisions divided by
gross non performing loan exposures, but IFRS accounting provisions to gross non
performing loans or specific provisions for non performing loans over gross non performing
loans have also been used. Evidently, coverage ratios will differ across jurisdictions based
on the loan portfolio mix (secured and non secured portfolios) and the provisioning
practices in the country. One must thus be careful before drawing conclusions on the
quality of banking sector loan portfolios. Nonetheless, the median range in the region is
between 40 and 60% (Chart 15 and Annex Table 7).

                Chart 15. Coverage ratios as per the IMF Financial soundness indicators




64.     Coverage ratios may go well above 100%. While this may appear a little
counterintuitive, it is explained by what is referred to in regulatory terms as “pooling of
provisions”. Generally, jurisdictions with high coverage ratios also have mandatory
provisions in place for the EL of performing exposures 11. These “general provisions” are
then pooled with the specific provisions in place for the non performing exposures and
divided by the total of non performing exposures. Hence, this can lead to instances where
the outcome is higher than 100%. Although high coverage ratios do provide additional
comfort and generally are a good indication of a sound provisioning framework, strictly
speaking they do not mean that all NPLs are fully provided for. Indeed, provisions for EL
on performing exposures can offset shortfalls in specific provisions.

       3) Accruing interest on non performing loans and reversing accrued interest
65.     A loan considered to be non performing is usually expected to be classified as non-
accrual for prudential purposes; as the likelihood of full repayment is considered to be low
it makes little sense to keep on accruing income. An additional question to be considered
is if the already accrued but not paid interest should also be reversed. There is no
consensus on the treatment of interest accrued but not paid before the loan becomes
classified as non performing. In some instances though, the existence of good quality
collateral or guarantees are used to justify the non-reversal of accrued interest and the
continuation of the accrual; although the loan is considered to be non performing, the
expectation is that the recovery of the loan, through foreclosure of the collateral or
guarantee will result in no losses.

11
     For example, provisions of 1 or 2% of standard or watch loans have been observed.

                                                                                                        23
                           Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


66.     For purposes of calculating the FSIs, the IMF also considers classification as NPLs
sufficient evidence to cease accruing interest on the asset and to record interest income
only if the debtor subsequently makes an interest payment. Over half of the surveyed
countries do not explicitly require accrued but unpaid interest to be reversed (Chart 16
and Annex Table 8) thus resulting in an overstatement of incurred interest.

Chart 16. Does accrued, although unpaid interest enter the banks income statement while the
                             loan is classified as non performing?

          A. Percent of countries                          B. Number of countries




67.    There are clear differences between the IFRS and prudential regulations on this
topic, as the discussion of accruing non performing loans simply does not exist under the
IFRS. From an IAS 39 perspective, reversal of accrued interest or even the decision to stop
accruing income depends on the assessment of the impairment of the loan and on the
calculation of incurred losses based on net discounted cash-flows. In other words, under
the IAS 39, the fact that a loan is considered to be impaired does not have automatic
accrual implications because the continued interest accruing is balanced by the
discounting of the cash flows when calculating provisions.

68.     Supervisors and their prudential regulations are (and should be) guided by
conservatism and prudence, bringing tensions and sometimes irreconcilable differences
with the accounting principles. As a result, the removal of accrued interest is often an
additional requirement from supervisors for prudential reporting purposes. Banks being
required to issue separate reports or to include the prudential requirements into the notes
to the financial statements issued under the IFRS.




                                                                                               24
                            Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Conclusions

69.    Comparing regulatory asset classification systems across countries is a difficult and
complex task. One should be particularly cautious when drawing conclusions on the quality
of the loan portfolios in a particular country. The analysis in this paper of a number of
factors influencing the definition of a non performing loan allows us to establish some
good practices, such as;

   •   Requiring banks to segment performing exposures using an internal rating system
       with the objective to serve as early warning indicator before the asset becomes
       non performing;
   •   Including exposures to the sovereign in the asset classification and provisioning
       framework;
   •   Reporting non performing loans using the gross value of the loan, not the amount
       that is overdue, the value net of provisions or the value net of collateral;
   •   Requiring banks to clearly flag and report restructured loans, including keeping
       track of the number of forbearances for each loan;

   •   Including maturity extensions and embedded forbearance clauses in the regulatory
       forbearance definitions;
   •   Establishing a probation period and a creditworthiness verification before non
       performing restructured loans can be upgraded to performing loans;
   •   Performing an in depth assessment of banks’ statistical provisioning methodologies
       and, when applicable, reconciling the risk inputs with the parameters used in the
       regulatory capital calculations;
   •   Including clear qualitative criteria in the definition of default and not just basing it
       on the number of days past due;
   •   Including clear criteria for the calculation of regulatory provisions and not just
       minimum percentages in the regulations;
   •   Requiring prompt write offs of fully provided or uncollectable loans remains an
       area where prudential supervisors and tax authorities can provide the right
       incentives for banks;
   •   Performing a thorough analysis of provisioning methodologies; and
   •   Establishing a clear position on the single customer view or the product view.

70.     There are also a number of conclusions that can be drawn. First, some benchmarks
are widely known and accepted, such as the 90 days past due benchmark for non
performing loans and the five categories for asset classification. But there are a number
of, at first sight seemingly insignificant implementation and regulatory issues which can
have a serious impact on prudential benchmarks, such as NPL and coverage ratios. When
comparing NPL ratios of different countries, one should be mindful of these upward and
downward biases.

71.    Second, the majority of the countries surveyed have asset classification systems in
place and they generally cover all exposures, including sovereign exposures. About half of
those asset classification systems set minimum provisioning percentages but do generally
not provide additional guidance to banks on provisioning requirements. Moreover, the
treatment of collateral in regulatory provisioning requirements varies widely. Nonetheless,
of the countries that allow collateral to be taken into account in provisioning, the
majority defines at least two quality classes of collateral. Also, there appears to be a
consensus on the treatment of multiple loans to a single customer.


                                                                                                25
                            Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


72.    Third, most divergences in practice were also observed in the area of loan
forbearance. These cover the definition of restructured loans as well the treatment for
upgrading and classifying restructured loans. The EBA definitions can certainly provide a
benchmark for harmonization of the regulatory treatment of forborne exposures to
supervisors in the region.

73.     Fourth, the macro prudential policy stance in the area of loan classification and
provisioning should be well thought through and formally determined in advance. Frequent
changes to asset classification and provisioning requirements that come under the guise of
macro prudential policy but are in fact designed to cover-up real NPL ratios should be
avoided. These do not provide incentives to banks to book losses early and only delay the
day of reckoning.

74.     Finally, prudential regulations on provisioning are not necessarily aligned to
accounting standards. Many prudential supervisors of developed countries have done away
with asset classification systems and are now relying on IFRS for the identification and
provisioning of impaired loans. For prudential supervisors, it is crucial to fully understand
the inputs and methodologies supporting these calculations before allowing banks to rely
fully on IFRS for prudential purposes. This is a complex and time consuming task that
requires a scarce combination of expert accounting and regulatory skills.

75.    The introduction of IFRS 9 will only partly bridge the divide between EL used by
regulators and incurred losses used by accountants. For banks using statistical approaches
for the calculation of their loan loss provisions, it is important for supervisors to
understand the discrepancies between the internal risk estimates used for the capital
calculation and for provisioning.

76.    Going forward, there is scope for a deeper understanding, more regional
cooperation and sharing of knowledge on banks’ provisioning practices among supervisors
in the region. This could include data collection and benchmarking of internal risk
estimates, sharing of reviews of the provisioning methodologies and expected loss
calculations applied by the banking groups active in the region and efforts to further
analyze and harmonize NPL definitions.




                                                                                                26
                                   Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Annexes
            Table 1. Asset Classifications Systems across countries surveyed

                                             Asset Classification             Covers all type of
                                             System in place                  borrowers
            Host Countries
            Albania                                   
            Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                   
                          12
            Bulgaria
            Croatia                                                                  
            Czech Republic                                                           
            Estonia                                                                  
            Georgia                                                                  
            Hungary                                   
            Kosovo                                                                   
                     13
            Latvia                                                                    
            Lithuania
            Macedonia                                                                
            Montenegro                                                               
            Poland                                    
            Romania                                                                  
                                                                                           14
            Serbia                                    
            Slovakia
            Slovenia                                  
            Home Countries
            Austria                                                                  
            Denmark                                   
            France                                                                   
            Greece
            Italy                                                                    
            Norway
            Sweden



12
   Bulgaria recently repealed Ordinance nr 9 but it continues to exist as a reference point for banks. As this
regulation is not binding, it has been excluded from the analysis in this paper.
13
   Latvian authorities have a regulation on asset quality assessment and provisioning, but it is only applied if
supervisors consider the institution’s process for credit quality assessment to be unsatisfactory.
14
  In principle, the Serbian regulation covers all types of borrowers, with the exception of the receivables from
government and central banks, autonomous territorial and local government units, public administrative
bodies, international development banks and international organizations assigned a 0% credit risk weight
pursuant to the decision on bank capital adequacy.

                                                                                                                   27
                                    Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


                          Table 2. Numbers of days past due for classifying loans as:

           Host countries                            Substandard     Doubtful           Loss
           Albania                                   61-90           91-180                    >180
           Bosnia and Herzegovina                    90-180          181-270                   >271
           Bulgaria                                  -               -                             -
                                                     181-270         271-365                   >365
           Croatia

           Czech Republic                            91- 180         181-360                   >360
                                                                                   15
           Estonia                                                 Not specified

                     16                              31-90           91-120
           Georgia
                                                     61-120          121-150                   >150
           Hungary                                                   Not specified
           Kosovo                                    61-90           91-180                    >180
           Latvia                                    31-90           91-180                    >180
           Lithuania                                 -               -                             -
           Macedonia                                 61-120          121-240                   >241
           Montenegro                                91-270          271-364                   >365
           Poland                                    60-90           91-180                    >181
                      17
           Romania                                   0-30            31-60                     61-90
           Serbia                                    60-90           91-180                    >180
           Slovakia                                  -               -                             -
           Slovenia                                  31-90           91-180                    >360
           Home countries
           Austria                                                                               90
           Denmark                                                   Not specified
           France                                                    90
           Greece
           Italy                                     151
           Norway
           Sweden




15
  The only reference in the regulation says a claim will always be considered non performing if the party to
transaction delays the payment of interest or principal over 90 calendar days.
16
   The Georgian regulation determines the categories based on different buckets for fully secured and partially
secured loans. The bucket with the higher number of days relates to fully secured exposures. Banks can split a
loan between the different categories based on the collateral
17
   Romania uses days past due in combination with an assessment of credit worthiness to be performed by the
institution. All exposures more than 90 days past due are loss exposures.

                                                                                                               28
                              Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries




Table 3. Criteria to classify assets as non performing

                                                                           Borrower        Existence of
                                     Significant
                          Days                                             bankruptcy      collateral,
                                     financial     Breach
                          past                                 Forbear     or other        guarantees
                                     difficulty    of
                          due                                  ance        financial       and/or other
                                     of the        contract
                          status                                           reorganizati    credit
                                     borrower
                                                                           on              mitigants
Albania                                                                       
                              

Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     
                              

Bulgaria

Croatia                                                                                    
                              

Czech Republic                

Estonia                                                                                    
                              

Georgia                                                                                    
                              

Hungary                                                                                    
                              

Kosovo                                                                                     
                              

Latvia

Lithuania                                                                                   
                                         

Macedonia                     

Montenegro                                                                                 
                              

Poland                                                                                     
                              

Romania                                                                        

Serbia                                                                        
                                         

Slovakia

Slovenia                                                                                   
                              




                                                                                                   29
                               Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



                       Table 4. Rules for classification of restructured loans

                                                                                      Ensure
               Upgrade of
                                                                                    borrower's       Restructur
                   loan
                                                                                 creditworthine       ed loans
              classification
  Country                             Specific conditions for upgrade             ss to upgrade       classified
              immediately
                                                                                 classification of     as non
               it has been
                                                                                   restructured      performing
              restructured
                                                                                       loan

                               Not until the borrower has paid regularly the
                               instalments (principal and interest) for 6
Albania       No               months from the restructuring date AND it         No                  No
                               has regularly settled at least 3 instalments
                               (principal and interest).

                               If the borrower has paid the matured,
                               accrued interest on the loan before it was
Bosnia and                     renegotiated, the bank is obliged to classify
              No                                                                 Not specified       Yes
Herzegovina                    the assets as substandard, unless it has good
                               proof enabling the eventual classification of
                               the assets as watch loans.

Bulgaria

Croatia       No                                                                 Not specified       Yes

                               If the bank is able to prove that the risk of
Czech                          non-payment of the loan is lower than prior
              Yes                                                                Yes                 No
Republic                       to restructuring, it may assign it to a better
                               subcategory.

                               A loan restructured due to solvency problems
                               will not be considered a standard loan until
Estonia       No               the circumstances that have caused the            Yes                 Yes
                               decrease of the borrower’s creditworthiness
                               have been removed.

                               The classification of a restructured loan shall
                               be made after the bank has taken into
                               account the number of times the original
                               loan has been renewed or its maturity
                               extended, changes in terms of interest
                                                                                                     Yes,
                               payment compared with its initial terms, the
                                                                                                     although it
                               specific changes in the terms or conditions of
Georgia       Yes                                                                No                  can still be
                               the original loan which have been
                                                                                                     “watch
                               incorporated into the restructured loan
                                                                                                     loan”
                               agreement and the reasons why the changes
                               were made. Regardless the terms of a loan
                               restructuring, it shall be prohibited to
                               classify it as "Standard", but can still be
                               “Watch” loan.

                               Restructured troubled loans are not allowed
Hungary       No               to be treated as problem-free.                    Not specified       Yes

                               Restructured loan must be classified at the
                               minimum substandard category or worse and
                               will continue to be classified at the same
Kosovo        No               category until sustained performance is           No                  Yes
                               observed. After the completion of each
                               period of sustained performance, the bank
                               can upgrade such loans by one category only.

Latvia        No                                                                 Yes                 Not specif

Lithuania


                                                                                                             30
                              Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



                                                                                   Ensure
              Upgrade of
                                                                                 borrower's       Restructur
                  loan
                                                                              creditworthine       ed loans
             classification
  Country                           Specific conditions for upgrade            ss to upgrade       classified
             immediately
                                                                              classification of     as non
              it has been
                                                                                restructured      performing
             restructured
                                                                                    loan

                              The bank may not classify a restructured loan
                              into a higher classification category until
Montenegro   No               regular payment of principal and interest       No                  Yes
                              have been received for at least 3 months
                              after the restructuring.

                              Restructured loans may be moved to another
                              exposure category with a lower risk, but only
Poland       No               after full recovery of the debtor's             Yes                 Yes
                              creditworthiness and not earlier than after 3
                              months of timely debt service.

                              Banks will classify restructured loans by
                              evaluating the financial performance of the
Romania      No                                                               Yes                 No
                              debtor using more stringent standards than
                              those used prior to the restructuring.

                              Restructured will not be regarded as in
                              default if the borrower settles his/her
                              obligations pursuant to the new repayment
                              schedule with a delay of not more than 30
Serbia       No
                              days during the last three previous months,
                                                                              No                  No
                              and/or three consecutive payments pursuant
                              to the repayment schedule agreed upon
                              within the effected restructuring.

Slovakia

Slovenia     Not specified                                                    Not specified       Yes




                                                                                                         31
                               Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Table 5. Rules for customer with multiple loans

                         All
                         exposures
Country                  classified      Specific conditions
                         as non
                         performing
                                         Banks, for individual or related group of individuals with more
                                         than one exposure, will classify their loans into one category,
Albania                  Yes
                                         based on the lowest classification amongst the individual
                                         classifications.
                                         The bank is obliged to classify all those receivables to the same
Bosnia and Herzegovina   Yes             category, related to the category of the worst classified claim of
                                         one debtor.
Bulgaria
Croatia                  No
                                         If a bank has several receivables towards the same debtor, and at
                                         least one of these are non performing, all the receivables of that
Czech Republic           Yes             debtor will be assigned to the non performing category of
                                         receivables (except for retail exposures in accordance with the
                                         capital adequacy regulations).
                                         Loans of related parties will not be classified standard loans if at
Estonia                  Yes
                                         least one of those loans has been classified as non performing.
                                         Even in the case when debt service capability is low, but the
                                         repayment source of a loan depends on a separate project
                                         performance and highly liquid collateral is available, the loan can
                                         fall into standard class despite other loans to the same borrower
Georgia                  No
                                         being non performing. In cases when servicing different loans to
                                         the same borrower depend on the same income source and/or are
                                         mitigated by the same collateral, they would usually fall into the
                                         same asset class.
Hungary                  Yes
                                         The Central Bank of Kosovo requires that loan exposures,
Kosovo                   Yes             including off-balance sheet exposure, to a single borrower should
                                         be classified in the same category.
                                         Several loans granted to one borrower are classified by
Latvia                   Yes             determining a risk group for each loan separately and applying the
                                         highest risk group to all loans.
Lithuania
Macedonia                Not specified
                                         If one person holds several loans with a bank, and one or more of
                                         those loans are classified as non performing, the bank will classify
Montenegro               Yes
                                         all loans into the lowest classification category and/or
                                         subcategory.
Poland                   Yes
                                         Loans in relation to a particular debtor will be included in a single
                                         category of classification, on the basis of the principle of
Romania                  Yes
                                         downgrading by contamination, by taking into consideration the
                                         weakest of the individual classification categories.
                                         All receivables from a borrower will be classified in the lowest
Serbia                   Yes             category in which any of its receivables is classified.
                                         Exception for receivables with prime collateral
Slovakia
Slovenia                 Yes




                                                                                                            32
                                  Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries




          Table 6. Treatment of collateral for asset classification and provisioning purposes

                            Collateral
                               to be
                            deducted                                                              Differentiation
                               from                                                                  between
          Country           amount of                      Specific conditions                      prime and
                             the loan                                                                  other
                              before                                                                 collateral
                           provisioning
                            is applied
                                           Banks, with the purpose to calculate the
                                           reserves for loan loss provisioning, may use the
Albania                    Yes             value of guarantees and financial collaterals set      Yes
                                           forth in this Regulation, to reduce their exposure
                                           from credits.
Bosnia and Herzegovina                     Not specified
Bulgaria
                                           All other instruments of collateral accepted by
                                           the credit institution, not listed in this decision,
                                           shall be deemed ineligible instruments of
                                           collateral, which the credit institution cannot
                                           take into account in assessing the expected cash
                                           flows, i.e. for the purpose of impairment of
                                           placements or for making provisions for losses
                                           arising for the assumed off balance sheet
Croatia                     Yes            liabilities.                                           Yes
Czech Republic                             Not specified for coefficient method
                                            If a credit institution has no assurance that a
                                           claim should be discounted based on cash flows,
Estonia                     Yes
                                           on discounting such loan the security or claim
                                           net realization value shall serve as a basis.
Georgia
                                           Guarantees and collateral, including the liquity
                                           and the enforceability of claims on collateral,
                                           are taken into consideration in determining if
Hungary                    Yes             exposure is impaired.                                  No
                                           Collateral security should be taken into
                                           consideration in the classification process.
Kosovo                     Yes                                                                    Yes
                                           Classification of amounts should always be net of
                                           eligible collateral values.
Latvia
Lithuania
                                           When calculating impairment and special reserve
                                           on an individual basis, collateral shall be
                                           included in the calculation of the present value
                                           of expected future cash flows, in the amount
Macedonia                  Yes             that is equal to the lesser of the value of            Yes
                                           collateral and the total credit exposure covered
                                           by collateral, while the discounting covers the
                                           period up to the date of expected recovery of
                                           collateral.
                                           A bank may take into account cash flows based
                                           on collateral when calculating impairment of
Montenegro                 Yes
                                           balance sheet assets and probable losses related
                                                                                                  Yes
                                           to off-balance sheet items.
                                                                                                  No
Poland                     Yes



                                                                                                              33
                         Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



                    Collateral
                       to be
                    deducted                                                         Differentiation
                       from                                                             between
         Country    amount of                   Specific conditions                    prime and
                     the loan                                                             other
                      before                                                            collateral
                   provisioning
                    is applied
Romania
                                  In calculating the amount of impairment of
                                  balance sheet assets and probable losses on off-
Serbia             Yes            balance sheet items, a bank may take into          Yes
                                  account cash flows deriving from collateral
                                  instruments that secure the receivables.
Slovakia
                                  The projected cash flows from the exercise of
                                  collateral are taken into consideration in the
Slovenia           Yes            calculation of the impairment of a financial       Yes
                                  asset or provision for contingency and
                                  commitment including off-balance sheet items.




                                                                                                 34
                 Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Table 7. Write off on non performing loans

                                                                Maximum
                                                                amount of
                         Requirement to write off non           time as non
Country
                         performing loss                        performing
                                                                before writing
                                                                off

                         No, but requirement for 6 monthly
Albania
                         review.

                         No, until legal proceedings are
Bosnia and Herzegovina   taken to terminate the liability of
                         the debtor.

Bulgaria                 Not specified

Croatia                  No

Czech Republic           No

Estonia                  No

Georgia                  No

Hungary                  No

Kosovo                   No

Latvia                   No

Lithuania                Not specified

Macedonia                No

Montenegro               Yes                                    24 months

Poland                   Yes                                    12 months

Romania                  No

Serbia                   No

Slovakia                 Not specified

Slovenia                 No




                                                                                     35
                                 Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



          Table 8. Minimum provisioning requirements as loans become:
                                        Minimum
                                        levels of
                                        specific
                                        provisions        Substandard     Doubtful      Loss
                                        for loans set
                                        by the
                                        regulator?
          Host Countries
          Albania                       Yes               Min 20%          Min 50%      Min 100%
          Bosnia and Herzegovina        Yes               16%-40%         41%-60%       100%
          Bulgaria                      No                -               -             -
          Croatia                       Yes               30-70%          70-100%       100%
                           18
          Czech Republic                Yes               20%             50%           100%
          Estonia                       No                -               -             -
          Georgia                       Yes               30%             50%           100%
          Hungary                       Yes               11%             31%           71%
          Kosovo                        Yes               Min 20%         Min 50%       Min 100%
          Latvia                        Yes               Min 30%          Min 60%      Min 100%
          Lithuania                     No                -                -            -
          Macedonia                     Yes               20%-45%         45%-70%       70%-100%
          Montenegro                    Yes               20%-40%         70%           100%

                                                          20%             50%
          Poland                        Yes                                             100%


                                                          20%             50%           100%
          Romania                       Yes               FX loans:       FX loans:     FX loans:
                                                          23%             53%           100%
          Serbia                        Yes               15%             30%           100%
          Slovakia                      No
          Slovenia                      No
          Home Countries
          Austria                       No
          Denmark                       No
          France                        No
          Greece                        No
          Italy                         No
          Norway                        No
          Sweden                        No



18
  This is one of three provisioning methods allowed in the Czech Republic. The two other methods are
discounting expected future cash flows and statistical methods.

                                                                                                       36
                     Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries


                    Table 9. Coverage ratio (provisions/NPL)



          Country           Coverage ratio in %                Period


Albania                   65.2                      12/2013

Bosnia and Herzegovina    64.9                      09/2013

Bulgaria                  63.0                      12/2012

Croatia                   46.2                      12/2013

Czech Republic            50.5                      12/2013

Estonia                   28.9                      12/2013

Georgia                   54.5                      09/2013

Hungary                   47.8                      09/2013

Kosovo                    85.2                      12/2013

Latvia                    73.6                      12/2013

Lithuania                 29.4                      09/2013

Macedonia                 80.0                      12/2013

Montenegro                40.2                      12/2012

Poland                    67.3                      06/2013

Romania                   90.4                      09/2013

Serbia                    116.2                     11/2013

Slovak Republic           54.5                      12/2013

Slovenia                  47.4                      09/2013




                                                                                         37
                               Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



    Table 10. Rules for accrued but not paid interest for loans classified as non performing

                            Enter
          Country          income                            Specific conditions
                         statement?
                                         Banks, regarding credits which are not paid for more than
Albania                  No              90 days and for the credits classified as either “doubtful”
                                         or “loss”, shall not account the accrued interest.
                                         In FBiH, accrued and unpaid interest remains reported as
                                         a balance sheet position until it is collected or legal
                                         action is (?)taken to terminate the liability of the debtor,
                                         Interest income calculated on the poor performing assets
                                         is recognized in compliance with MRS/MSFI.
                                         Capitalized interest in case of restructuring and extension
Bosnia and Herzegovina   No              of loans cannot be included in income until it is actually
                                         collected for the debtor.
                                         In RS, banks have to terminate accrual of the interest on
                                         non performing assets and cannot include it as income in
                                         its balance sheet until beneficiary makes true cash
                                         payment of the interest. Exception is granted to non
                                         performing assets that are secured by high quality
                                         collateral.
Bulgaria
                                         Recognition of interest income on non performing assets
                                         in the income statement is postponed until its collection.
                                         Receivables on the basis of interest income shall be
                                         recorded in the off-balance sheet accounts.
                                         Interest income may be recognized if there is evidence
                                         that it will be collected in the following accounting
Croatia                  No              period.
                                          Where a bank or credit union applies the accrual
                                         principle to a non performing receivable, it shall use the
                                         principal of the receivable without the accrued interest
Czech Republic           No
                                         and fees in the calculation and it shall add an amount
                                         equal to the accrued interest and fees to the computed
                                         loss.
                                         The calculation of accrued interest on non performing
Estonia                  No
                                         claims shall be suspended.
                                         Interest income is no longer recognized on balance sheet
                                         when they are past due for over 30 days. Such accrued
Georgia                  No
                                         interest is classified as off-balance-sheet item until the
                                         actual payment of the interest.
Hungary                  Yes
                                         A loan classified as non performing must stop the accrual
                                         into the income statement of its interest. All uncollected
Kosovo                   No
                                         interest that has been previously accrued and recognized
                                         as income must be reversed out of income.
                                         The bank will recognize interest income of non performing
                                         assets only in case of sound assurance on repayment of
                                         full principal and interest and this assurance is based on
                                         reasonable and justified assumptions and projections,
Latvia                   Yes             which are duly documented, and the institution shall take
                                         into account all information available at the moment of
                                         assessment.



                                                                                                   38
                         Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



                      Enter
         Country     income                            Specific conditions
                   statement?
Lithuania
                                   The bank shall make full impairment of accrued interest
Macedonia          No
                                   on non performing claims.
Montenegro         Not specified
Poland             Yes
Romania            Not specified
Serbia             Not specified
Slovakia
Slovenia           Not specified




                                                                                             39
                           Loan classification and provisioning: Current practices in 26 countries



Bibliography

Cihak, M., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Martinez-Peria, M. and Mohseni-Cheraghlou, A. (2012) Bank
Regulation and Supervision around the World - A Crisis Update. The World Bank.
Washington D.C. December

Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (2006), Sound Credit Risk Assessment and
Valuation of Loans. Bank for International Settlements. Basel. June

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009), Guiding Principles for the Replacement of
IAS 39. Bank for International Settlements. Basel. Augustus.

European Banking Authority (2013) EBA Draft Implementing Technical Standards On
Supervisory reporting on forbearance and non performing exposures under article 99(4) of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. London. October.

Barisitz, S. (2011) Non Performing Loans in CESEE: What do they comprise? Focus on
European Economic Integration Q4/2011. Pg. 46-68. Austrian National Bank.

Barisitz, S. (2012) Non Performing Loans in Western Europe: A comparison of Countries and
National Definitions. Focus on European Economic Integration Q1/2013. Pg. 28-47 Austrian
National Bank.

Barisitz S. (2013) Non Performing Loans in CESEE – An Even Deeper Definitional
Comparison. Focus on European Economic Integration Q3/2013. Pg 64-81. Austrian
National Bank.

European Banking Coordination “Vienna” Initiative (2012). Working Group on NPLs in
Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/articles/governance/2012-03-28-ebci-npls_en.htm




                                                                                               40
