                                                                                                         92966
 VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
 CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF




                                                                            CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW,
                                                                            AND JUSTICE BRIEF




 0 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
April 2015 MENT
        BRIEF
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF

             Citizen security refers to the protection of the rights of all persons and groups, both urban and rural
             to live free from crime and violence. As defined by the Inter-American Commission on Human
             rights, states have an obligation to ensure citizen security by privileging the rights to security of
             one’s person, personal liberty and security, and the right to privacy and to have one’s honor
             respected and dignity recognized. Where women and girls are subject to gender-based violence in
             their communities, on their streets, and in public places, their fundamental security is violated.
             Source: Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (2009). Report on Citizen Security and Human
             Rights.



                                                     KEY POINTS
  • For every three years a country is affected by major violence (defined as deaths due to war or
    excess homicides comparable to a major war), economic growth lags behind by 2.7 percentage
    points.1
  • Criminal violence is costly. In Guatemala, for example, it cost approximately US$2.4 billion, or 7.3
    percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), in 2005. Spending on security can also be quite
    high: overall, developing countries spend between 10-15% of their GDP on security compared to
    the 5% spent in developed nations.
  • Citizen security issues impact women and men differently. For example, women are more likely to
    be assaulted or murdered by someone they know – in fact, worldwide the share of homicides by an
    intimate partner was six times higher for female victims compared with male victims (39 percent
    versus 6 percent, respectively).2
  • Boys who witness intimate partner violence (IPV) during childhood are more likely to exhibit
    delinquent behavior3 and to perpetrate IPV in adulthood.4 And girls who witness violence are more
    likely to experience IPV in adulthood.5 This contributes to a continuing cycle of violence in homes
    and in communities.




1 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


       INTERSECTION BETWEEN CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW AND
          JUSTICE, AND VAWG: PERSISTANT CHALLENGES
The number of countries recognizing domestic violence as a crime has risen from close to zero to 76 in
just 37 years.6 Still, most countries do not have legislation criminalizing many forms of violence against
women and girls (VAWG). While legislative reform is a very important step, it is insufficient to eliminate
violence and must be accompanied by other social and structural interventions.

Despite this progress in the adoption of domestic violence laws, major challenges persist
related to:
  • Ineffective application of legislation: This includes the absence of regulations and protocols to
    apply laws, a lack of training for justice system personnel, and dissonance among legislative
    instruments (federal/state laws, etc.).
  • Impunity: Laws are often not enforced due to a culture of patriarchy and corruption.7 The
    discriminatory attitudes of (predominantly male) police officers and justice officials, in particular, can
    serve as a serious deterrent for women seeking justice and support when they experience VAWG.8
  • Incomplete legal provisions for addressing VAWG: In 62% of countries9, for example, there is
    no specific law or provision that explicitly criminalizes marital rape and sexual assault within
    marriage.



   Box 1. Barriers to seeking help and justice for experiences of VAWG
   Seeking justice is an enormous challenge for survivors of VAWG. Only a small fraction of women experiencing
   physical or sexual violence ever seek help within formal systems, turning instead to families or communities for
   support. The 2005 WHO multi-country study found that between 55 and 95% of survivors of violence do not seek
   assistance from formal systems or from individuals in authority positions (such as village or religious leaders). Only in
   the capital cities of Brazil, Namibia, and Peru did approximately 15% of women report seeking help from the police.
   Recent research by the World Bank Group found that, across 30 countries, on average only 4 in 10 women exposed
   to partner violence sought any help from formal or informal sources. Only 6 percent sought help from authorities
   such as police, lawyers, doctors, or religious leaders.

   Sources:
   García-Moreno, C., Jansen, H., Ellsberg, M., Heise, L., and Watts, C. (2005). WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s
   Health and Domestic Violence against Women. Geneva: World Health Organization.


   Klugman, J., Hanmer, L., Twigg, S., Hasan, T., McCleary-Sills, J., and Santa Maria, J. (2014). Voice and Agency:
   Empowering women and girls for shared prosperity. Washington DC: World Bank.




2 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


  • Harmful traditional justice/redress mechanisms: For example, in some countries, perpetrators
    of rape can avoid criminal charges by agreeing to marry the survivor.
  • Procedural challenges: Complicated and lengthy criminal procedures make conviction unlikely
    and place a heavy burden on the survivor to provide evidence and dedicate time, money, and other
    resources she may not have to pursue her case.10
  • Constraints in access to quality legal, judicial, and other services for VAWG survivors:
    Accessing justice can be an enormous challenge for survivors due to: limited access to
    transportation and/or travel funds, social constraints11 and sanctions, victim-blaming on the part of
    service providers and poor quality services.12
  Evidence suggests that law enforcement/justice sectors could contribute to improving the
  response to VAWG by:
  • Enforcing punishments for those who perpetrate crimes against women.
  • Increasing awareness among law/justice personnel that physical and sexual violence against
    women are crimes.
  • Reducing mistreatment of women by law enforcement institutions themselves.13
  • Facilitating the collection of evidence after an incident of violence has occurred.14
  • Systematically collecting data on VAWG-related crimes against women.15
  • Strengthening or establishing a coordinated systems and procedures for protection and survivor
    support.


              ETHICAL AND SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
                        VAWG INTERVENTIONS16
Any intervention that aims to prevent or address VAWG should include precautions above and beyond
routine risk assessment to guarantee no harm is caused. This includes following ethical guidelines related to:
respect for persons, non-maleficence (minimizing harm), beneficence (maximizing benefits), and justice
to protect the safety of both service providers and the survivors. The sensitive nature of collecting information
about VAWG demands additional precautions above and beyond routine risk assessments to guarantee no
harm is caused. Interventions should:
  • Assess whether the intervention may increase VAWG
  • Minimize harm to women and girls
  • Prevent revictimization of VAWG
  • Consider the implications of mandatory reporting of suspected VAW cases
  • Be aware of the co-occurrence of child abuse


3 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


  • Minimize harm to staff working with survivors
  • Provide referrals for care and support for survivors



 For further details on these Ethical and Safety Recommendations, visit the Ethics section of our website.




                                    RAPID SITUATION ANALYSIS
Integrating VAWG prevention and response into citizen security projects requires an understanding of
the legal, social, and epidemiological context of VAWG as it relates to initiatives in the security sector.
Teams should work with governments (including actors in the law enforcement and judicial sectors),
private sector partners, non-governmental organizations, local experts, and other counterparts in the
country to answer some or all of the following questions:



  For general questions to undertake a Rapid Situation Analysis visit the Integrate section of our website.




Additional Questions for the Citizen Security, Law and Justice sector17:
  • What types of VAWG are codified as crimes? Are they aligned with international legal frameworks?
  • Do policies, plans and programs on citizen security address VAWG?
  • What is the prevalence of VAWG, disaggregated by age, ethnicity, geographic locations, etc.?
  • What percentage of VAWG cases received by the criminal justice system (police and courts) result
    in conviction?
  • What are the procedures and protocols that the justice system applies in VAWG cases for handling
    complaints, registry of cases, protection of victims, prosecution, etc.? Do they reduce re-
    victimization of women?
  • What specialized justice services are available for VAWG survivors (police units, courts, justice
    centers for women, hotlines, legal counselling etc.) and how effective are they in increasing
    women’s access to quality services?
  • What are the training programs on VAWG available for citizen security/justice system stakeholders?




4 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


  • What are the existing coordination mechanisms among agencies in the citizen security/justice
    system sector?
  • Are specific budget allocations made available by the government to address VAWG in this sector?



     Box 2. Guiding Principle: Due Diligence
     The due diligence principle holds states accountable for human rights abuses, including violence against
     women, committed not only by the state or state actors, but also by non-state actors. The due diligence
     framework is applicable in circumstances that include state obligation on the five P’s regarding violence against
     women.

     “As such, the State should look into making protection of victims/survivors a priority, effectively prosecute
     perpetrators to remove impunity, ensure punishment is commensurate with the offence and capable of
     preventing recidivism and deterring others, provide adequate reparations to victims/survivors to enable
     them to rebuild their lives away from the perpetrator, if required, and address women’s fears effectively in
     prevention campaigns.”

     Source: Azizi, Z. A. and Moussa, J. (2014). Due Diligence Framework: State Accountability for Eliminating Violence
     Against Women. For further information please visit www.duediligenceproject.org



  KEY AREAS FOR INTEGRATING VAWG IN CITIZEN SECURITY,
                   LAW, AND JUSTICE
Protecting survivors of violence and preventing future acts of violence requires the establishment of
legislation and policies that recognize all forms of VAWG as crimes and actively prosecute perpetrators.
To facilitate a coordinated response, efforts should include key actors within the justice sector (such as
police, prosecutors, judges, etc.), other relevant persons in the education and health sectors, and key
actors at various levels, including communities.18 Promising practices and recommended actions at
each level (policy, institutional, and community) are outlined in further detail in the sections below.

Policy Level
  • Support law and policy reforms. This includes specific legislation on VAWG, age of consent and
    age of marriage, and other laws that limit women’s ability to obtain protection and red ress (such as
    laws relating to divorce, custody of children, maintenance claims, property rights, inheritance and
    sex work). Recommend dedicated budget allocations for implementation of VAWG laws, policies,
    and response mechanisms.19 Monitor existing legislation’s impact on women.20 See Box 3.




5 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


    o Detailed, up-to-date information on laws in every country and region regarding various forms of
    VAWG, property rights violations, and other issues that disproportionately affect women, can be
    found in the World Bank Women, Business and the Law database.
  • Include the law enforcement/justice sectors in comprehensive, multi-sectoral national plans
    or strategies to combat VAWG. National plans involving the law enforcement/justice sectors are
    essential for providing comprehensive and sustained blueprints for ending violence against women
    and girls. Such plans allow all the sectors involved to coordinate and evaluate their activities in a
    structured manner.21 (For detailed guidance, see the UN Women Handbook on National Action
    Plans on Violence Against Women.)




    Box 3. Promising practices… Increasing women’s access to justice in Papua
    New Guinea
    In Papua New Guinea, a Family Protection Bill was introduced in Parliament in 2013 after extensive and inclusive
    stakeholder consultation. This effort was accompanied by the establishment of specialized Family and Sexual
    Violence Units and survivor-centered training for service providers. Prosecution efforts were also strengthened to
    support legal staff and to improve case management. The early results are promising. The number of female
    magistrates rose from 10 in 2004 to more than 900 in 2013. Since 2012, a record number of IPV cases have been
    heard in Papua New Guinea’s courts, with two out of three resulting in a conviction or guilty plea. Of particular
    note are two landmark sexual violence cases involving police officers, who received combined sentences of 30
    years imprisonment.

    Sources:
    Mukasa, S., McCleary-Sills, J., Heilman, B., Namy, S., Brady, L., and Stich, S. (2014). Review of Australian Aid
    Programs in the Pacific Aimed at Ending Violence against Women. Washington, DC: International Center for Research on
    Women.

    Office of the Public Prosecution. (2012).“Strongim Gavman Program Internal Progress Report.” Australian
    Agency for International Development, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea.


Institutional Level
  Personnel in the law and enforcement sectors often lack the knowledge and capacity to respond
  adequately to survivors. They may also share with society values that condone violence against
  women and girls, leading to victim-blaming or discriminatory attitudes and decisions. Thus, in addition
  to establishing clear responses to VAWG and specialized support services for survivors, it is crucial to
  provide on-going training and awareness-raising interventions for personnel at all levels.22

Procedures/Protocols
  • Establish codes of conduct for security personnel, including staff from private military and
    security companies. These should provide explicit guidelines about what constitutes sexual


6 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


    harassment, sexual violence, and other exploitive behaviors. These codes of conducts should
    specify behaviors that are unacceptable within the ranks of the security forces as well as by security
    personnel toward civilians. For further information, please see the training curriculum created by
    Ideamérica.
  • Develop protocols/guidelines for the medical forensic examination of sexual assault
    survivors to enable medical evidence to be collected and used in possible prosecution, as well as
    to ensure that women receive adequate medical care.23,24 These guidelines should be accompanied
    by extensive training, particularly for health care personnel as well as law enforcement
    representatives involved in maintaining the integrity of the evidence. Important investments in this
    area may also include support for crime laboratories and training of forensic scientists to analyze
    evidence for prosecutions.
  • Put in place protocols for filing police reports and pressing charges, as this process is an
    important entry point for survivors to access the justice system. These protocols can guide the
    justice staff on the information required for the report, standardize the process, and reduce
    revictimization.25
  • Establish appropriate measures to protect women who are at higher risk of revictimization,
    especially murder (femicide). Measures could include issuing emergency protection orders in less
    than 72 hours or requiring law enforcement personnel to contact the survivor of violence within 24
    hours after she files a police report. The measures implemented should be aligned with local
    experience of women’s increased risk after reporting, including immediately after the perpetrator is
    notified of the claim. For guidance on how to assess a survivor’s risk of being murdered by her
    partner, please see the Danger Assessment website and also see Box 4.



    Box 4. Promising practices… A Multidisciplinary Strategy to reduce murders of
    women by intimate partners in Costa Rica
    The Ministry of Security, the Ministry of Justice, the public health system, judicial system, public services, and the
    National Institute for Women have signed a protocol to be applied in circumstances of high risk to the lives or
    well-being of women. In every situation where a threat to the life of a woman has been made or identified, a risk
    assessment must be carried out by these agencies. This, in turn, triggers specials measures. Information from all
    agencies is collected and shared in a common database so that protective orders are recorded, shared, and tracked,
    along with violations of orders, or other factors/acts that may increase the risk of homicide.

    Source: UNODC. (2010). Handbook on Effective Police Responses to GBV: Criminal Justice Handbook Series. New York:
    United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.)




7 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


                                                 •     Develop policies that facilitate the arrest of VAWG
                                               offenders and require supervisory audits of domestic violence and
                                               VAWG calls, reports, and follow-ups by police.26 Supervisory
                                               audits, for example, could help to ensure that women who call the
                                               police to report violence are taken seriously and receive
                                               appropriate response, while facilitating the arrest of VAWG
                                               offenders could play a role in protecting women from further harm.
                                                 •     Systematize and strengthen data collection on VAWG-
                                               related crimes. To improve the processing, analysis, and follow
                                               up of criminal cases related to VAWG, the different institutions
                                               involved in justice and law enforcement (including the public health
                                               system, for example) must have a reliable case registry and follow-
                                               up system with high-quality data. Further, it is important to use the
                                               same quantitative indicators to compare the effectiveness of
                                               different programs and legislation, a practice that is still currently
                                               lacking.27
                                     o Ensure that data on the incidence, prevalence, and type of
    violent crime is disaggregated by sex, age, and location.
    o    Promote the use of agreed indicators and a common registry for reporting and tracking such
         cases, such as the Gender-based violence Information Management Systems (GBVIMS)
         developed by UNFPA, UNHCR, WHO, the IRC, and UNICEF.

Institutional Structures and Capacity
  • Support the development of a more responsive and inclusive justice system. This includes
    increasing the representation and participation of women at all levels of the justice system,
    including institutions responsible for citizen security. Gender parity alone will not address all of
    challenges within the justice system. Efforts to improve the meaningful participation of women, in
    concert with changing institutional norms and expectations to be more gender equitable, can help to
    heighten the responsiveness of the security and justice sector to the needs of VAWG survivors.28
    o    Support the recruitment of female police officers to provide survivors with the option of giving
         their statement to a woman; the increased comfort this provides has been shown to increase
         reporting.
    o    The participation of women as judges or arbiters can help to render the process more gender
         sensitive, especially where there is a predominance of customary laws that do not favor
         women’s rights.29
  • Establish dedicated units or specialized police stations. Specialized stations or dedicated units
    with trained personnel may be better equipped to provide survivor-centered service, collect
    survivors’ statements without re-victimization, and facilitate the collection of forensic evidence.


8 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


    Despite generally being under-resourced and under-staffed, a study in Melanesia found that women
    reported better treatment and services in special police units for offences against women and would
    like to see such services expanded.30 If dedicated units or specialized police stations are already in
    place, provide additional resources and training based on their assessed needs and assist with
    monitoring and evaluation efforts.31 See Box 5.
  • Provide long-term support and on-going
    training to frontline workers, the police and
    justice system personnel with the objective of                           Box 5. Promising practices…
    sensitizing them about VAWG issues and improving                         Gender Desks in the Rwanda
    their response to survivors. In order to improve the                     National Police
    quality of the services, training should be
                                                                             The Gender Desks in the Rwanda National
    accompanied by adequate staffing, infrastructure,                        Police, with the support of UN Women,
    and equipment as well as inter-institutional                             conducted a recruitment campaign for female
    protocols/referral systems to meet survivors’ short-                     police officers and set up a hotline for
    term and long-term needs.32 33 For further                               survivors of sexual and gender-based violence.
    information on such training, see the website for                        These actions led to a significant increase in
                                                                             reported cases of violence. This result can be
    Aequitas, an organization that provides training on
                                                                             attributed in large part to the greater comfort
    the prosecution of violence against women for                            survivors felt sharing information about
    justice system personnel.                                                VAWG with other women.
    o For the police, focus the training on clear
                                                                             More examples at:
    protocols for responding to reports of domestic and                      http://www.unwomen.org/co/what-we-
    sexual violence, emphasizing women’s legal right to                      do/peace-and-security/achieving-
    be protected from violence. Include information                          security#sthash.jMxILw3y.dpuf
    about disciplinary action against police offenders.34
    o For justice system personnel, including judges,
    emphasize human rights approaches more broadly; include training on violence against women. 35
    Provide training (including refresher trainings) on new laws.36 37

Coordinated/Multisectoral Initiatives
  • Improve the inter-institutional coordination and responses to VAWG among actors of the
    justice sectors through collaboration agreements and joint interventions. These actors
    include police, judges, lawyers, public defenders, and legal aid as well as actors of other relevant
    sectors (health, education, social services). Facilitate coordination between different levels of
    government, civil society, and the private sector.38 See Box 2.
  • Promote integrated services for VAWG survivors such as one-stop-shops using
    multidisciplinary teams that include police, attorneys or public prosecutors, forensic experts,
    psychologists, and health providers to provide quality services and reduce revictimization during the
    process of criminal investigation.39



9 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


  • Carry out campaigns to promote citizen disarmament, control the circulation of firearms,
    and limit alcohol sales. A successful intervention by the municipal government of Bogotá,
    Colombia, which combined citizen disarmament with limits on the sale of alcohol after certain hours,
    generated a significant reduction in all types of violence.40 41 Excessive alcohol consumption,
    particularly binge drinking, has been strongly associated with intimate partner violence in almost
    every setting in which this association has been studied.42 Recent World Bank Group research
    showed that women whose husbands get drunk “often” have five times the risk of experiencing
    IPV.43

Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
  • Promote the use of technologies to increase awareness around VAWG and knowledge of
    available services. New promising technologies that aim to increase safety-seeking behaviors,
    such as internet-based tools (for example, Internet Resources and Information for Safety (IRIS) 44
    and smartphone apps like MyPlan and Love is Not Abuse)45 should be integrated into service
    provision and prevention strategies.46 Technology can be used to provide information on geo-
    referenced services to women as well as educational resources through the internet. 47
    Nonetheless, the development and use of such technology for survivors of VAWG should be
    undertaken with caution, since perpetrators may have access to women’s technology devices.
  • Adopt technology such as SMS and geocoding technologies for monitoring and reporting
    VAWG incidents. Information about sexual harassment from women can be collected in real time
    through SMS to generate maps of “hotspots” of sexual violence through apps like Hollaback! 48
    Confidential hotlines and reporting via SMS can make it easier for VAWG survivors to contact a
    crisis intervention officer or the police. Telephone hotlines are a way for survivors, their family, and
    friends to speak about the violence they are experiencing and is often the first and only way
    survivors report the violence and access information on the suite of services available to
    them. Reports show that survivors often feel like they have more support and information after
    accessing a hotline.49 Panic buttons are GPS devices that can increase the protection of IPV
    women survivors that have restraining orders. Once the women activate the device, the police are
    able to track down their location and protect them.

Community Level
  • Foster dialogue among community actors, NGOs, and the justice sector: Discussions should
    include women’s human rights and their participation within traditional or restorative justice
    systems.50 Although informal and community justice systems such as restorative justice, peace
    mediation, and conflict resolution can offer culturally sensitive, straightforward solutions to incidents
    of VAWG, in certain cases these systems may further perpetuate unequal gender norms, as
    community institutions are often controlled by men.
  • Work with partners to establish community policing initiatives or police-community
    partnerships that include an explicit focus on violence against women and girls. There are
    numerous examples of successful community policing initiatives to prevent and respond to

10 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


    survivors of VAWG. The roles of such partnerships may vary depending on the issues faced by the
    community and the resources available. Partnership activities include creating new arrest policies,
    providing follow-up support for victims, prosecuting offenders, monitoring system activity,
    developing intervention programs, or strengthening civil remedies, among others.51
  • Provide support to NGOs offering women legal literacy and human rights training in order to
    promote women’s rights in the community. Wherever possible, include men in the training.
    Survivors should, at a minimum, have access to information provided through self-help pamphlets –
    this has been successfully used by women in Melanesia to obtain support and protection orders. 52
    Assist NGOs with building the capacity of civil society groups, especially women’s organizations, to
    monitor the situation of women’s security and the quality of services received.
  • Support the establishment and training of community paralegals to support and advise
    VAWG survivors on legal recourses.53 Community paralegals may help to bridge the gap
    between formal and informal systems. As such, the uptake of legal options is higher when women
    are provided with assistance from trained paralegals.54
  • Increase available services for survivors of violence, such as safe houses and mobile legal
    aids clinics if they exist.55 56 Service access can be improved by bringing them closer to the
    communities and providing them free of charge or at low cost. Addressing awareness of services as
    well as women’s time and resource constraints may increase the demand for and use of such
    services.57
  • Design and implement information, awareness-raising, and capacity-building campaigns in
    the communities on the impacts of VAWG and how to prevent and respond to it.




11 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


     RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR INTEGRATING
VAWG INTO CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE PROJECTS
Guidance/Tools

CEDAW. (2012). Do our Laws Promote Gender Equality? A Handbook for CEDAW-based Legal
Reviews

Chiongson, R.A et al. (2011). Role of Law and Justice in Achieving Gender Equality. World
Development Report 2012 Gender Equality and Development: Background Paper.

DESA/DAW. (2010). Handbook for Legislation on Violence against Women.
Provides stakeholders with detailed guidance to support the adoption and effective implementation of
legislation, which prevents violence against women, punishes perpetrators, and ensures the rights of
survivors everywhere.

Rainero, L., Rodigou, M. and Perez, S. (2006). Herramientas para la promoción de ciudades seguras
desde la perspectiva de género.

Ramaseshan, G.(2007). Addressing Rape as a Human Rights Violation: The Role of International
HumanRights Norms and Instruments Link [English]:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1146984

Reuland, M, Morabito, M.S., Preston, C., and Cheney, J. (2004). Police-Community Partnership to
Address Domestic Violence.

UNDP. (2005). Programming for Justice: Access for All: A Practitioner’s Guide to a Human Rights-
Based Approach to Access to Justice.

UN Women. (2009). Domestic Violence Legislation and its Implementation: An Analysis for ASEAN
countries based on international standards and good practices.

UNODC. 2010. Handbook on Effective Police Responses to Violence against Women: Criminal Justice
Handbook Series

World Bank. (2014). Women, Business and the Law 2014: Removing Restrictions to Enhance Gender
Equality.

Data sources
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) is the body of
independent experts that monitors implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. The website provides information on countries that have ratified, latest
reports by country, and other useful documents.



12 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


The Due Diligence Project is research-advocacy project that aims to add content to the international
legal principle of ‘due diligence’ in the context of State responsibility to end VAWG. The objective is to
create and accountability framework based on the due diligence principle, namely the Due Diligence
Framework together with guiding principles that are concrete and measurable across regions.

The International Women's Rights Action Watch (IWRAW) was organized in 1985 at the Third
World Conference on Women in Nairobi, Kenya, to promote recognition of women’s human rights under
the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW), an international human rights treaty.

The Stop Violence Against Women website (STOPVAW), a project of The Advocates for Human
Rights, is a forum for information, advocacy and change in the promotion of women's human rights
around the world.

Research
Bennett, L., Riger, S., Schewe, P., Howard, A., & Wasco, S. (2004). Effectiveness of hotline, advocacy,
counseling, and shelter services for victims of domestic violence a statewide evaluation. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 19(7), 815-829.

Dinnen, S. and Haley, N. (2012). Evaluation of the Community Project Officer Program in Solomon
Islands. (Justice for the Poor Research Report). World Bank.

Feder, L., Wilson, D. B., and Austin, S. (2008). Court-mandated interventions for individuals convicted
of domestic violence. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 12, 1-49.

Moser, C. O. N. and McIlwaine, C. (2006). Latin American Urban Violence as a Development Concern:
Towards a Framework for Violence Reduction. World Development 34(1), 89-112.

Callan, M. and Saneto, I. (2012). Strongim Gavman Program: INI767: Independent Progress Report:
Mid-Term Review of Strongim Gavman Program.

Mukasa, S., McCleary-Sills, J., Heilman, B., Namy, S., Brady, L., and Stich, S. (2014). Review of
Australian Aid Programs in the Pacific Aimed at Ending Violence against Women.Washington, DC:
International Center for Research on Women. http://dfat.gov.au/about-us/publications/Pages/review-of-
australian-aid-initiatives-in-the-pacific-aimed-at-ending-violence-against-women.aspx

Rodríguez, J.A. and León, J.S. (2007) Mujeres y pandillas. Maras y pandillas, comunidad y policía en
Centroamérica: Hallazgos de un estudio integral. Costa Rica: Demoscopía S.A. Retrieved from:
http://www.scribd.com/doc/32651664/5/MUJERES-Y-PANDILLAS

Solhjell, R., Karlsrud, J., and Sande Lie, J. (2010). Protecting civilians against sexual and gender-based
violence in Eastern Chad. Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.

Srinivasan, A. (2011). Gender Violence as Insecurity: Research Trends in South Asia. (New Voices
Series 9).



13 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


Worden, A. P. (2001). Models of Community Coordination in Partner Violence Cases: A Multi-Site
Comparative Analysis, Final Report. US Department of Justice. Washington, DC.

World Bank. (2011) Increasing Access to Justice for Women, the Poor, and Those Living in Remote
Areas: An Indonesian Case Study. Justice For the Poor Briefing Note 6(2).

World Bank. (2011). World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved from: http://www.worldbank.org/wdr2011

World Bank. (2012) World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington,
DC: World Bankhttp://wwwr.worldbank.org/wdr2012.




14 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF


                                                   REFERENCES
1
 World Development Report team calculations based on Chen, Ravallion, and Sangraula 2008 poverty
data (available on POVCALNET (http://iresearch.worldbank.org). Cited in World Bank, 2011.
2
 Stöckl, H., Devries, K., Rotstein, A., Abrahams, N., Campbell, J., Watts, C., and Moreno, C. G. (2013).
The global prevalence of intimate partner homicide: a systematic review. The Lancet, 382(9895), 859-
865.
3
 Chen, P. H., Jacobs, A., & Rovi, S. L. (2013). Intimate partner violence: childhood exposure to
domestic violence. FP essentials, 412, 24-27.
4
 Fleming, P., Barker, G., McCleary-Sills, J., and Morton, M.(2013). Engaging men and boys in
advancing women’s agency: Where we stand and new directions. World Bank, Women’s Voice,
Agency, & Participation Research Series 2013 No.1. Washington, DC: World Bank.
5
 Klugman, J., Hanmer, L., Twigg, S., Hasan, T., McCleary-Sills, J., and Santa Maria, J. (2014). Voice
and Agency: Empowering women and girls for shared prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/19036
6
    Klugman, et al., 2014.
7
 Bott, S., Guedes, A., Claramunt, M.C., Guezmes, A. (2010). Improving the Health Sector Response to
Gender Based Violence: A Resource Manual for Health Care Professionals in Developing Countries.
8
 Note: Other challenges include the re-victimization of survivors through bias or mistreatment, and in
some countries, women’s limited right to practice voluntary marriage, divorce, child custody, and child
support (Bott et al., 2010).
9
    Note: Out of 100 included in Women, Business and Law 2014.
10
   McCleary-Sills, J., Namy, S., Nyoni, J., Rweyemamu, D., Salvatory, A., and Steven, E. (2013). Help-
seeking pathways and barriers for survivors of gender-based violence in Tanzania: Results from a
study in Dar es Salaam, Mbeya, and Iringa Regions. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Engender
Health/Champion.
11
     McCleary-Sills et al., 2013.
12
  Comisión Interamericana de Derechos Humanos (CIDH). (2011). Acceso a la justicia para mujeres
víctimas de violencia sexual en Mesoamérica.
13
     Bott et al., 2010.
14
 World Health Organization. (2003). Guidelines for medico-legal care of victims of sexual violence.
Retrieved from http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2004/924154628X.pdf
15
     U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). (2009). A Guide to Programming Gender-based



15 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF



Violence Prevention and Response Activities.
16
 Adapted from Ellsberg, M., and Heise, L. (2005). Researching Violence Against Women: A Practical
Guide for Researchers and Activists. Washington, DC: World Health Organization, PATH.
17
  Adapted from Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). (2014). Violencia contra las mujeres y el
Sistema de Justicia Penal: Nota técnica sectorial para la incorporación del enfoque de igualdad de
género.; and IDB. (2013). Seguridad Ciudadana y Justica: Nota técnica sectorial para la incorporación
del enfoque de igualdad de género.
18
     USAID, 2009.
19
   UN WOMEN. (2013). A transformative stand-alone goal on achieving gender equality, women’s
rights and women’s empowerment: imperatives and key components.
20
  Ellsberg, M. (2008). Violence Against Women in Melanesia and East Timor: Building Global and
Regional Promising Approaches.
21
     UN Women. (2012). Handbook on National Action Plans on Violence Against Women.
22
     Ellsberg, 2008.
23
     WHO, 2003.
24
     Ellsberg, 2008.
25
   See: Argentina Ministerio de Salud, Presidencia de la Nacion. (2011) Protocolo para la atención
integral a personas víctimas de violaciones sexuales: Instructivo para equipos de salud; Gobierno de
Chile, Ministerio del Interior, Int Endencia Regional de Atacama. (2010). Protocolo de Atención para
Casos de Violencia Intrafamiliar; Colombia. Protocolo para la prevención, protección y promoción de
los derechos de las mujeres víctimas de la violencia, Guía de Consulta Abreviada para el Examen
Sexológico Forense, Informe Pericial y Manejo del Kit para la Toma de Muestras en los Sectores
Forense y de Salud.
26
     USAID, 2009.
27
  Arango, D., Morton, M., Gennari, F., Kiplesund, S., and Ellsberg, M. (2014). Interventions to Prevent
and Reduce Violence Against Women and Girls: A Systematic Review of Reviews. Women’s Voice,
Agency, and Participation Research Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.
28
 Organization of American States (OAS) and Inter-American Commission of Women. (2012). Briefing
Note:A Rights-based and Gender Equality Approach to Citizen Security in the Americas.
29
     IDB, 2013.
30
     Ellsberg, 2008.
31
     OAS, 2012.




16 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF



32
  Morrison, A. and Alvarado, N. (2012, June) From Knowledge to Action: A framework for Collaboration
on Preventing Violence against Women in Central America. Paper prepared for the Central America
Donors Forum.
33
  Kilonz, N. (2012). Interactive Expert Panel: Elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against
women and girls: Provision of support services to women and girls victims/survivors of violence. New
York: United Nations Commission on the Status of Women.
34
     Ellsberg, 2008.
35
     Bott et al., 2010.
36
     Bott et al., 2010.
37
     USAID, 2009.
38
     OAS, 2012.
39
  Snow, R. (2006). Sex Crimes Investigation Catching and Prosecuting the Perpetrators. United
States: Praeger Publishers.
40
   Note: Controlling firearms and alcohol had a significant, albeit not large, effect in violence reduction.
In Bogota, Colombia, homicide rates decreased from 80 to 28 homicides per 100,000 people and the
police increased arrest rates by 400 percent without an increase in the size of the police force. Buvinic,
M., Alda, E., and Lamas, J. (2005). Emphasizing prevention in citizen security: The Inter-American
Development Bank’s contribution to reducing violence in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank
41
     Buvinic, M., Alda, E., and Lamas, J. (2005).
42
     Heise, Lori L. (2011). What works to prevent partner violence: An evidence overview. .
43
     Klugman et al., 2014.
44
     Klugman et al., 2014.
45
   Note: Details about MyPlan can be found at http://www.joinonelove.org/resources-help and
information on the Love is Not Abuse app can be found at http://www.loveisnotabuse.com/ Note: To
learn more about IRIS, please visit
https://www.pdx.edu/sites/www.pdx.edu.wrc/files/Iris_Study_Summary.pdf.
46
     Klugman et al. 2014.
47
   Note: Some examples are presented in: CEPAL. (2013). Mujeres en la economía digital: Superar el
umbral de la desigualdad. Retrieved from
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/3/51083/Mujeresenlaeconomiadigital.pdf
48
  Institute of Medicine (IOM) and National Research Council (NRC). (2012). Communications and
technology for violence prevention: Workshop summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies


17 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
CITIZEN SECURITY, LAW, AND JUSTICE BRIEF



Press. Examples of monitoring VAWG using technology are Harassmap in Egypt (http://harassmap.org)
and Maps4Aid in India (https://www.facebook.com/we4change). For further information on Hollaback,
see http://www.ihollaback.org/about/
49
     Bennett, L. et al., 2004.
50
     Ellsberg, 2008.
51
     Reuland, et. al., 2004.
52
     Ellsberg, 2008.
53
     USAID, 2009.
54
     Ellsberg, 2008.
55
     Bott et al., 2010.
56
     USAID, 2009.
57
     World Bank, 2012.




                                            PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: Jonathan Ernst/World Bank.
Page 8: Curt Carnemark/World Bank.



This brief was written by Floriza Gennari (GWI), Nidia Hidalgo (IDB), Jennifer McCleary-Sills (WBG), and
Diana Arango (GWI), with comments and editing from Manuel Contreras (GWI), Mary Ellsberg (GWI), Anne-
Marie Urban (IDB), and Sveinung Kiplesund (WBG). Inputs were also provided by Rea Abada Chiongson
(WBG), and Andy Morrison (IDB). Lisa Fry (WBG) provided editorial support.




18 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Citizen Security, Law, and Justice Brief
