                                                                                          92968
     VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
     EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF




                                                                           EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF




April   2015
  0 | Violence      MENT
               Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief

           BRIEF
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


                I know education is what separates a girl who is trapped in a cycle of poverty, fear, and
                                 violence from one with a chance at a better future.
                              —Malala Yousafzai (July 13, 2014, The New York Times)




                                                    KEY POINTS
  • Experiencing violence in schools can negatively impact girls’ enrollment as well as the quality of the
    education they receive. Evidence suggests that sexual harassment is widespread in educational
    settings in many parts of the world. For example, one study in Brazil found that 8% of students from
    5th to 8th grade had witnessed sexual violence within the school environment.1
  • Parental concerns about girls’ safety in school and while traveling to and from school appear to
    lower female school enrollment in settings such as South Asia, Africa and the Middle East.2
  • Children who have witnessed violence at home or experienced violence have lower educational
    attainment. A study in Nicaragua, for example, found that 63% of the children of abused women
    had to repeat a school year and dropped out of school on average four years earlier than others.3 In
    Zambia, girls who experienced sexual violence were found to have more difficulty concentrating on
    their studies, some students transferred to another school to escape harassment, and others
    dropped out of school because of pregnancy.4
  • Few ministries of education around the world have explicit policies on sexual violence and
    harassment as unacceptable, and few have developed guidelines on the definition of harassment
    and how educational institutions should respond. Often, only the most egregious cases of school-
    based sexual violence result in criminal prosecution.5


             INTERSECTION BETWEEN EDUCATION AND VAWG
  • Schools are one of the most important environments for children’s socialization. Education is a
    powerful tool for empowerment, and schools can contribute to building respectful relationships
    between boys and girls.6 School environments can also reflect characteristics of the communities
    that surround them, including gender norms and levels of violence. Across the globe, there are
    girls who face violence in, around, and on the way to and from schools. This violence includes
    sexual harassment/assault and bullying, and it is perpetrated by other students, out of school youth,
    teachers, school administrators, and others.
  • The challenge for schools is two-fold: to reduce all forms of discrimination that contribute to
    violence against women and girls (VAWG) within the school setting and secondly, to strengthen the
    capacity of schools to promote non-violence in families and communities.7 As such, the formal
    education system can be a key site for eliminating gender-based stereotypes in educational
    curricula by: providing gender-sensitivity training for teachers; creating a school environment that
    rejects and prevents violence, including VAWG; offering specialized courses on human rights,

1 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


    including women’s rights; and fostering non-violent social relationships and mutual tolerance among
    students.
  • Ministries of education and other policy makers, with the support of communities and schools, can
    engage in the prevention of VAWG by reforming education sector laws and policies, improving the
    institutional response to VAWG at the school level, and promoting community mobilization in
    support of girls’ safety and rights.8
  • The education sector can also collaborate with other sectors to ensure that girls’ and young
    women’s well-being is safeguarded. It can also provide vital support to community-level social
    norm/behavior change interventions to reduce the acceptability of VAWG.




              ETHICAL AND SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
                        VAWG INTERVENTIONS9
Any intervention that aims to prevent or address VAWG should include precautions above and beyond
routine risk assessment to guarantee no harm is caused. This includes following ethical guidelines related to:
respect for persons, non-maleficence (minimizing harm), beneficence (maximizing benefits), and justice

2 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


to protect the safety of both service providers and the survivors. The sensitive nature of collecting information
about VAWG demands additional precautions above and beyond routine risk assessments to guarantee no
harm is caused. Interventions should:
  • Assess whether the intervention may increase VAWG
  • Minimize harm to women and girls
  • Prevent revictimization of VAWG
  • Consider the implications of mandatory reporting of suspected VAW cases
  • Be aware of the co-occurrence of child abuse
  • Minimize harm to staff working with survivors
  • Provide referrals for care and support for survivors



 For further details on these Ethical and Safety Recommendations, visit the Ethics section of our website.




                                   RAPID SITUATION ANALYSIS
Integrating VAWG prevention and response into education projects requires an understanding of the
legal, social, and epidemiological context of VAWG and how this relates to education initiatives. Project
teams should work with ministries of education, teachers’ groups, other governmental stakeholders,
private sector partners, non-governmental organizations, local experts, communities and other
counterparts in the country to answer some or all following questions:


    For general questions to undertake a Rapid Situation Analysis visit the Integrate section of our website.




Specific questions for the sector:
  • What is the educational status of boys and girls, i.e., enrollment, pass, and completion rates? What
    type of cultural and social constraints do girls face that might limit their educational attainment?
  • What is the prevalence of VAWG in schools (if data are not available, what mechanisms are
    required to support data collection)? Who are the main perpetrators of VAWG in schools? (These
    might include other students, teachers/staff, or others.)
  • Are there any traditional practices, norms, or dynamics that may increase girls’ vulnerability to
    violence in the school context?


3 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


  • Are there institutional codes of conduct for teachers/administrative staff? Do these provide
    definitions of violence and harassment and specify sanctions for these behaviors?
  • What obligations do teachers, administrative staff, and the Ministry of Education personnel have
    with regard to situations of VAWG?
  • What are the current protocols and norms regarding the identification and care of violence
    survivors, particularly students? Are there training programs on VAWG response for education
    sector personnel?
  • Is the education sector participating in any inter-institutional coordination mechanisms for
    addressing VAWG?
  • What initiatives are being implemented in schools to prevent VAWG? Are there VAWG awareness-
    raising and violence prevention activities for students? For Parent Teacher Associations (PTAs)?
  • Do community members, and girls in particular, view schools as safe environments? Are the routes
    to school safe?


          KEY AREAS FOR INTEGRATING VAWG IN EDUCATION
Policy Level
The first and most important step toward eliminating violence against girls in schools is to develop a
strong and unequivocal policy statement that sexual violence and harassment are unacceptable in
educational institutions and will not be tolerated, accompanied by clear definitions about what
constitutes harassment and sexual violence.
In addition, the vital role of the education sector in building skills that contribute to violence prevention
in homes and communities should be outlined at the policy level.
Specific actions may include:
  • Support laws and policy design or reforms to establish a role for the education sector in
    preventing, identifying, and responding to VAWG. Recommend specific budget allocations for
    their implementation and for the resulting response mechanisms.10 Monitor the impact of existing
    legislation on women.11
  • Support the preparation of national action plans to address VAWG in schools. These should
    include sexual harassment policies and enforcement mechanisms for educators, staff, and
    students. The plan should also include a clear dissemination strategy to ensure awareness of the
    policy by all those participating in the educational establishment.
           o     Ensure the plan includes mechanisms for students, faculty, and staff to safely and
           confidentially report violence. The policy must also include referrals to appropriate services
           for survivors after violence is reported.12



4 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


           o     Data collected in the context of service provision (including referral services) can be
           collected in a safe and ethical way that does not put the survivor at risk for identification. No
           identifiable information should be included in records. It may be useful to analyze the
           reporting trends from service provision institutions and, where available, compare them to
           trends found in Violence Against Children Surveys.
           o     Depending on the specific country context, national action plans can be stand-alone or
           form part of broader “safe schools” or “coexistence in schools” initiatives, which are emerging
           in a growing number of countries. For examples and further information, please see the links
           listed under Guidance/Tools at the end of this brief.
  • Develop institutional codes of conduct for teachers and administrative enforcement mechanisms
    that, among other elements, prohibit sexual harassment, sexual contact with students, or other
    abuses of students.

Institutional/Sectoral Level
Efforts to improve the institutional commitment to
eliminating VAWG and to augment schools’ contributions to                      Box 1. Promising Practices…
violence prevention and response could involve the                             Raising awareness about
following:                                                                     VAWG among youth and their
  • Develop and carry out a training curriculum for                            communities
    teachers and school staff to build their capabilities
    to promote gender equitable norms as well as to                            Papua New Guinea’s National Gender Policy
                                                                               and Plan on HIV/AIDS (2006–2010) includes
    detect and prevent sexual abuse. The curriculum
                                                                               activities that promote safer sex education
    should include the entire teaching and administrative                      based on gender equality, human rights, and
    staff and involve parents as well as the wider                             consensual sex free of violence. The target
    community.                                                                 audience for this activity includes both in-
                                                                               school and out-of-school youth (male and
           o    Teachers and school staff should be made                       female). Other activities involve awareness-
           aware of institutional codes of conduct, including                  raising among adults and youth in communities
           the unacceptability of sexual harassment and                        about the negative impacts of early marriage,
           misconduct within schools, as well as how to                        intergenerational relationships, physical and
           respond appropriately to students who are                           sexual violence against women, sexual
                                                                               harassment in schools and workplaces, child
           experiencing or witnessing violence, including
                                                                               sexual abuse and exploitation, incest and
           abusive relationships, intra-family violence, and                   polygamy.
           sexual violence.5
                                                                               Source: UN Women. (2012). Handbook for
           o     Modules on the prevention of sexual                           National Action Plans on Violence Against Women.
           harassment prevention and gender discrimination
           should be included in teacher certification
           requirements and continuing education curricula.



5 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


  • Foster the integration of the prevention of VAWG, including school-based harassment, in
    sexual and reproductive health and/or life-skills curricula for students. This is a low-cost and
    effective activity that can reduce partner violence among youth, and, if combined with sexual health
    classes, increase safe sex through condom use.13 See Box 1.
  • Promote curricular reform to update textbooks with content that promotes gender-equitable
    norms and nonviolence among students and educators
  • Expand school-based counseling and referral services by putting in place at least one
    counselor or teacher who can be a first point of contact for students experiencing VAWG. Ensure
    the counselor or teacher is aware of ethical and safety guidelines, has access to referral services
    (including social services), and has access to a space where student confidentiality and privacy can
    be respected.14 See Box 2.




6 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF



 Box 2. Promising practices… Increasing access to counseling and referral
 services
 A number of schools have tried to improve their response to sexual violence and harassment by providing
 counseling and referral services to students. For example, the TANESA “Guardian Project” in Tanzania aimed to
 improve girls’ safety by designating one teacher from each of 185 primary schools as a “guardian” or mlezi (Mgalla
 et al, 1998; Mirsky, 2003; Guedes, 2004). Mlezis were trained to counsel girls who experienced sexual violence or
 harassment, or who needed advice about other sexual and reproductive health issues. The program was evaluated
 through interviews with teachers, mlezis, and 1,219 students in 40 schools where TANESA was implemented and
 22 schools where it was not. Over 61% of girls consulted the guardians during the first year. In control schools,
 not a single girl said that she would ever report sexual harassment by a teacher, compared to 52% of girls in
 schools with a mlezi.

 Source: Bott, S, Morrison, A., and Ellsberg, M. (2005). Preventing and Responding to Gender-Based Violence in Middle and
 Low Income Countries: A Multi-Sectoral Literature Review and Analysis. (Policy Research Working Paper 3618).
 Washington, DC: The World Bank.

  • Carry out school-based programs specifically targeting the prevention of dating violence
    among youth. Evidence has shown that school activities focusing on improving conflict
    management skills and changing harmful gender norms, in combination with complementary
    community activities, can reduce psychological abuse and sexual violence perpetration among
    youth in abusive relationships.15 Longer-term transformative approaches within education should
    include social and emotional skills and learning strategies that promote these skills. See Box 3.
  • Address cyberbullying, a growing form of violence to which girls are particularly
    susceptible. One study from the United States in 2010 found that over one third of adolescent
    girls participating in a study reported that they had been bullied online. While cyberbullying may
    often take place outside of the school environment, almost 70 percent of the victims reported that
    the abuser was someone they knew from school.16 Although limited evidence is available on the
    effectiveness of prevention interventions, schools should at a minimum educate students, teachers,
    and parents about online safety, internet use and the many negative consequences of
    cyberbullying.
  • Employ edutainment approaches to promote changes in attitudes and behavior among
    youth, including radio or TV awareness campaigns and theater. This is a cost-effective and
    powerful strategy for changing norms and behaviors that can be adapted for use either in schools
    or within the community or be used in conjunction with dating violence prevention curricula.17 See
    Box 4.




7 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF



 Box 3. Promising practices… Preventing Adolescent Dating Violence
                1. The Safe Dates program (Foshee et al., 1998), carried out in the United States among youth in 8th
           or 9th grade, found significantly less psychological abuse and sexual violence perpetration among youth in
           abusive relationships after they participated in the program. Safe Dates consisted of both community and
           school-based activities. School activities included: a) theatre performances by students, b) a 10-session
           curriculum for students, and c) a poster contest, all of which aimed to change norms, decrease gender
           stereotypes and improve conflict management skills among youth. Community activities consisted of
           services for youth in abusive relationships, including crisis lines, support groups, materials for parents, and
           community service provider training.

                2. The Fourth R: Skills for Youth Relationships program (Wolfe et al., 2009), a cluster-randomized trial
           carried out among Canadian students in 9th grade, used an expanded, yet similar approach to the Safe Dates
           program by integrating 21 interactive classes on dating violence prevention with lessons on healthy
           relationships, sexual health, and substance abuse. The study found that teaching youth about healthy
           relationships as part of a school curriculum reduced physical violence among dating couples and, 2.5 years
           later, increased condom use among sexually active youth. This effective program had a low cost at $16
           CAD per student.

 Sources:
 Wolfe, D.A., Crooks, C., Jaffe, P., Chiodo, D., Hughes, R., Elli,s W., Stitt, L., and Donner, A. (2009). A school-
 based programs to prevent adolescent dating violence: a cluster randomized trial. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
 Medicine 163(8), 692-9.

 Foshee, V.A., Bauman, K.E., Arriaga, X.B., Helms, R.W., Koch, G.G., and Linder, G.F. (1998) An evaluation of
 Safe Dates, an adolescent dating violence prevention program. American Journal of Public Health 88(1), 45-50.

  • Improve girls’ safety at school. This could entail hiring more female teachers in schools with high
    percentages of male teachers, and/or providing in-service gender sensitivity training to teachers,
    administrators, and inspectors.18 (See Box 5.) Considerations should also be made as to where and
    how schools are built as this can impact the overall safety of students.19 For example:
           o      Build schools in locations perceived as safe by the communities, away from bars and
                  areas with high crime rates;
           o      Consider girls’ physical safety in the design of school infrastructure
           o      Ensure greater visibility by maximizing the number of windows and doors in classrooms,
                  offices, and other spaces);
           o      Provide separate and adequate sanitation facilities to prevent sexual assault in these
                  areas;
           o      Improve lighting in and around school grounds;
           o      Use perimeter and access point fencing and monitoring



8 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


  Box 4. Promising practices… “Edutainment”
  One promising approach to behavioral change is “edutainment”—the use of plays, music, and radio and television
  programs to promote health and social change. The strategy, used in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, has
  demonstrated effectiveness in changing attitudes related to reproductive health, AIDS education, and the status of
  women. Edutainment initiatives can be used in school and community settings to reach a large audience with
  important and engaging social change messages. Nongovernmental organizations have recently begun to use radio
  and television edutainment to address violence against women. One well-evaluated example targeting gender
  relations (including gender-based violence) was the Sexto Sentido television program in Nicaragua. A longitudinal
  study of more than 4,000 young people found significant improvements in attitudes toward violence and gender
  equity among those who watched the show regularly. Whether it can be effective in changing violent behavior has
  not yet been demonstrated, but its success in other areas suggests promise for violence prevention.

  Source: Morrison, A., Ellsberg, M., and Bott, S. (2007). Addressing Gender-Based Violence: A Critical Review of
  Interventions. The World Bank Research Observer22(1), 25-52.

  • Increase girls’ safety on the way to and from school. Reduce the distance girls must travel to
    school and establish “safe passage” routes that are patrolled. Other examples include providing
    school transportation or subsidies for students to use public transportation in places where use of
    public transportation does not increase their risk to violence. In other contexts, work with local civil
    society organizations, community groups, and parents to help facilitate groups of students that can
    walk or arrange safer shared transport options.



  Box 5. Promising practices… Breaking the cycle of violence through safer
  schools
  Evidence from “girl-friendly” schools shows that adjusting the physical school environment can dramatically
  improve girls’ attendance, retention, and achievement. Changes included the construction of sex-segregated
  latrines, clean water supplies, and an array of outreach activities to promote girls’ education. In Burkina Faso, girls’
  enrollment increased by 5 percentage points over that of their male counterparts after girl-friendly adjustments had
  been made. Both girls and boys showed improved test scores in the intervention schools, pointing to positive
  effects for both and increasing their likelihood of school completion. And because the risk of perpetrating
  violence is linked to men’s education level, this improvement for boys can also translate lower rates of violence
  committed in their adult years.

  Source: Kazianga, H., Levy, D., Linden, L. and Sloan, M. (2013). The Effect of ‘Girl-Friendly’ Schools: Evidence
  from the BRIGHT School Construction Program in Burkina Faso. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
  3(5), 41-62.; World Bank Group, 2014.

  • Carry out sexual assault prevention programs at the university or college level. There is a
    multitude of research on the effectiveness of such programs, almost all undertaken in the United
    States. While the evidence demonstrating the effectiveness of such programs in reducing violence
    is limited, they have shown effectiveness at changing norms and attitudes related to non-partner
    abuse.20, 21 Key lessons learned from sexual assault prevention programs within university settings
    include:


9 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


           o      Longer duration interventions (several sessions spanning months) are more effective
                  than one-off activities.22
           o      Professional presenters can be more effective than peers, although this may be due to
                  peer educators receiving limited support and supervision.23
           o      Course content should focus on risk reduction, gender role socialization, or information
                  and discussions on myths and facts about sexual assault rather than rape empathy.24
           o      In some circumstances, single-gender groups may be more helpful and/or appropriate,
                  particularly for women. Programs should consider the goals and topics of the
                  presentation before deciding whether to use single or mixed-gender groups.25

  Community Level
  Participatory activities that mobilize communities, such as community workshops, facilitated
  discussions, and theater can be useful for engaging the entire community in countering harmful
  gender norms that condone violence against women and girls. Emerging evaluation research in
  Zimbabwe, Ghana, and Malawi found that these types of activities raised awareness of abuse,
  increased parents’ willingness to report abuse, and allowed the community to confront the problem of
  abuse without putting individual girls at risk of retaliation.26
  • Increase buy-in for VAWG prevention and response through strategies to engage the entire
    community - youth, parents, religious and social leaders, teachers, and other influential adults.
    Such strategies might include:
           o      Parenting education programs: there is increasing evidence that parenting education
                  programs can serve as key interventions to reduce or prevent child maltreatment.
                  Parenting programs can also be effective for addressing antisocial childhood behaviors
                  linked to violence perpetration later in life.27
           o      Community-based workshops, theater, etc. to raise awareness of the issue of school-
                  based VAWG, educate the community on teacher and student sexual misconduct, and
                  decrease tolerance of sexual harassment/violence among the broader community.28
           o      Disseminating official (ministry of education) policies on sexual harassment and abuse in
                  schools to parents, PTAs, school committees, and community groups, along with the
                  correct procedures for students and parents to follow in reporting a case.29
           o      Strengthening the capacity of parent/teacher and community organizations to monitor
                  the performance of schools, and provide social accountability on VAWG.30 While PTAs
                  are often tasked with the management of finances and resources needed to run schools,
                  they can also be harnessed to support VAWG prevention and response activities, such
                  as linking with district education offices to report incidents and follow up cases.
           o      Engaging and strengthening partnerships and collaboration between schools and NGOs.


10 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


             RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR INTEGRATING
               VAWG INTO EDUCATION SECTOR PROJECTS
Guidance/Tools
    American College Health Association (ACHA) (May 2008). Shifting the Paradigm: Primary
    Prevention of Sexual Violence: An ACHA Toolkit. A CDC supported toolkit that provides facts,
    ideas, strategies, and resources for the prevention of sexual violence, primarily within the university
    context.
    Coexist Learning Project (CLP)
             CLP is a comprehensive and education outreach project. Its mission is to prepare students
             and teachers to interrupt violence in its less destructive stages.
    Common Sense Media (2011). Cyberbullying Toolkit.
    Doorways Training Manual (USAID, 2009). Available in English, Spanish, French, Arabic, and
    Russian, this set of three manuals is designed for teachers, students, and volunteer community
    counselors. The Doorways program can be integrated into any comprehensive national or local plan
    to reduce VAWG.
    Ecole de la Paix
             This program in the DRC focuses on reconciliation, non-violence and harmonious
             "coexistence" in schools.
    Futures Without Violence (2012). Beyond Title IX: Guidelines for Preventing and Responding to
    Gender-based Violence in Higher Education.
    Hinduja, S. & Patchin, J. W. (2009). Responding to Cyberbullying: Top Ten Tips for Educators,
    Cyberbullying Research Center.
    Limber, S. P., Kowalski, R. M., & Agatston, P. W. (2008-2009). Cyber Bullying: A Prevention
    Curriculum, Violence Prevention Works.
    Milofsky, A. (2011). The Peacebuilding Toolkit for Educators – Middle School Edition. United States
    Institute of Peace (USIP).
             This toolkit is designed to support the work of educators as peacebuilders, and focuses on
             peace-building as well as conflict avoidance/resolution.
    Overcoming Obstacles - Life Skills Program (2010). Overcoming Obstacles Anti-Bullying Handbook:
    Creating a Positive Environment in the Classroom and Beyond. Community for Education
    Foundation, Inc.
    Peaceful Schools International
             Peaceful Schools International provides support to schools that have declared a

11 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


             commitment to creating and maintaining a culture of peace
    Plante, E.G., Banyard, V.L., Moynihan, M.M., and Eckstein, R.P. (2007). Facilitator's Guide:
    Bringing in the bystander. A prevention workshop for establishing a community of responsibility.
    This guide focuses primarily on engaging bystanders, the surrounding community, and preventing
    violence at the post-secondary level.
             [Contact Victoria Banyard (Victoria.Banyard@unh.edu) or Mary Moynihan
             (marym@unh.edu) for a copy of the Facilitator's Guide]
    Promundo (2013). Program H|M|D: A Toolkit for Action Engaging Youth to Achieve Gender Equity
             While not specifically geared towards the education sector, this toolkit provides hands on
             activities and exercises to help youth question norms that condone violence against women
             and girls and can be used in a classroom setting.
    UN WOMEN and World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts (2013). Voices Against Violence.
             This curriculum is a global non-formal education curriculum to engage young people in
             efforts to prevent and end violence against girls and women. The co-educational curriculum
             is designed for various age groups ranging from 5 to 25 years and is available for download.
    UNICEF (2009). Child-Friendly Schools Manual.
             Chapter 5 is particularly relevant, as it analyzes threats to children’s health, safety and
             security and discusses how to ensure schools provide a protective environment.

Research
    Action Aid. (2013). Stop Violence Against Girls in School: A cross-country analysis of change in
    Ghana, Kenya and Mozambique. Retrieved from:
             http://www.actionaidusa.org/sites/files/actionaid/svags_review_final.pdf
    Fabiano, P.M., Perkins, H.W., Berkowitz, A.D., Linkenbach, J., and Stark, C. (2003). Engaging men
    as social justice allies in ending violence against women: Evidence for a social norms approach.
    Journal of American College Health, 5(3), 105-112.
    Together for Girls. (Swaziland 2007, Tanzania 2011, Kenya 2012, Zimbabwe 2013). Violence
    Against Children Surveys. Retrieved from Together for Girls website:
             http://www.togetherforgirls.org/dataresources.php
    Women and Law in Southern Africa-Zambia , Avon Global Center for Women and Justice at Cornell
    Law School and Cornell Law School International Human Rights Clinic. (2012). “They are
    Destroying Our Futures”: Sexual Violence Against Girls in Zambia’s Schools. Retrieved
    from:http://www.lawschool.cornell.edu/womenandjustice/Conferences-and-Events/upload/Sexual-
    Violence-Against-Girls-in-Zambia-s-Schools.pdf



12 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF


                                                  REFERENCES
1
 Morrison, A., Ellsberg, M., and Bott, S. (2007). Addressing Gender-Based Violence: A Critical Review
of Interventions. The World Bank Research Observer 22(1), 25-52.
2
    Morrison et al., 2007.
3
    Larraín, S., Vega, J., and Delgado, I. (1997). Relaciones familiares y maltrato infantil. Calicanto.
4
 Women and Law in Southern Africa-Zambia , Avon Global Center for Women and Justice at Cornell
Law School and Cornell Law School International Human Rights Clinic. (2012). “They are Destroying
Our Futures”: Sexual Violence Against Girls in Zambia’s Schools. Retrieved from:
http://www.lawschool.cornell.edu/womenandjustice/Conferences-and-Events/upload/Sexual-Violence-
Against-Girls-in-Zambia-s-Schools.pdf
5
    Morrison et al., 2007.
6
 UNiTE to End Violence Against Women. (2013). Orange Day. Retrieved from:
http://endviolence.un.org/orangedayseptember2013.shtml
7
    Morrison et al., 2007.
8
    Morrison et al., 2007.
9
 Adapted from Ellsberg, M., and Heise, L. (2005). Researching Violence Against Women: A Practical
Guide for Researchers and Activists. Washington, DC: World Health Organization, PATH.
10
   UN WOMEN. (2013). A transformative stand-alone goal on achieving gender equality, women’s
rights and women’s empowerment: imperatives and key components.
11
  Ellsberg, M. (2008). Violence Against Women in Melanesia and East Timor: Building Global and
Regional Promising Approaches. AusAID.
12
   Note: reporting of violence against children is mandated almost everywhere. See page 13:
http://srsg.violenceagainstchildren.org/sites/default/files/publications_final/web_safe_final.pdf
13
  Wolfe, D.A., Crooks, C., Jaffe, P., Chiodo, D., Hughes, R., Elli,s W., Stitt, L., and Donner, A. (2009). A
school-based programs to prevent adolescent dating violence: a cluster randomized trial. Archives of
Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 163(8), 692-9.
14
     Ellsberg and Heise, 2005.
15
  Foshee, V.A., Bauman, K.E., Arriaga, X.B., Helms, R.W., Koch, G.G., and Linder, G.F. (1998) An
evaluation of Safe Dates, an adolescent dating violence prevention program. American Journal of
Public Health 88(1), 45-50.




13 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
EDUCATION SECTOR BRIEF



16
   Burgess-Proctor, A., Patchin, J. W., and Hinduja, S. (2010). Cyberbullying and online harassment:
Reconceptualizing the victimization of adolescent girls. In V. Garcia and J. Clifford (Eds.), Female crime
victims: Reality reconsidered. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
17
     Foshee et al., 1998.
18
     Bott et al., 2005.
19
  UN Economic and Social Council. (2013). Report on the 57th Session of the Commission on the
Status of Women. New York: United Nations.
20
  Anderson, L.A., and Whiston, S.C. (2005). Sexual assault education programs: a meta-analytic
examination of their effectiveness. Psychology of Women Quarterly 29, 374–388.
21
  Brecklin, L.R., and Forde, D.R. (2001). A Meta-Analysis of Rape Education Programs. Violence and
Victims 16(3).
22
     Anderson and Whiston, 2005.
23
     Anderson and Whiston, 2005.
24
     Anderson and Whiston, 2005.
25
     Anderson and Whiston, 2005.
26
  Leach, F., Fiscian, V., Kadzamira, E., Lemani, E., & Machakanja, P. (2003).An investigative study of
the abuse of girls in African schools (No. 12849). Department for International Development
(DFID)(UK). Retrieved from: http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/12849/1/er030054.pdf.
27
     Heise, L. (2011). What works to prevent partner violence? An evidence overview.
28
     Leach et al., 2003.
29
     Leach et al., 2003.
30
     Leach et al., 2003.

                                           PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: Arne Hoel/World Bank.
Page 2: Maria Fleischmann/World Bank.
Page 6: Flore de Préneuf /World Bank.
This brief was written by Floriza Gennari (GWI), Anne-Marie Urban (IDB), Jennifer McCleary-Sills (WBG), Diana
Arango (GWI), and Sveinung Kiplesund (WBG), with comments and editing from Manuel Contreras (GWI), Mary
Ellsberg (GWI), and Nidia Hidalgo (IDB). Inputs were also provided by Loreto Biehl (IDB), Jo Kelcey (WBG), Joel
Reyes (WBG), and Claudia Uribe (IDB). Lisa Fry (WBG) provided editorial support.




14 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Education Sector Brief
