                                                                                                 92967
   VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
   DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




                                                                              DISASTER RISK
                                                                              MANAGEMENT BRIEF




   0 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief


April 2015 MENT
      BRIEF
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF

         “According to the principles of humanitarian aid and the international legal framework related to
         gender-based violence, the humanitarian community, host governments, donors, peacekeepers, the UN
         and all others engaged in working with and for affected populations are collectively accountable for
         preventing and responding to gender-based violence.”

         Source: Inter-Agency Standing Committee (2005). Guidelines for Gender-Based Violence Interventions
         in Humanitarian Settings: Focusing on Prevention of and Response to Sexual Violence in Emergencies.




                                                   KEY POINTS
  • Violence against women and girls (VAWG) has negative impacts on their physical and mental
    health. Health care settings provide a unique opportunity to identify VAWG survivors, provide critical
    support services, and prevent future harm.
  • In 2012, 357 natural disasters were registered with 124.5 million people affected and 9,655 people
    killed worldwide. This is in contrast with the rates during the previous decade (2002-2011), in which
    107,000 people died each year as a result of natural disasters.1 The number of people affected
    directly and indirectly by disasters has risen since the 1960s, as have the economic costs
    associated to these events.2 Analysis of data from recent disasters in seven countries (Haiti, Japan,
    Kenya, New Zealand, Pakistan, Samoa, and St Lucia) shows that the cost of damages caused by
    disasters ranged from 1.9% to 120% of GDP.3 In Nicaragua, for example, the damages of Hurricane
    Mitch were estimated at 41% of GDP in 1998.4
  • Six of the 10 countries with the highest disaster mortality are low or middle-income countries. Asia
    was the continent most often hit by natural disasters in 2012 (40.7%), followed by the Americas
    (22.2%), Europe (18.3%), Africa (15.7%) and Oceania (3.1%).5
  • Ample studies have shown that natural disasters, including tsunamis, hurricanes, earthquakes, and
    floods, disproportionately affect women and girls, who are at greater risk of violence and
    exploitation than men and boys in the face of uprooted housing and traditional support structures,
    disrupted access to services, and both structural and social obstacles to accessing food, relief,
    supplies, and latrines.
  • In 2010, unsafe living conditions after the earthquake in Haiti contributed to sexual violence against
    women and girls (VAWG) in camps;6 and both psychological and economic violence increased
    during and prior to Tropical Storm Agatha in Guatemala.7 In Sri Lanka and other countries affected
    by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, increased levels of intimate partner violence (IPV) and non-
    partner rape were documented in the wake of the disaster.8 A study conducted four years after
    Hurricane Katrina occurred in the United States found that the rate of new cases of VAWG among
    displaced women also increased and did not return to the pre-hurricane baseline during the
    protracted phase of displacement.9



1 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




INTERSECTION BETWEEN DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND
                      VAWG
  • Women and girls are at far greater risk of experiencing physical and sexual violence in emergency
    settings.10 Protection from violence is one of the minimum standards established as a principle for
    humanitarian aid.11 The types of VAWG that are common in emergency settings include rape and
    other sexual assault, physical assault, psychological and emotional abuse, sexual exploitation, and
    trafficking.12 It is important to note that the type of response required will vary depending on the
    forms of VAWG being perpetrated. For example,
    trafficking of women and girls might involve very
    different actors and responses (especially if it Acts of VAWG in crises may be perpetrated
    happens across borders) than increased incidence of by anyone, including husbands and other
                                                                intimate partners, family members, border
    rape within a specific location or an increase in
                                                                guards, military personnel, humanitarian aid
    physical intimate partner violence (IPV).                   workers, community members hosting the
  • In addition to the direct harm caused by violent acts, displaced, and other refugees and internally
                                                                displaced people.
    VAWG can also prevent women and girls from
    accessing services or securing shelters/safe spaces Source:            Reproductive      Health     Access,
    during an emergency, further increasing their Information and Services in Emergencies
    likelihood of injury or death.13 It can also impact (RAISE), RAISE Fact Sheet: Gender-Based
    women’s ability to access aid and other resources Violence.
                                                                http://www.raiseinitiative.org/library/pdf/fs_
    during recovery and reconstruction. Therefore, it is
                                                                gbv.pdf
    vital that disaster management projects include
    measures to prevent and effectively respond to
    VAWG.




2 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




              ETHICAL AND SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
                        VAWG INTERVENTIONS14
Any intervention that aims to prevent or address VAWG should include precautions above and beyond
routine risk assessment to guarantee no harm is caused. This includes following ethical guidelines related to:
respect for persons, non-maleficence (minimizing harm), beneficence (maximizing benefits), and justice
to protect the safety of both service providers and the survivors. The sensitive nature of collecting information
about VAWG demands additional precautions above and beyond routine risk assessments to guarantee no
harm is caused. Interventions should:
  • Assess whether the intervention may increase VAWG
  • Minimize harm to women and girls
  • Prevent revictimization of VAWG
  • Consider the implications of mandatory reporting of suspected VAW cases
  • Be aware of the co-occurrence of child abuse
  • Minimize harm to staff working with survivors
  • Provide referrals for care and support for survivors


   For further details on these Ethical and Safety Recommendations, visit the Ethics section of our website.




                                   RAPID SITUATION ANALYSIS
Before developing a plan to address VAWG prevention and response into a disaster risk management,
project teams should understand what the legal, social, and epidemiological situation of VAWG was in
the country, region or local community prior to the disaster. Teams should work with governments,
humanitarian aid groups, private sector partners, non-governmental organizations, local experts and
other counterparts in the country to answer some or all of the following questions:


      For general questions to undertake a Rapid Situation Analysis visit the Integrate section of our website.




3 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




Specific questions for the sector:
Before the emergency - Preparedness and mitigation:
  • Do the existing trainings on disaster risk management (DRM) include how to address VAWG in the
    different stages of the process?
  • What services will be needed to respond to VAWG during the emergency and the recovery, and
    which organizations will be responsible for providing them?
  • Do the established protocols for DRM (preparedness, emergency response, recovery) include
    actions on how to address and mitigate the risk of VAWG?
  • Is there any coordination among the institutions that work on DRM and those that work on VAWG
    prevention and response?
  During and after the emergency15 - Emergency response and recovery:
  • What is the proportion of women (as a percentage of the affected population) accessing
    humanitarian assistance or VAWG service providers within a referral system? This information can
    be illustrative of how safe women and girls perceive the delivery of aid and services to be.16
  • Have there been reports of sexual assault and/or other forms of VAWG (for examples, trafficking,
    intimate partner violence, forced marriage) perpetrated in the immediate aftermath of the crisis?
  • What are the main types of VAWG being perpetrated? Who is the most vulnerable to each type of
    violence, why, and where?
  • Who are the main perpetrators of violence?
  • What are the factors likely to increase the risk of violence within the affected communities?
  • What operating support systems and services are available, trusted, and accessible for VAWG
    survivors? Are existing service agencies adequately staffed and resourced to respond to VAWG?
  • What services are available to help affected families to recover from the crisis? Do they specifically
    address IPV/family violence and associated factors, such as substance abuse?
  • What security measures (police, UN, private, community, etc.) are in place to help prevent and
    respond to VAWG?




4 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




        KEY AREAS FOR INTEGRATING VAWG IN DISASTER RISK
                         MANAGEMENT
Prior to the Emergency – Preparedness and Mitigation

Policy Level
  While many countries have disaster contingency plans and preparedness strategies, these often do
  not include VAWG prevention and response strategies. At a minimum, DRM plans should:
  • Comprehensively address VAWG in legislation, policies, and plans on disaster risk
    management. Also, legal and policy frameworks on violence against women should address VAWG
    that occurs in emergency situations. Ensure budget allocations for their implementation.
  • Promote the participation of various sectors, stakeholders, and community members from
    diverse backgrounds (e.g. ethnicity, gender, disability status) in the development of preparedness
    plans that include a focus on VAWG prevention and response.17
  • Create or strengthen existing protocols/guidelines to integrate actions to respond to VAWG
    during the emergency and the recovery phase. Place specific emphasis on security measures
    for the protection of displaced populations, especially women and girls, and support services to help
    mitigate the risk of IPV and VAWG more broadly.
    o    Assign clear lines of responsibility for providing the services to respond to VAWG, and train the
         staff that will be in charge of these activities to comply with the protocol.

Institutional/Sectoral Level
  • Build the capacity of disaster response actors at the regional and national levels to identify
    and integrate VAWG issues into existing risk reduction and emergency response training and
    manuals. Adapt training materials on VAWG and emergencies to your setting and offer training
    opportunities on the adapted material to your staff. Examples include the virtual course on Gender
    and Disaster by Development Connections18 and UNFPA’s GBV in Emergencies training.19
    o    Train response teams and staff working directly with the community to recognize and respond to
         violence triggers.
  • Ensure preparedness plans consider that women and girls are at higher risk of experiencing
    physical and sexual violence in emergency settings. Unless adequate precautions are taken,
    measures intended to assist the population affected by disasters may place women and girls at



5 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




      greater risk of harm. Settlements for displaced populations, for example, should include ample
      patrols and adequate lighting, particularly at night.
  • Map VAWG services and develop dissemination materials outlining the availability of
    services. Note that information will need to be updated to include new actors after the disaster.20
  • Whenever possible, ensure medico-legal and health services (such as the collection of
    forensic material and treatment of injuries) are provided at the same time, same location,
    and ideally by the same person to avoid burdening the survivor of physical or sexual violence
    with multiple visits and points of contact.
      o   Health care workers should have adequate knowledge of local protocols and laws governing
          physical and sexual violence to avoid compromising legal processes, such as future
          investigations or court hearings.21
  • Strengthen confidential referral mechanisms among and between sectors working on VAWG
    prevention and response.22
  •
      Ensure that medical, reproductive health, and safety supplies are ready to be deployed in the
      case of an emergency.
  • Systematically include VAWG                      in    disaster      research,       evaluations,   training,   and
    advocacy/awareness campaigns.

Community Level
Work with government and key stakeholders, including community-based organizations and women in
the local community, to prevent VAWG and respond appropriately to survivors by:

  • Establishing confidential entry points where survivors and other community members can seek
    assistance after an incident of sexual violence and/or make an incident report.
  • Carrying out community educational programs on how to be prepared for disasters, with an
    emphasis on the right to a life free of violence before, during, and after disasters and the negative
    effects violence can have on the entire populations’ recovery. (See Box 1)




6 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




     Box 1. Promising Practices: A multi-media public information campaign on
     post-disaster VAWG in Nicaragua
     The post-Hurricane Mitch campaign, “Violence Against Women: A Disaster Men CAN Prevent,” designed and
     promoted by the Puntos de Encuentro Foundation in Nicaragua, was a novel approach addressing post-disaster
     VAWG, especially intimate partner violence (IPV). This nation-wide campaign cleverly applied the theme of rebuilding
     to personal relationships, drawing parallels between the hurricane and IPV. Campaign activities consisted of TV and
     radio announcements, educational materials, public presentations and training workshops, and promotional materials
     with the campaign slogan, including t-shirts, hats, calendars and bumper stickers. One leaflet, for example, described
     seven reasons VAWG negatively impacts the community, society, and development efforts, and provided men with
     anger management strategies and tips for peaceful conflict resolution.
     A mixed-methods evaluation of the campaign, comparing men exposed to the campaign with controls, found that the
     greatest impact was an increase in men’s belief in their ability to avoid violence: 15 percent more of the men exposed to
     the campaign believed this was the case, compared with the controls. The evaluation also revealed a greater belief in the
     perception that VAWG is as destructive as natural disasters and can hinder progress at the community level (15%
     increase among the men exposed to the campaign).
     Source: Reyes, Ruben. (n.d). Violencia contra las mujeres: un desastre que los hombres sí podemos evitar:
     http://www.jerez.es/fileadmin/Documentos/hombresxigualdad/fondo_documental/Violencia_masculina/Violencia.
     Un_desastre_que_los_hombres_si_podemos_evitar._Ruben_Reyes_Giron..pdf


7 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




During and After the Emergency – Response and Recovery
It is important that recovery be given equal attention to the emergency response phase since VAWG
and its effects continue after the acute crisis period of the disaster and require long term support to
address.

Policy Level
VAWG prevention and response require multi-sectoral coordination among health and social services
actors, legal, human rights, and security actors, and the community. The primary objectives of
coordinated action are two pronged: to ensure that VAWG survivors are identified and receive prompt,
confidential, and appropriate services according to guidelines and that mechanisms to prevent VAWG
are put into place.
  • Form inter-organizational, multi-sectoral VAWG working groups at the national, regional and
    local levels, comprised of VAWG service providers and other key actors from the community,
    government, UN, international and local NGOs, donors, etc. Identify coordinating agencies
    responsible for ensuring that the action described in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s
    Guidelines on Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings are carried out.
    Ensure the coordinating agencies operate with clear terms of reference that are agreed upon by all
    working group members and aligned with the IASC Guidelines.23
  • Develop an interagency VAWG Action Plan, together with government and key stakeholders.
    Delineate objectives, roles and responsibilities, and indicators for ensuring objectives are met. The
    plan should be informed by data obtained in the situation analysis, and with the active participation
    of women from the community. For detailed guidance on developing an action plan, please see, for
    example, the Handbook for Coordinating GBV in Humanitarian Settings.24

Institutional Level
  • Integrate VAWG expertise into agencies’ disaster response and recovery teams to help
    ensure the design and implementation of interventions that address VAWG comprehensively.
    VAWG advisors should also facilitate multi-sectoral coordination at national and local levels, and
    help build the capacity of locally-based actors during and after the crisis.25
  • Involve governmental and civil society groups already working to address VAWG in the
    affected regions in disaster-related coordination committees and decision-making bodies.26
  • Ensure that the Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s Codes of Conduct on Protection from
    Sexual Abuse and Exploitation in Humanitarian Crisis are enforced for all humanitarian aid
    workers, and post-disaster recovery and reconstruction staff.



8 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




  • Promote the standardization of VAWG data collection, analysis, and incident recording by all
    key stakeholders and partners. Use existing data collection systems in country or state of the art
    instruments such as the Gender-based Violence Information Management System (GBVIMS)27
  • Provide health and social services that take into account women’s and girls’ safety and the
    provision of confidential VAWG information and survivor services.



        Box 2. Promising Practices: Addressing VAWG in Response and Recovery
        Efforts
        Hurricane Mitch struck Central America in 1998, dropping historic levels of rainfall and causing catastrophic
        damage. In addition to the national and regional efforts to respond to the immediate shelter and safety needs
        of affected families and communities, the Nicaraguan government took steps to ensure that VAWG was also
        taken into account as a priority in the post-hurricane period. These included:
            1. A social and gender audit to assess the impact of the hurricane on both men and women, including
                 violence against women.
            2. Six months later, a second audit to identify who was included and excluded from relief efforts.
            3. Formation of a commission on psychosocial development to support the emotional recovery of
                 affected individuals, which included issues related to violence in all workshops and groups.
            4. The Nicaraguan Psychosocial Commission worked for several years after the hurricane to provide
                 support to survivors of violence in their healing and empowerment.

        Data on VAWG by Auditoria Social existed prior to the hurricane, which allowed a comparison and
        subsequent analysis in the wake of the storm. Local NGOs also conducted household surveys, participated in
        a social audit, and carried out campaigns about reducing VAWG.

        Source: UNFPA (2012) Gender Based Violence and Natural Disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean.

  • Develop projects that leverage women’s strength and capabilities, particularly in income-
    generating activities. Despite limited evidence that economic opportunities reduce VAWG, these
    interventions may reduce women’s need to resort to risky measures such as sex work or
    transactional sex.28
    o     Overall, when attempting to include women in disaster response and risk reduction agendas,
          ensure that this improves the situation of women, rather than merely adding to their workload.




9 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




Community Level
During and after the emergency, work with government and key stakeholders, including community-
based organizations and women in the local community to prevent VAWG and respond appropriately to
survivors’ needs.29 Some services must be offered beyond the immediate crisis to address the
continuing VAWG and to provide longer-term support for survivors recovering from trauma. The
following actions address both immediate and longer-term support scenarios:

Security
  • Design sites and shelters that meet internationally agreed-upon standards and that consider
    women’s and girls’ physical safety. To ensure that the site and shelter design strengthens the
    protection of women and girls, include them in consultations as much as possible.
    o    In Bassaso, Somalia, for example, focus groups revealed that women preferred corrugated
         galvanized iron shelters, despite the heat these generate, as these were perceived to be more
         effective for safeguarding against sexual violence than tents.30



  Box 3. Promising practices: Using Edutainment to Help Communities Prepare
  for Disasters: Caribbean Audio Soap Opera
  Entertainment-education (edutainment) is an effective means of providing information to a wide audience through
  an engaging and dramatic (or comedic) medium that has mass appeal. The Rough Season is a radio soap opera on
  disaster risk reduction strategies created for communities in the Caribbean that are vulnerable to recurrent natural
  disasters. This soap opera is based on other successful examples from across Latin America, such as “Times of
  Hurricanes” and “Tremors of the Heart.” Using edutainment principles, “The Rough Season” employs catchy
  music, culturally appropriate characters and storylines to raise awareness about the risks of natural disasters, food
  security crises, as well as IPV. The serial educates its audience about best practices in preparedness before a
  disaster and safety during and after. The ten episodes lasting 15 minutes each incorporate script, characters, and
  situations typical of a Caribbean scenario.

  This audio soap opera is an inter-agency effort of various organizations, including the
  Pan-American Health Organization, International Strategy on Disaster Reduction,
  International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent, and Association of Caribbean States.

  For more information, visit
  http://www.eird.org/eng/educacion/radionovela-caribe/radionovela-caribe-ing.htm

  • Ensure female protection or police officers are available, and that female workers are included
    in food distribution, registration, and other services set up to respond to the emergency.


10 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




  • Establish an early warning system for VAWG, so that individuals are able to report threatening
    behaviors before incidents occur, thus triggering appropriate preventive measures. Ensure that on-
    the-ground reporting mechanisms are private and confidential.
  • Distribute safety equipment with basic emergency supply kits, such as whistles, flashlights,
    etc. to help women and girls to better protect themselves.
  • Set up latrines, washing facilities and water points in accessible, secure locations, and have
    locks to ensure safety and privacy while the latrine or washing facility is being used.
  • Patrol firewood collection routes or provide direct transportation to firewood collection sites.
  • Identify vulnerable individuals, and after consulting them, provide them with special
    arrangements, such as housing for unaccompanied children and for female-headed households.
Outreach/psychosocial support
  • Implement outreach activities focusing on women and girls in camps/settlements, to raise
    awareness of risks of increased violence, how to protect themselves, and where to go for
    assistance.
  • Ensure the displaced population is informed of the availability and location of services for
    survivors of various forms of violence.
  • Provide culturally appropriate psychosocial support for families in crisis to help reduce the risk
    of IPV/family violence and provide direct support for VAWG survivors (during and after the crisis).
Sexual violence/sexual and reproductive health response (see also Box 4)
  • Offer a standard medical response to sexual violence survivors, including the option of
    emergency contraception, preventive treatment for STIs, post-exposure prophylaxis for prevention
    of transmission of HIV, and tetanus and hepatitis B vaccinations and wound care as appropriate.
  • Allow for the presence of same-sex, same-language health worker or chaperone and, if the
    survivor so desires, a friend or family member, present for any medical examination.
  • Put in place measures to protect the physical safety of the survivor immediately following an
    incident of sexual violence, such as safe housing.
  • Identify and document locations where incidents of sexual violence have occurred and
    establish relevant preventive measures.
  • Ensure the availability of the Minimum Initial Service Package (MISP). Rather than consisting
    of kits of equipment and supplies, the MISP is actually of a series of actions to respond to the
    reproductive health needs of a population in a refugee or post-disaster situation. Adequately trained


11 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




    staff can implement the package without carrying out a needs assessment, given that ample
    evidence already exists to support its use.31 For further information on the MISP, please visit
    https://www.unfpa.org/emergencies/manual/index.htm.



          Box 4. Providing appropriate care for survivors of sexual violence
          requires that these priority services should be available and accessible:

                  Emergency contraception (EC) to prevent pregnancy
                  Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) to minimize HIV transmission
                  Treatment for STIs, care of wounds and injuries
                  Counseling and other psychosocial support
                  Collection of forensic evidence, with consent of survivor
                  Referral to legal and social support services within the community

          Sources:
          RAISE Initiative Fact Sheet: Gender-Based Violence http://www.raiseinitiative.org/library/factsheets.php

          World Health Organization. (2004). Clinical management of rape survivors: developing protocols for use with refugees
          and internally displaced persons.
          http://www.who.int/entity/reproductivehealth/publications/emergencies/924159263X/en/index.html

          World Health Organization (2013). Responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women:
          Clinical and policy guidelines
          http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/violence/9789241548595/en/




12 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




             RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR INTEGRATING
                VAWG INTO HEALTH SECTOR PROJECTS
Programming
Clinical Care for Sexual Assault Survivors: Health care workers often lack the skills and experience to
provide optimal care to survivors of sexual assault. The IRC partnered with UCLA’s Center for
International Medicine to create a multimedia training tool designed for use in resource-limited and
conflict-affected health settings. Since 2008 the Clinical Care for Sexual Assault Survivors training DVD
has been used to train health care workers across Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean. The goal of this tool
is to improve the clinical care of sexual assault survivors in low resource settings by demonstrating
compassionate, competent, and confidential care in keeping with international standards. It is intended
for use in the training of all staff in health clinics (clinicians and non-clinicians) that interact with sexual
assault survivors.

GBV Responders’ Network
The IRC Women’s Protection & Empowerment (WPE) Unit developed the GBV Emergency ToolKit
based on years of experience responding to GBV in emergencies. The ToolKit, designed to strengthen
our global response and preparedness, includes ready-to-use tools and templates, as well as
guidelines and examples of best practice.

The Gender Based Violence Information Management System (GBVIMS) aims to provide program
managers with one simple system to manage their data on reported GBV cases, including the safe and
ethical sharing of reported incident data. Effective utilization of the GBVIMS can also assist service
providers to understand better the reported GBV cases they receive to: adjust their programming to
more effectively respond to the needs of survivors; aggregate data to analyze wider trends and threats;
and enable safe sharing for improved inter-agency coordination and joint action to address emerging
issues.

Global Protection Cluster (July 2010). Handbook for Coordinating Gender-based Violence Interventions
in Humanitarian Settings. The Coordination Handbook is a quick reference tool that provides practical
guidance on leadership roles, key responsibilities and specific actions to be taken when establishing
and maintaining a GBV coordination mechanism in a humanitarian setting (conflict, post-conflict and
natural disaster).

Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) (2005). Guidelines for Gender-based Violence Interventions
in Humanitarian Settings: Focusing on Prevention of and Response to Sexual Violence in Emergencies.

13 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




The primary purpose of these guidelines is to enable communities, governments, and humanitarian
organizations to establish and coordinate a set of minimum multi-sectoral interventions to prevent and
respond to sexual violence during the early phase of an emergency. The Guidelines specifically detail
minimum interventions for prevention and response to sexual violence to be undertaken in the early
stages of an emergency. Twenty-five action sheets have been developed in 10 functional/sectorial
areas.

The Reproductive Health Access, Information and Services in Emergencies (RAISE) Initiative is
catalyzing change in how reproductive health (RH) is addressed by all sectors involved in emergency
response, from field services to advocacy and from local aid providers to global relief movements.
Developed by Columbia University's Heilbrunn Department of Population and Family Health in the
Mailman School of Public Health and Marie Stopes International (MSI), the RAISE Initiative aims to
address the full range of RH needs for refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) by building
partnerships with humanitarian and development agencies, governments, United Nations (UN) bodies,
advocacy agencies, and academic institutions. This page provides useful tools, fact sheets, and links
to training for providers of clinical and social services in emergencies.

RHRC. (2003). Gender Based Violence Tools Manual. This manual is a result of the three-year global
Gender-based Violence Initiative that aimed at improving international and local capacity to address
GBV in refugee, internally displaced, and post-conflict settings. The manual provides tools for
assessment, program design, and program monitoring and evaluation according to a multi-sectoral
model of GBV programming. It is intended to be used by humanitarian professionals committed to GBV
prevention and response.

UNFPA. (2011). Managing GBV Programming in Emergencies. This course was developed by the
UNFPA and World Education, Inc. in consultation with a wide range of GBV experts and humanitarian
and development actors worldwide. The goal of this course is to improve the knowledge of program
managers to better address the issue of gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies.

Research
Spangaro, J., A. Zwi, C. Adogu, G. Ranmuthugala, G. P. Davies, and L. Steinacker (2013). What Is the
Evidence of the Impact of Initiatives to Reduce Risk and Incidence of Sexual Violence in Conflict and
Post-Conflict Zones and Other Humanitarian Crises in Lower- and Middle- Income Countries? A
Systematic Review. London: EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education,
University of London.

UNFPA, (2012). Gender Based Violence and Natural Disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean.



14 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




WHO, UN Action, MRC South Africa, and SVRI. (2012). A research agenda for sexual violence in
humanitarian, conflict and post-conflict settings (Executive Summary). Pretoria: Sexual Violence
Research Initiative, Gender and Health Research Unit, Medical Research Council.

WHO. (2007). WHO ethical and safety recommendations for researching, documenting and monitoring
sexual violence in emergencies. Geneva: WHO Press.
http://www.who.int/gender/documents/violence/9789241595681/en/

Wood, E. J. (2006). Variation in Sexual Violence in War.Politics & Society 34(3), 307–342.

Other Relevant Guidance
Children in a Changing Climate, Children’s Charter: An action plan for disaster risk reduction for
children by children. (2011). Retrieved from
http://www.childreninachangingclimate.org/database/CCC/Publications/children_charter.pdf

Canadian Red Cross and International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC).
(2012). Predictable, Preventable: Best Practices for Addressing Interpersonal and Self-Directed
Violence During and After Disasters. Retrieved from
http://www.ifrc.org/PageFiles/94522/ViolenceInDisasters-English-1up.pdf

Pincha, C. (2008). Gender-Sensitive Disaster Management: A Toolkit For Practitioners. Mumbai:
Earthworm Books for Oxfam America and Nanban Trust. Retrieved from
http://www.eldis.org/vfile/upload/1/document/0812/Gnder%20sensitive%20disaster%20management%2
0Toolkit.pdf.

The Sphere Project: Humanitarian charter and minimum standards in humanitarian response.(n.d.).
Retrieved from http://www.sphereproject.org

Pinheiro, P. S. (2006). World report on violence against children. Geneva, Switzerland: ATAR Roto
Presse SA. Retrieved from
http://www.unviolencestudy.org/

WHO, UNFPA, and UNHCR. (1999). Reproductive Health in Refugee Situations: an Inter-agency Field
Manual. Retrieved from
https://www.unfpa.org/emergencies/manual/index.htm

UNHCR. (2008). UNHCR Guidelines on Determining the Best Interests of the Child. Retrieved from
http://www.unhcr.org/4566b16b2.pdf

WHO. (2008). Preventing violence and reducing its impact: How development agencies can help.
France. Retrieved from
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2008/9789241596589_eng.pdf

15 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




                                                 REFERENCES
1
 Guha-Sapir D, Hoyois P., and Below R. Annual Disaster Statistical Review 2012: The Numbers and
Trends. Brussels: CRED; 2013.
2
 Laframboise, N. and B. Loko. (2012). Natural Disasters: Mitigating Impact, Managing Risk.
(WP/12/245). Retrieved from International Monetary Fund website:
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2012/wp12245.pdf.
3
    Laframboise and Loko, 2012.
4
 Integrated Regional Information Networks. (2005) Disaster Reduction and the human cost of disaster.
IRIN Web Special. Retrieved from http://www.irinnews.org/pdf/in-depth/disaster-reduction-irin-in-
depth.pdf.
5
    Guha-Sapir et al., 2013.
6
  UNFPA, 2012.
7
  GETSA, SEPREM, and UNFPA (2010). Impacto en los Medios de Vida de las Mujeres Afectadas por
la Tormenta Agatha (Guatemala: GETSA).
8
  Pittaway E, Bartolomei L, and Rees S. (2006). Neglected issues and voices. Asia-Pacific Journal of
Public Health 19 (Spec No: 69).
9
  Anastario, M., N. Shehab and L. Lawry. (2009) Increased Gender-based Violence among Women
Internally Displaced in Mississippi 2 Years Post-Hurricane Katrina. Disaster Medicine and Public Health
Preparedness 3(1) 18-26.
10
   UNFPA, 2012.
11
   The Sphere Project, n.d..
12
  Arango, D. and Guedes, A. (2012). Addressing Gender Based Violence (GBV) in Natural Disasters
and all Emergency Settings is Critical. Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) unpublished
guidance note.
13
     Arango and Guedes. 2012.
14
 Adapted from Ellsberg, M., and Heise, L. (2005). Researching Violence Against Women: A Practical
Guide for Researchers and Activists. Washington, DC: World Health Organization, PATH.
15
     Adapted from IFRC, 2012.
16
  DFID. (2013). Violence against Women and Girls in Humanitarian Emergencies. CHASE Briefing
Paper. Retrieved from DFID website:




16 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT BRIEF




https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/271932/VAWG-
humanitarian-emergencies.pdf.
17
     Arango and Guedes, 2012.
18
     UNFPA, 2012.
19
     Note: This course can be found at: https://extranet.unfpa.org/Apps/GBVinEmergencies/index.html.
20
     Arango and Guedes, 2012.
21
  WHO. (2003) Guidelines for medico-legal care for victims of sexual violence. Retrieved from
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2004/924154628X.pdf?ua=1.
22
 Inter-Agency Standing Committee (2005). Guidelines for Gender-Based Violence Interventions in
Humanitarian Settings: Focusing on Prevention of and Response to Sexual Violence in Emergencies.
Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee.
23
     IASC, 2005.
24
     Global Protection Cluster, 2010.
25
     UNFPA, 2012.
26
     UNFPA, 2012.
27
     UNFPA, 2012.
28
   Willman, A. M. and Corman, C. (2013). Sexual and Gender-Based Violence: What is the World Bank
Doing and What Have We Learned, A Strategic Review. Washington, DC: World Bank.
29
   Adapted from Arango and Guedes, 2012.
30
  Danish Refugee Council, Norwegian Refugee Council, UNHCR, and UNOCHA. (2011). Transitional
Shelter Assessment Phase I Report: Bossaso 14th-17th April. See also DFID, 2013.
31
     WHO, UNFPA, and UNHCR, 1999.


                                             PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: Nugroho Nurdikiawan Sunjoyo/World Bank.
Page 7: Scott Wallace/World Bank.
 This brief was written by Floriza Gennari (GWI), Diana Arango (GWI), Anne-Marie Urban (IDB), and
 Jennifer McCleary-Sills (WBG), with comments and editing from Manuel Contreras (GWI), Mary Ellsberg
 (GWI), and Nidia Hidalgo (IDB). Inputs were also provided by Sveinung Kiplesund (WBG). Lisa Fry (WBG)
 provided editorial support.
 .

17 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Disaster Risk Management Brief
