                                                                                            92963
      VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
      HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF




                                                                              HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF




April  2015
  0 | Violence      MENT
               Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief

          BRIEF
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF




                                                    KEY POINTS
  • Violence against women and girls (VAWG) has negative impacts on their physical and mental
    health. Health care settings provide a unique opportunity to identify VAWG survivors, provide critical
    support services, and prevent future harm.
  • While the majority of survivors of VAWG never seek help, the health sector is often the first point of
    contact for those who do seek care and support services.
  • Health care costs for survivors of violence are high and can impose significant burdens on health
    systems. For example, the 2011 household survey in Vietnam estimated that out of pocket
    expenditures for accessing services and replacing damaged property averaged 21% of women’s
    monthly income.1
  • VAWG has intergenerational effects: boys who witness intimate partner violence (IPV) at home are
    more likely to grow up to perpetrate violence themselves. And girls with childhood exposure to IPV
    are more likely to experience violence in later relationships.2
  • Children living in homes with IPV also face greater likelihood of experiencing physical abuse, which
    increases their risk-taking behaviors in adolescence, including drinking, drug use, and early
    initiation of sex.3
  • Violence in the home also has negative effects on children’s mental and physical health, including
    higher infant mortality, lower vaccination rates, and lower birth weight.
  • The health sector can play a role in educating clients and the broader community about VAWG as a
    human rights violation and major public health issue.


                 INTERSECTION BETWEEN HEALTH AND VAWG
The health sector is often the first point of contact for survivors of VAWG and is a key entry point into
the referral pathway to other sectors. For example, one study examining emergency department
utilization by women who were ultimately killed by an intimate partner found that 44% of the women had
sought help in an emergency department within the two years prior to their death.4 Consequently, the
health sector, in collaboration with other sectors, can contribute significantly to preventing and
responding to VAWG at various stages of the cycle of violence:




1 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


  • Primary prevention: refers to efforts to prevent
                                                                            Exposure to violence has been linked with a
    violence from occurring in the first place. Examples
                                                                            multitude of adverse physical health outcomes
    of primary prevention activities include increasing
                                                                            for women, including acute injuries, chronic
    community awareness of VAWG risk factors, healthy                       pain, gastrointestinal illness, and gynecological
    conflict resolution, challenging harmful gender                         problems. Mental health consequences can
    norms, etc.                                                             include increased risk of depression, post-
  • Secondary prevention: focuses on early identification                   traumatic stress disorder, and substance abuse.
    of survivors (via screenings in emergency departments                   A recent systematic review found that VAWG
    and reproductive, maternal and child services, for                      increases a woman’s risk of experiencing
    example), responding to their physical, mental, and                     depression two- to three-fold. VAWG has also
    reproductive health care needs, and referral to                         been linked to increased risk of contracting
    appropriate services.                                                   HIV and other sexually transmitted infections,
                                                                            as well as the risk of having unintended
  • Tertiary prevention: serves to mitigate the negative                    pregnancies and attempting to and/or
    impacts of violence that has already occurred.                          completing an abortion. Survivors of violence
    Examples include long-term counseling, HIV post-                        are also 2.3 times more likely to have alcohol
    exposure prophylaxis, and emergency contraception                       use disorders.
    for rape victims.                                                       Source: Klugman, J., Hanmer, L., Twigg, S., Hasan,
  • Referral to social, economic and legal support: T., McCleary-Sills, J., and Santa Maria, J. (2014).
    given that women experiencing physical violence will Voice and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for
    likely seek health services at some point, health care Shared Prosperity.
    providers are favorably positioned to refer survivors
    to other services to address their immediate needs and prevent future incidents of violence from
    occurring. (Adapted from Heise, 2011)


              ETHICAL AND SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
                        VAWG INTERVENTIONS5
Any intervention that aims to prevent or address VAWG should include precautions above and beyond
routine risk assessment to guarantee no harm is caused. This includes following ethical guidelines related to:
respect for persons, non-maleficence (minimizing harm), beneficence (maximizing benefits), and justice
to protect the safety of both service providers and the survivors. The sensitive nature of collecting information
about VAWG demands additional precautions above and beyond routine risk assessments to guarantee no
harm is caused. Interventions should:
  • Assess whether the intervention may increase VAWG
  • Minimize harm to women and girls
  • Prevent revictimization of VAWG
  • Consider the implications of mandatory reporting of suspected VAW cases


2 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


  • Be aware of the co-occurrence of child abuse
  • Minimize harm to staff working with survivors
  • Provide referrals for care and support for survivors



 For further details on these Ethical and Safety Recommendations, visit the Ethics section of our website.



                                   RAPID SITUATION ANALYSIS
Integrating VAWG prevention and response into a project requires an understanding of the legal, social and
epidemiological context as in the sector, and how these influence and are influenced by violence. To conduct
the rapid situation analysis, work with governments, private sector partners, non-governmental organizations,
local experts, and other counterparts in the country to answer some or all following questions:

Specific questions for the sector:
  • What obligations do health service providers have with regard to identifying and responding to VAWG?
  • Does the health sector have any responsibilities for collecting forensic evidence in cases of sexual
    and physical violence?
  • What protocols and norms exist regarding identification of and care service provision for survivors
    of violence?
  • Does the health sector have a system of referrals and counter-referrals to provide comprehensive
    care to survivors?
  • What programs exist for training and sensitizing the health sector personnel on addressing VAWG?
  • What are inter-institutional coordination mechanisms for addressing VAWG in which the health
    sector is participating?
For further details about how to conduct a rapid situation analysis, please return to the Introduction to
this resource guide.




3 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


              KEY AREAS FOR INTEGRATING VAWG IN HEALTH
Violence against women and girls is a complex public health and human rights issue that affects
hundreds of millions of women and girls around the world. This epidemic is best addressed through
multi-sectoral coordination at all stages of intervention, ranging from the micro to the macro level. In
the health sector, VAWG prevention and response efforts should be incorporated into health plans,
policies, and guidelines at the national level, institutional protocols, medical and nursing curricula,
healthcare sites6, and everywhere health is addressed.7
Additionally, buy-in from the legal, judicial, and other
social services sectors at all levels is essential to         Box 1. Promising practices…
ensure the survivor is seamlessly referred through the        Liberia’s Multi-Sectoral Plan To
complete pathway of services needed to address                Prevent and Respond to
violence, healing, and recuperation.                          Gender-Based Violence
Drawing on the ecological framework presented in Annex                      (2006-2011)
2, below we present some key steps international                            Liberia’s plan includes strategies to improve and
financial institutions and other development agencies can                   strengthen the ability of the health care system to
take to integrate VAWG into the health sector through                       respond adequately to VAWG. Activities include
actions at the policy, institutional, and community levels                  developing national guidelines on the clinical
and through specific survivor-centered interventions.                       management of violence against women and the
                                                                            training of health care providers in their use.
Policy Level                                                                Training for medical staff, including auxiliary and
  • Enable a space for dialogue on VAWG prevention                          community health workers, is also included, as
    and response: Once key stakeholders have been                           well as the improvement of referral mechanisms
    identified, establish a forum for discussion between                    among police stations, health centers, referral
    the health sector, different ministries responsible for                 hospitals, and counseling centers.
    justice, education, and social services, and other key                  Source: UN Women. (2012). Handbook for National
    partners to develop a national action plan for VAWG.                    Action Plans on Violence Against Women
    See Box 1.
  • Develop clear policy guidelines and protocols to identify and respond to the physical and
    mental health needs of survivors of physical and sexual violence, including the prevention of
    HIV/STI infection and unwanted pregnancies following sexual assault. The WHO clinical and policy
    guidelines on responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women are the
    international standard for health sector response to VAWG. Protocols should be developed in
    alignment with these guidelines and in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and other
    stakeholders and partners. Services outlined in the protocols should be offered free of charge. If
    feasible, urge hospital accreditation processes to call for the development of written protocols for
    identifying and treating survivors of VAWG.8




4 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


  • Work with government partners and key
    stakeholders to reform education curricula for
    health care providers and include VAWG
                                                                       Box 2. Promising practices…
    awareness and response training. Incorporating                     Routine Screening for IPV in
    even one module on VAWG in the curricula may                       Health Clinics
    enable healthcare providers to better recognize                    At Kenyatta National Hospital in Nairobi,
    key signs and symptoms and more adequately                         Kenya, researchers implemented and evaluated
    treat and/or refer survivors.9                                     a routine screening program beginning in April
                                                                       2012. A total of 121 providers from the
                                                                       antenatal care clinic (ANC), the HIV
Institutional/Sectoral Level                                           comprehensive care center (CCC), and the
  • Work with government partners and key                              youth clinic attended one-day training sessions
    stakeholders to include data on physical and                       on IPV screening techniques. After training
                                                                       was completed, providers performed routine
    sexual violence disaggregated by sex and age                       screening over the following seven months and
    group in the routine data collection of the national               referred women who reported violence to the
    health information system.10 Developing safe and                   GBV Recovery Center (GBVRC) affiliated
    ethical data collection systems is crucial for                     with the hospital. At the youth clinic and CCC,
    monitoring the prevalence of VAWG and                              providers were able to offer confidential and
                                                                       private sessions appropriate for screening. This
    maintaining a strong evidence base. A good
                                                                       was more difficult at the ANC. As such, ANC
    example of an integrated data collection system                    providers found it most appropriate to screen
    is the Web-based version of the Gender-Based                       for IPV during HIV pre- and post-counseling.
    Violence Information Management System                             Overall, a total of 1,210 women were screened
    (GBVIMS) currently used in Colombia, which                         in the three clinics, with 95 (7.9%) reporting
    collects data from all service providers and                       IPV. This study provides preliminary evidence
                                                                       of successful capacity building for routine
    integrates them into one system.
                                                                       screening in the health sector and of patients’
  • Ensure that health care providers receive pre-                     willingness to disclose IPV to these trained
    and in-service training and mentoring in                           staff.
                                                           Source: Undie, C., Maternowska, C., Mak’anyengo,
    protocols on VAWG response.11 Health M., Askew, I. (2013). Feasibility of Routine Screening for
    providers often share the same stigmatizing Intimate Partner Violence in Public Health Care Settings in
    attitudes as the population at large, which can Kenya. Nairobi: Population Council.
    impede survivors from seeking services and can
    affect quality of care.12 Providers may also lack the knowledge or confidence to ask their patients
    about their history of violence.13 Provide training for health care providers to recognize key signs,
    symptoms, and health consequences of VAWG and to respond to disclosures of violence
    appropriately, ensuring privacy and confidentiality, with a non-judgmental attitude and support for
    the victims. Include other staff, such as home visitation nurses, emergency technicians, and
    traditional birth attendants in such training.14 Other staff, such as those involved in hospital
    administration and management, should be included in most, if not all, of the training, particularly
    where VAWG treatment and referral protocols are concerned.
  • Support the provision of trained on-site counselors, social workers, or nurses to provide
    individual counseling and/or group psychosocial support to identified VAWG survivors.

5 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


      Evidence has demonstrated that tailored, extensive interventions are generally more effective for
      reducing violence. However, in the absence of longer, dedicated support, one study found that even
      a 20-minute counseling session with a nurse can be effective for reducing revictimization.15 Another
      study, in Hong Kong, provided pregnant women screened positive for IPV with either a 30-minute
      “empowerment intervention” or the standard of care for abused women.16 Women in the
      intervention group reported significantly less psychological abuse and minor physical violence at six
      weeks post-partum compared to women in the control group.17
  • Design and implement a support system for health staff involved in the provision of services
    to survivors. Professionals’ well-being may be at risk due to the emotional exhaustion caused by
    exposure to the pain and suffering of survivors on a daily basis. This vicarious trauma can have
    serious effects on both the health and performance of staff. Unless this is addressed, staff may
    become desensitized to or minimize the suffering of survivors; they may omit aspects of their
    intervention or eventually leave their jobs.18
  • Invest in linkages among the health sector and law enforcement and other survivor services,
    such as shelters and safe housing, as well as in research to build the evidence base about how
    best to integrate VAWG in health services.19 Establish referral pathways among the different
    services and responders.20 At a minimum, encourage the development and distribution in each
    municipality of a directory of violence-related resources available for survivors (discussed further in
    the community level section).21 See Box 2.
  • Support the development of a victim advocate program to work in collaboration with health
    services. The responsibilities of victim advocates vary depending on the country or context;
    however, their primary role is to offer survivors information regarding the different options available
    to them and to support their decision-making processes. They may also assist survivors of violence
    by contacting social services on their behalf, explaining the various steps involved in the criminal
    justice process, helping them fill out paperwork, etc. Studies have found that victim advocates can
    make a considerable difference in a survivors’ ability to navigate and access important services
    such as shelters, protection orders, and psychosocial support.22
  •
      In the absence of victim advocates, allow health care providers to accompany women to the
      various services included in the referral pathway. Survivors greatly appreciate this support, and
      it often leads to an improvement in the treatment they receive from providers and duty bearers,
      especially by police officers.23
  • Ensure that health facility infrastructure projects include safe, private spaces for health care
    providers to confidentially ask patients about violence and provide other services, including
    counseling, as needed.

For survivors of sexual violence/abuse
Women living in situations of physical abuse often concurrently experience sexual and emotional
violence and may have difficulty negotiating contraception and condom use. Health care providers
should be aware that emergency services may be needed by any survivor of sexual violence or

6 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


coercion (i.e., those assaulted by husbands, partners, relatives, and acquaintances), not just those
raped by a stranger. In addition to post-traumatic stress, survivors of sexual violence may experience
unintended pregnancy, sexually transmitted infections (STIs) including HIV/AIDS, and complications
from an incomplete or unsafe abortion.
  • Support key partners and stakeholders in the development of a comprehensive package of
    emergency services for survivors of sexual violence that includes the provision or referral for the
    following: treatment for physical injuries, preservation of forensic evidence, emergency
    contraception, safe abortion (where legal and available), post-abortion care, testing and counseling
    for HIV/AIDS, and STI prophylaxis and treatment.
  • Ensure that trained or specialized staff are available to provide crisis counseling and/or
    psychosocial support. Providing survivors with non-judgmental, emotional support is as vital for
    their recovery as treatment of physical injuries. See Box 3.




 Box 3. Promising practices… Counseling for sexually exploited girls in the
 DRC
 To assess the impact of counseling on survivors, a randomized control trial was carried out in the Democratic Republic of
 Congo with war-exposed, sexually exploited girls from 12 to 17 years of age living in foster care. The girls had been
 orphaned or abandoned by their parents because of the stigma of sexual exploitation; through the program they received
 vocational training from an NGO. The participants suffered from high levels of posttraumatic stress, anxiety, depression,
 and conduct problems. Girls were randomized to receive trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy (TF-CBT) three
 times a week for five weeks, or a no-treatment wait-list condition. Given that trained mental health therapists are scarce in
 the DRC, the counselors did not have mental health backgrounds but received training to provide TF-CBT. At the end of
 the intervention, TF-CBT group participants experienced significant reduction in posttraumatic stress disorder,
 depression, anxiety, and conduct symptoms, and improved pro-social behaviors compared to girls in the wait-list group,
 including at the three-month mark.
 Source: Cohen, D. (2013). Explaining Rape during Civil War: Cross-National Evidence (1980-2009). American Political Science
 Review 107(03), 461-477.



  • Request that emergency contraception kits and STI and HIV prophylaxis be included in the
    country’s national list of essential medicines, and work towards guaranteeing free access to this
    medicine as women may not have access to funds to purchase them.
  • Ensure the availability of forensic nurses or health personnel trained in the medical forensic care of
    survivors of physical and sexual assault or abuse (and the collection of medical evidence for
    prosecution, if requested by the survivor) in each major health care setting.24 Depending upon the
    local and national regulations, health care providers may or may not be able to collect forensic
    evidence without special certification. Promote the establishment of training programs for health



7 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


    providers who are responsible for collecting evidence on protocols in forensic examination for
    sexual assault, including collection and proper handling of medical evidence.


   The above section on sexual violence was adapted from Bott, S., Guedes, A., Claramunt, M.C., Guezmes, A.
   (2010) Improving the Health Sector Response to Gender-Based Violence: A Resource Manual for Health Care Professionals in Developing
   Countries.




Community Level
Work with local partners and stakeholders to help survivors to make the best use of existing services and
resources, including those offered within healthcare settings. Raising community awareness of VAWG,
challenging harmful gender norms, and creating spaces for
community dialogue may increase health-seeking behavior
and challenge the acceptability of violence. On the supply Box 4. Promising practices…
side, establishing strong partnerships and low-cost
                                                                Designing and distributing
strategies can improve response to survivors and strengthen
referral pathways. (For detailed instructions on the points
                                                                materials on VAWG services
below, please see Bott et al., 2006, in the resource section).  Consider women’s safety when designing and
                                                                distributing materials. Remember that a
Build alliances among the health sector, NGOs, and
                                                                woman living in situations of violence may be
local/community partners to:                                    at risk of further violence if her partner finds
1. Identify existing programs and services for                  the pamphlet or card with information about
survivors.                                                      services. Additionally, women may come to
                                                                the clinic with their partners and may not feel
  • Work with partners to compile information on NGO
                                                                free to pick up materials in waiting rooms.
    programs, government services such as police, public
                                                                One strategy is to develop small cards that
    prosecutors, and forensic medical exams, as well as
                                                                women can hide in their clothing. Sometimes
    information on services related to custody, divorce,        it is helpful to include only the address and
    property settlements, and protection orders. In phone number of referral services on a card,
    resource-limited settings in particular, record             rather than an explanation of the services
    information on the service the organization provides,       provided. This way, a perpetrator will not
    opening hours, and fees.25                                  realize what the referral is for if the card is
  • Assemble this information into a referral directory and found. Other health programs have found that
    make at least one copy per health care setting. This is placing          information        (whether   cards,
    an inexpensive and helpful step for facilitating referrals. pamphlets,    or  posters)   in bathrooms, where
                                                                women can look at them without being
  • If adequate external referral services are unavailable in observed by a male partner, can be helpful.
    the community, establish basic services in the health
                                                                (Source: Bott, et al., 2010)
    center, such as crisis intervention, emotional support,


8 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


    and support groups for women. (See Chapter V in Bott, et al., 2006)
2. Disseminate information on available services.
  • Materials can include videos for clients and providers, pamphlets that discuss issues related to VAWG,
    referral cards with information about local services for survivors, and/or posters that can be displayed in
    clinics or other places in the community.5 See www.endvawnow.org for existing materials.
  • Other topics for materials could include patient rights within health services (e.g. for privacy and
    confidentiality), the different types of violence, child sexual abuse, laws about violence against
    women, sexual and reproductive rights, and human rights in general.26 See Box 4.



 Box 5. Promising Practices… Mobilizing communities against violence:
 Lessons from SASA!
 SASA!, which means “Now!” in Kiswahili, is a program developed by Raising Voices and implemented in Uganda
 by the Center for Domestic Violence Prevention. It is the first community-based violence prevention program in
 Sub-Saharan Africa to be rigorously evaluated. The program employs multiple strategies to build a critical mass of
 engaged community members, leaders, and institutions, including local activism, media and advocacy,
 communication materials, and training. The Activist Kit that is central to SASA! community engagement and
 mobilization involves four phases: Start, Awareness, Support, and Action. The content evolves with each phase,
 with power as a central theme. Initial results from a randomized controlled trial show positive effects after almost
 three years of programming. Compared with control communities, people in SASA! communities have more
 gender-equitable attitudes and a reduced prevalence of past-year physical violence by an intimate partner.
 Compared with control communities, SASA! communities report the following striking results:
  Levels of violence against women were 52% lower.
  28% more women and men believe it is acceptable for women to refuse sex.
  50% more men and women believe physical violence against a partner is unacceptable.
 Source: Abramsky, T., Devries, K., Kiss, L., Nakuti, J., Kyegombe, N., Starmann, E., Cundill, B., Francisco, L., Kaye, D.,
 Musuya, T., Michau, L., and Watts, C. (2014). Findings from the SASA! Study: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial to
 Assess the Impact of a Community Mobilization Intervention to Prevent Violence against Women and Reduce HIV Risk in
 Kampala, Uganda. BMC Medicine 12:122.



3. Carry out educational/behavior change interventions.
  • Address the underlying gender norms that support violence and other detrimental health-related
    behaviors in the community.27 Studies have found that merely changing legislation or carrying out a
    campaign is less effective for transforming harmful gender norms than community-based initiatives
    that simultaneously address a variety of social issues.28 29 Wherever possible, work with NGOs and
    community groups to integrate VAWG awareness-raising or education activities into existing
    groups, such as microcredit or savings groups. See Box 5.

9 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


  • Encourage the creation of safe spaces where both men and women can discuss values, practices,
    and behavior, ensuring these discussions are grounded in human rights discourses.30 See Box 6.




 Box 6. Promising practices… Program H/Program M
 Program H/Program M is a community education approach originally developed in Brazil to promote gender-
 equitable attitudes and action among young men. The program has gradually evolved to include a program also
 focusing on young women, and in certain settings, it has implemented both simultaneously. The program has been
 carried out in India, Tanzania, Croatia, Vietnam, and Central America. It encourages boys and young men to
 question traditional views on what it means to be a man by using a small-group format and a no-words cartoon
 video titled “Once Upon a Boy.” Using a participatory curriculum, trained facilitators serve as mentors and meet
 with the group (often weekly) over four to six months.
 Impact evaluations of Program H have found that young men report greater acceptance of domestic work as
 men’s responsibility, improved relationships with their partners and friends, higher rates of condom use, and
 reduced rates of self-reported sexual harassment and violence towards women. In India, for example, the
 proportion of men in the urban intervention sites (two slums in Mumbai) who reported sexual or physical violence
 against a partner in the last three months decreased by more than half to less than 20% at follow-up. In the
 project’s rural intervention site, partner violence also decreased from 50% to 37%.
 Source: Verma et al., 2008 and Ricardo et al., 2010, as cited in Heise, Lori L. (2011). What works to prevent partner
 violence: An evidence overview.




10 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


             RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR INTEGRATING
                VAWG INTO HEALTH SECTOR PROJECTS
Guidance/Tools
Bott, S., Guedes, A., Claramunt, M., Guezmes, A. (2010). Improving the Health Sector Response to
Gender-Based Violence: A Resource Manual for Health Care Professionals in Developing Countries.
An excellent manual for integrating VAWG prevention and response into the health sector. Very
detailed with practical information, including checklists and sample questionnaires.

Khan, A. (2011). Gender-Based Violence and HIV: A Program Guide for Integrating Gender-Based
Violence Prevention and Response in PEPFAR Programs. Arlington, VA: USAID’s AIDS Support and
Technical Assistance Resources, AIDSTAR-One, Task Order 1.

Velzeboer, M., Ellsberg, M., Arcas, C. C., & García-Moreno, C. (2003).Violence against women: the
health sector responds. Pan American Health Organization, Pan American Sanitary Bureau.
UNFPA. (2010). Addressing Violence against Women and Girls in Sexual and Reproductive Health
Services: A Review of Knowledge Assets.
UNHCR. (2008). UNHCR Guidelines on Determining the Best Interests of the Child.

U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). (2006). Addressing Gender-based Violence
through USAID’s Health Programs: A Guide for Health Sector Program Officers.

World Health Organization (WHO). (2005). Integrating Poverty and Gender into Health Programmes: A
Sourcebook for Health Professionals: Module on Gender-Based Violence.

WHO. (2004). Clinical management of rape survivors: developing protocols for use with refugees and
internally displaced persons.

WHO. (2013). Responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence against women: Clinical
and policy guidelines for DV and sexual violence.

Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
IRC and UNICEF. (2012). Caring for Child Survivors of Sexual Abuse, Guidelines for Health and
psychosocial service providers in Humanitarian settings..
WHO, UNFPA, and UNICEF. (2011, November). Responding to the psychosocial and mental health
needs of sexual violence survivors in conflict-affected settings: A Summary Report.
IRC. (2008). Clinical Care for Sexual Assault Survivors: A Multi-Media Training Tool.
IASC. (2007). IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings.


11 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


         All of the above can be found on gbvaor.net under tools and resources

Data sources
Demographic and Health Surveys including questions on VAWG.
WHO. (2005). WHO’s Multi-Country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence Against Women.

Research
Barker, G., Ricardo, C., and Nascimento, M. (2007). Engaging men and boys in changing gender-
based inequity in health: Evidence from programme interventions. Geneva: WHO.
Evanson, T. A. (2006). Addressing domestic violence through maternal-child health home visiting: what
we do and do not know. Journal of Community Health Nursing 23(2), 95-111.
Guedes, A. (2004). Addressing GBV from the Reproductive Health/HIV Sector: A Literature Review and
Analysis. Washington, DC: The Population Technical Assistance Project. Retrieved from
http://www.prb.org/pdf04/addressGendrBasedViolence.pdf.
Kataoka, Y., Yaju, Y., Eto, H., Matsumoto, N., and Horiuchi, S. (2004). Screening of domestic violence
against women in the perinatal setting: a systematic review. Japan Journal of Nursing Science 1(2), 77-
86.
Nelson, H. D., Bougatsos, C., and Blazina, I. (2012). Screening women for intimate partner violence: a
systematic review to update the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation. Annals of
Internal Medicine 156(11), 796-808.
O'Reilly, R., Beale, B., and Gillies, D. (2010). Screening and Intervention for Domestic Violence During
Pregnancy Care: A Systematic Review. Trauma, Violence & Abuse 11(4), 190-201.
Ramsay, J., Richardson, J., Carter, Y. H., Davidson, L. L., and Feder, G. (2002). Should health
professionals screen women for domestic violence? British Medical Journal 325(7359).314-318.
Ramsay, J., Rivas, C., and Feder, G. (2005). Interventions to reduce violence and promote the physical
and psychosocial well-being of women who experience partner abuse: A systematic review. Barts and
the London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry.
Sharps, P. W., Campbell, J., Baty, M. L., Walker, K. S., and Bair-Merrit, M.H. (2008). Current evidence
on perinatal home visiting and intimate partner violence. JOGNN - Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic,
and Neonatal Nursing 37(4),pp 480-491.
Smedslund, G., Dalsb, T. K., Winsvold, A., Clench-Aas, J., (2007). Cognitive behavioral therapy for
men who physically abuse their female partner. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 3.
Taft, A., O'Doherty, L., Hegarty, K., Ramsay, J., Davidson, L., and Feder, G. (2013). Screening Women
for Intimate Partner Violence in Healthcare Settings. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 4.




12 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF


                                                  REFERENCES
1
 Duvvury, N., Nguyen, M., and Carney, P. (2013). Estimating the cost of domestic violence against
women in Vietnam. UN Women.
2
 Velzeboer, M., Ellsberg, M., Arcas, C. C., & García-Moreno, C. (2003).Violence against women: the
health sector responds. Pan American Health Organization, Pan American Sanitary Bureau.
3
    World Bank. (2003). Caribbean Youth Development: Issues and Policy Directions.
4
 Boinville, Madeleine. Screening for Domestic Violence in Health Care Settings. ASPE Policy Brief,
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, August 2013
5
 Adapted from Ellsberg, M., and Heise, L. (2005). Researching Violence Against Women: A Practical
Guide for Researchers and Activists. Washington, DC: World Health Organization, PATH.
6
 For example: sexual and reproductive health centers, maternal and child health centers, adolescent
and youth health services, emergency departments, patient treatment centers, and the offices of
primary care clinicians.
7
 Tropp, S. and Ellsberg, M. Sectoral Operational Guides: Health, Education, Justice and Multi-Sector
Responses to Violence Against Women. World Bank/PRMGE, 2006.
8
    Boinville, 2013.
9
    USAID (2009). A Guide to Programming Gender-based Violence Prevention and Response Activities.
10
  Bott, S., Guedes, A., Claramunt, M., Guezmes, A. (2010). Improving the Health Sector Response to
Gender Based Violence: A Resource Manual for Health Care Professionals in Developing Countries.
IPPF/WHR Tools, 2010
11
     Bott et al., 2010.
12
     Tropp and Ellsberg, 2006.
13
     Boinville, 2013.
14
     Bott et al., 2010.
15
   Note: Two interventions were tested: a wallet-sized referral card and a 20-minute nurse case
management protocol. Two years following treatment, both treatment groups of women reported
significantly (p <.001) fewer threats of abuse (M = 14.5; 95% CI 12.6, 16.4), assaults (M = 15.5, 95% CI
13.5, 17.4), danger risks for homicide (M = 2.6; 95% CI 2.1, 3.0), and events of work harassment (M =
2.7; 95% CI 2.3, 3.1), but there were no significant differences between groups. (McFarlane, J. M.,
Groff, J. Y., O'Brien, J. A., & Watson, K. (2006). Secondary prevention of intimate partner violence: a
randomized controlled trial. Nursing research, 55(1), 52-61.).



13 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
HEALTH SECTOR BRIEF



16
   Note: The intervention consisted of advice in the area of safety, decision-making, and problem-
solving. It also included an “empathic understanding” component, derived from client-centered therapy.
17
   Tiwari A., Leung, W. C., Leung, T. W., Humphreys, J., Parker, B., and Ho, P. C. (2005). A
randomized controlled trial of empowerment training for Chinese abused pregnant women in Hong
Kong. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 112(9),1249-1256.
18
     Bott et al., 2010.
19
     Velzeboer et al., 2003.
20
     Bott et al., 2010.
21
     Bott et al., 2010.
22
  Bybee, D.I. and Sullivan, C.M. (2002). The process through which an advocacy intervention resulted in
positive change for battered women over time. American Journal of Community Psychology 30, 103-132.
23
     Tropp and Ellsberg, 2006.
24
     Bott et al., 2010.
25
     Tropp and Ellsberg, 2006.
26
     Tropp and Ellsberg, 2006.
27
     Heise, Lori L. (2011). What works to prevent partner violence: An evidence overview.
28
  Diop, N. J., Faye, M. M., Moreau, A., Cabral, J., and Benga, H. (2004). The TOSTAN Program.
Evaluation of a community-based education program in Senegal. New York: Population Council.
29
  See: Pande, 2006, Erulkar, 2007, and DuFlo, 2006, cited in Lee‐Rife, S., Malhotra, A., Warner, A., &
Glinski, A. M. (2012). What works to prevent child marriage: A review of the evidence. Studies in family
planning,43(4), 287-303.
30
     Bott et al., 2010.


                                           PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: Mary Ellsberg/Global Women’s Institute.



 This brief was written by Floriza Gennari (GWI), Jennifer McCleary-Sills (WBG), Diana Arango (GWI), and
 Nidia Hidalgo (IDB), with comments and editing from Manuel Contreras (GWI), Mary Ellsberg (GWI),
 Anne-Marie Urban (IDB), and Sveinung Kiplesund (WBG). Inputs were also provided by Clara Alemann
 (IDB), Rosemary Sunkutu (WBG), and Andy Morrison (IDB). Sarah Jackson-Han (WBG) provided editorial
 support.



14 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Health Sector Brief
