                                                                                         92970
     VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
     SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF




                                                                          SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF




December            2014
  0 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief

MENT BRIEF
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


     The definition of social protection (SP) programs varies widely, as do the types of interventions included and
     the specific outcomes sought. These programs can be implemented through public and/or private sectors,
     with the involvement of single or multiple government sectors, or by some combination of these actors. This
     brief will specifically focus on four types of social protection interventions: social assistance, social insurance,
     labor market programs, and early childhood development. It will offer suggestions for integrating violence
     against women and girls (VAWG) prevention efforts within these interventions. These areas of focus are
     meant to be illustrative of different social protection programs, rather than to reflect the full breadth of SP
     programs.

     In general, SP programs are public interventions that support the poorest populations and assist individuals,
     households, and communities to better overcome social and economic risks. Examples of programs include
     a) social assistance (social safety nets): cash transfers, school feeding, and targeted food assistance; b) social
     insurance: old-age and disability pensions and unemployment insurance; c) labor market programs: skills-
     building programs, job-search and matching programs, and improved labor regulations; and d) early
     childhood development. Other program interventions, which fall under what is referred to as social
     protection, aim to strengthen families’ abilities to respond to hardships by promoting gender equality.
     Examples include early childhood development, projects that focus on at-risk youth, or targeted poverty
     alleviation programs.

     Sources:
     World Bank. (2012). The World Bank 2012-2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy: Resilience, equity, and
     opportunity. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     World Bank. (2001). Social Protection Sector Strategy Paper: From Safety Net to Springboard. Washington, DC: World
     Bank.

     Inter-American Development Bank (2014). Social protection and the IDB. Washington, DC: Inter-American
     Development Bank.



                                                     KEY POINTS
  • Women and girls, particularly those in situations of violence, are more vulnerable to social and
    economic risks. They are also disproportionately affected by poverty, inadequate health care, and
    lack of access to high quality education. In addition, women face greater challenges in recovering
    from shocks due to disasters, crime, unemployment, old age, and widowhood.1
  • Poverty, limited choices, and harmful gender norms can have a greater negative impact on women
    and girls compared to men and boys; the contrast is starkest for women and girls living in poverty.
    In addition to the myriad of social and economic obstacles faced by women and girls in poorer
    households, girls living in poor households are also almost twice as likely to be married before the
    age of 18.2 Marrying before age 18 has harmful effects on a girl’s sexual and reproductive health
    and increases her odds of experiencing intimate partner violence (IPV) by 22%.3
  • Women traditionally have more limited access to resources like land, finance, and training
    opportunities than men. Social norms often restrict women’s mobility and decision-making, as well


1 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


    as their access to education, employment, and means of livelihood.4 These limitations increase
    women’s vulnerability and create greater barriers to social protection benefits. This cycle of
    deprivation exacerbates women’s risk of IPV and can also hinder their ability to access available
    services for survivors of violence.
  • Due to intersecting forms of discrimination and disadvantage, certain groups of women
    (ethnic/racial minorities, for example) are even less likely to benefit from social protection programs
    if these programs fail to consider specific needs/circumstances. Similarly, it is difficult for said
    women to access social services, support systems, and other benefits even though they are more
    likely to require them.5,6


   INTERSECTION BETWEEN SOCIAL PROTECTION AND VAWG
While numerous social protection programs have
shown significantly positive impacts on poverty,                   What is Economic Violence?
equity, and human development outcomes,7 there
                                                                   Economic violence can include acts perpetrated by
is a continued need to adapt these programs to                     systems and structures, as well as by individuals. At the
better accommodate the specific needs of women                     interpersonal level, economic abuse is defined as making
and girls. The purpose and breadth of social                       or attempting to make an individual financially
protection programs mean they are uniquely                         dependent by maintaining total control over financial
positioned to reach the most vulnerable of                         resources, withholding one's access to money, or
                                                                   forbidding one's attendance at school or employment. At
populations, including women and girls in
                                                                   the structural and institutional level, women might
situations of violence. 8                                          experience economic violence as limited access to
Nonetheless,     adapting    the    design   and                   funds and credit; controlling access to health care,
                                                                   employment,       or    education;      discriminatory
implementation of social protection programs first
                                                                   traditional laws on inheritance and property rights;
requires an understanding of some of the                           and unequal remuneration for work.
persistent challenges related to gender and
violence against women and girls:                                  Sources:
                                                                   The United States Department of Justice:
  • Social safety nets:                                            http://www.justice.gov/ovw/domestic-violence
           o      Safety net interventions,         Fawole, O.I. (2008). “Economic Violence To Women
                  including cash/in-kind transfers, and Girls: Is It Receiving the Necessary Attention?”
                  and income-generating schemes, Trauma Violence Abuse 9, 167-177.
                  among      others,     can affect
                  household power dynamics, which can exacerbate incidents of violence.9 It is also true
                  that IPV and unequal gender dynamics can limit women’s ability to access these
                  interventions.
  • Pension reforms:
           o      Broader pension reforms may fail to reach women in abusive relationships, as these



2 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


                  women may be forbidden from engaging in formal employment. Similarly, older women
                  and women facing illness or disabilities may not be reached as they are more likely to
                  earn their incomes from the informal sector or unpaid home care, if at all. Older women
                  are also more likely to experience high levels of exclusion and discrimination in their
                  access to markets, assets, and other economic resources, amounting to economic
                  violence.10
           o      In developing countries, in addition to the low coverage of state pensions financed by
                  pay-roll taxes, there is often an extreme gender imbalance in accessing these pensions.
                  For example, in Kenya, in 1994, only 3.1 percent of individuals over the age of 55
                  received a pension and 90 percent were male.11 Similarly, a survey in Bangladesh,
                  conducted in 2004, found that men comprised 88 percent of the recipients of
                  employment-related pension schemes.12
  • Labor market policies:
           o      Women are overrepresented in the informal job sector and are frequently subjected to
                  sexual harassment, poor working conditions, and other forms of discrimination, often
                  without access to formal grievance mechanisms.
           o      Promoting employment of women in underrepresented sectors (infrastructure, road
                  maintenance, construction, among others) through job subsidies or job creation
                  programs should be done with the awareness that these women may be at an increased
                  risk for facing discrimination, harassment, and physical violence by their male
                  counterparts, as well as unequal access to resources and opportunities.

  • Early childhood development:
           o      Early childhood development interventions are increasingly recognized as a key factor in
                  poverty alleviation and increased human capital, as it is during childhood that maximum
                  human development potential can be actualized.13 More specifically, evidence suggests
                  that witnessing or experiencing violence during childhood increases the risk of
                  perpetration (for boys) and victimization (for girls) in adulthood.14,15


               ETHICAL AND SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
                         VAWG INTERVENTIONS16
Any intervention that aims to prevent or address VAWG should include precautions above and beyond
routine risk assessment to guarantee no harm is caused. This includes following ethical guidelines related to:
respect for persons, non-maleficence (minimizing harm), beneficence (maximizing benefits), and justice
to protect the safety of both service providers and the survivors. The sensitive nature of collecting information
about VAWG demands additional precautions above and beyond routine risk assessments to guarantee no
harm is caused. Interventions should:

3 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


  • Assess whether the intervention may increase VAWG
  • Minimize harm to women and girls
  • Prevent revictimization of VAWG
  • Consider the implications of mandatory reporting of suspected VAW cases
  • Be aware of the co-occurrence of child abuse
  • Minimize harm to staff working with survivors
  • Provide referrals for care and support for survivors


 For further details on these Ethical and Safety Recommendations, visit the Ethics section of our website.




                                    RAPID SITUATION ANALYSIS
Integrating VAWG prevention and response into social protection projects requires an understanding of
the legal, social, and epidemiological context of VAWG as it relates to the key activities in this sector.
Teams should work with governments, private sector partners, non-governmental organizations, local
experts, and other counterparts in the country to answer some or all following questions:


    For general questions to undertake a Rapid Situation Analysis visit the Integrate section of our website.




            KEY AREAS FOR INTEGRATING VAWG INTO SOCIAL
                     DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
Policy Level
Ensuring survivors of VAWG benefit from social protection programs requires careful consideration of
their unique needs and circumstances. Further, adapting social protection programs can help avoid
potential harmful consequences, such as increased violence, which can result from SP interventions.
While some of the points below may not seem directly related to VAWG prevention or response, they
are important for empowering women and reducing their vulnerability to violence.17 There are many
opportunities for transforming gender norms and reducing violence against women within social
protection programs. Some of the most promising entry points are discussed in the following points:




4 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


  • Work to ensure that gender issues and
    VAWG are carefully considered in the                             Box 1. Promising practices… Juntos
    design, implementation, and monitoring                           Program, Peru
    and         evaluation        of        social
    protection/assistance programs. When                             A review conducted by the Overseas Development
                                                                     Institute (ODI) found that of 9 programs reviewed, the
    evaluating a cash transfer program, Bono de                      Juntos Program was the only social protection project
    Desarrollo Humano (BDH), conducted in                            that showed progress in transforming gender dynamics.
    Ecuador, researchers found that cash                             The primary factor behind this change was the
    transfers had varying effects on IPV. Women                      integration of cash transfers with other programs and
    with higher levels of education, who were                        services, rather than cash transfers alone. For example,
                                                                     Juntos facilitators directly addressed violence against
    enrolled in BDH, were more likely to face a
                                                                     women and men’s negative attitudes regarding the
    reduced risk of psychological IPV. This was                      participation of their wives in the project during group
    not necessarily the case for women with less                     meetings. One man, who was interviewed by ODI as
    than primary school education, of which many                     part of the review, described how the program and the
    women faced a significant increase emotional                     discussions around violence against women during the
    violence.18 For other examples, see Box 1.                       meetings changed his views:

  • Support the implementation of universal                          “Before, it was different, there were no training
    pension plans financed from general                              sessions. We didn’t know, so when we argued with our
    taxation, as opposed to pay roll taxes, as                       wives, we even kicked them, or punched them. But
                                                                     with Juntos they always tell us we must live in harmony.
    these provide men and women with an equal                        Before, women were not aware of their rights, even
    pension, regardless of their record in the labor                 men weren’t, which is why there was violence. Now it
    market. A guaranteed pension not only                            has diminished, we talk more.” (Male, focus group
    recognizes      women’s        contribution     as               discussion, Motoy, Peru).
    caregivers, but can be transformative for older
    women      suffering     from     exclusion     or               The Juntos Program also offers other benefits, such as
                                                 19                  strengthening women’s leadership and participation at
    discrimination or in situations of violence.                     the community level by having them serve as elected
  • Formally recognize and include informal                          liaisons between the program and its beneficiaries.
    work, such as domestic work, in the
                                                       Source: Heise, L. (2011). What works to prevent partner
    pension system. As mentioned earlier, violence: An evidence overview. London, UK: STRIVE.
    women can experience institutional or
    structural economic violence by being
    excluded from benefits and opportunities more readily available to men. Women comprise a large
    portion of workers in unpaid care or in the informal sector, where in addition to being excluded from
    the pension system, they are often subjected to poor working conditions and sexual harassment.
    Formally recognizing informal work, including domestic work, can provide women with better job
    security and access to important benefits. See Box 2.
  • Work to develop a gender-aware national employment plan that includes women in its
    planning and implementation. Increasing women’s livelihood opportunities can lead to greater
    financial independence, which may improve their ability to leave situations of violence. It is
    important to note, however, that the impact of providing women with employment opportunities may

5 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


    have        differing      effects       on             Box 2. Promising practices… Social
    risks/experiences        of       violence,             security benefits for domestic workers,
    depending on the socio-economic,                        Colombia
    cultural, and country context. The WHO
                                                            To address the issue of institutional/structural economic
    multi-country study found that women                    violence against domestic workers and to ensure that they are
    who worked and had unemployed                           able to equally benefit from pensions, a new Colombian
    partners were at a greater risk of                      government mandate now requires employers to make
    violence in 6 of 14 settings (2 settings                mandatory social security contributions, an important step
    had statistically significant findings).                toward labor equality for domestic workers. The mandate
                                                            stipulates that employers pay a contribution of four percent of
    Couples in which only the man worked
                                                            the employee’s monthly salary - which must not be below the
    seemed to be at a marginally lower risk                 minimum wage - to the Family Compensation System. The
    of partner violence than couples in                     Colombian social security system requires most formal
    which both partners worked in 8 of 14                   workers in the country to affiliate with private benefits
    sites (2 sites had statistically significant            providers, such as “Comfenalco,” which offers reduced rates
    findings).20 A North American study, on                 on health care, credit, and recreation. In signing a decree
                                                            obligating the affiliation of all domestic workers, they now
    the other hand, had more positive
                                                            receive the same benefits as those in the formal sector.
    findings: two randomized controlled
    trials of welfare-to-work programs                      Source: Hansen-Bundy, B. (2013, April 18). Colombian govt
    demonstrated a reduction in reports of                  mandate bolsters domestic workers’ rights. Colombia Reports.
    VAWG among low-income women, who                        Retrieved from: http://colombiareports.co/colombian-govt-
    were employed through the project.21                    mandate-bolsters-domestic-workers-rights/#.




6 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


  Institutional/Sectoral Level
  • Include VAWG prevention activities within conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs and
    labor market activities.
           o      “Cash for school attendance” CCT programs are a promising starting point for including
                  activities on VAWG prevention and the empowerment of women and girls. One CCT
                  program, Berhane Hewan in Ethiopia, successfully reduced the number of child
                  marriages (a form of VAWG that affects millions of girls each year), through community-
                  level activities such as “community conversations” on early marriage and reproductive
                  health, social mobilization of girls led by female mentors, provision of school supplies,
                  and livelihood skills for out-of-school girls. At the end of the program, the girls (ages 10–
                  14) who had received the intervention were only one-tenth as likely to have been
                  married compared to girls in the control site. Participants were also three times more
                  likely to be in school.22
           o      Include modules on VAWG prevention and conflict resolution strategies in labor market
                  activities, such as skills-building workshops and employment training projects. Raise
                  women’s awareness about their rights, including the right to a life free of violence.
                  Ensure the information is delivered in a format that is easy to understand and culturally
                  appropriate. At project check-in sites, after checking whether it is safe for participants,
                  provide women and girls with information on available services and resources for
                  survivors of VAWG. See Box 3.



        Box 3. Promising practices…The Empowerment and Livelihood for
        Adolescents (ELA)
        This program, implemented in Uganda, delivered "Adolescent Development Clubs," which provided
        safe places for positive social interactions along with vocational and life skills to girls aged 14-20. The
        clubs were led by female mentors who taught courses on income generation with a focus on micro-
        enterprises. Life skills courses covered topics such as sexual and reproductive health, family planning,
        rape, conflict resolution, and leadership. The study found that the percentage of girls reporting sex
        against their will dropped from 21 percent to close to zero. Furthermore, the program significantly
        improved entrepreneurial skills and increased participation in income-generating activities, in addition
        to a number of positive outcomes related to condom use, teenage pregnancies rates, and knowledge
        about risky behaviors, HIV, and pregnancy.

        Source: Bandiera, O., Buehren, N., Burgess, R., Goldstein, M., Gulesci, S., Rasul, I., and Sulaiman, M.
        (2014). Women’s Empowerment in Action: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial in Africa.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.




7 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


  • Provide VAWG training and sensitization to key project staff and volunteers, particularly
    those who come into direct contact with project beneficiaries. Establish codes of conduct for
    project personnel that include prevention of all forms of VAWG in the workplace and within the
    project. In addition to receiving training on preventing and responding to VAWG and on the
    expected behavior, staff should be required to formally sign the code of conduct and abide by its
    rules during the course of their engagement with the project.
  • Integrate VAWG prevention initiatives into early childhood development programs. Evidence
    has demonstrated (see Box 4) that interventions aimed at improving overall child health and
    development outcomes may also decrease prevalence of IPV victimization by mothers. Therefore,
    early childhood development programs present a unique opportunity to affect current and future
    generations at risk of violence.



      Box 4. Promising practices…Hawaii’s Healthy Start Program (HSP)
      The Healthy Start Program (HSP) is a home visitation program implemented in Hawaii that aimed to
      improve overall child health and development through one-on-one training on healthy childhood
      development, role-modeling positive parenting and problem solving strategies, providing emotional support
      to mothers, and connecting high-risk families for child maltreatment with community resources and
      services. The potential long-term impact of this program includes reducing the risk of adverse health
      outcomes suffered by children of victimized women, as well as decreasing the likelihood of future
      perpetration and victimization of violence that children who witness IPV experience.

      HSP home visitors worked to address adverse child outcomes through reducing maternal risk factors,
      including lack of social support, substance use, poor mental health, and intimate partner violence (IPV).
      Bair-Merrit et al. (2010) investigated the program’s impact on the prevalence of IPV, specifically, by
      conducting a rigorous evaluation that compared rates of IPV among control and intervention groups
      during the child’s first three years of life and later in life, at 7-9 years of age. For both age groups, mothers
      in the intervention groups had lower rates of victimization of physical partner violence as compared to
      those in the control group. The authors concluded that the main driving factors of HSP’s success in
      reducing violence were the supportive and encouraging relationships formed between the mothers and
      home visitors. While these results should be interpreted cautiously, HSP demonstrates how healthy
      relationship messaging and training can have promising effects on reducing the rates of intimate partner
      violence within the context of early childhood development programs.

      Sources:

      Bair-Merrit, M. H., Jennings, J. M., Chen, R., Burrell, L., McFarlane, E., Fuddy, L., and Duggan, A. K.
      (2010). “Reducing Maternal Intimate Partner Violence After the Birth of a Child: A Randomized
      Controlled Trial of the Hawaii Healthy Start Home Visitation Program”. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 164(1),
      16-23.

      Bott, S., Guedes, A., Goodwin, M., and Mendoza, J. A. (2012). Violence Against Women in Latin America and
      the Caribbean: A comparative analysis of population-based data from 12 countries. Washington, DC: Pan American
      Health Organization.


8 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


  • Set inclusion targets for the most vulnerable women relevant to the project. Even within
    vulnerable populations, there are women who are at heightened risk of suffering violence. Use
    indicators to identify female-headed households, pregnant women, women with disabilities,
    indigenous women, women in other disadvantaged and excluded situations, and women working in
    the informal sector.23
           o      Exercise caution to avoid further entrenching the role of women as caregivers and
                  imposing demands on their time without providing opportunities for income
                  generation.24,25 Include within programs skills-building and/or employment training
                  activities to build women’s economic independence.
  • While the main drivers of violence vary by context, it is often that the time and belongings of
    women and girls are tightly controlled by the perpetrators of violence. To prevent projects
    from resulting in unintended violence, projects should acknowledge and be sensitive to
    potential triggers of violence. Understanding that women and girls often face a disproportionate
    burden of household care, limited mobility (due to controlling partners or social/cultural norms)26 is
    important to consider when designing programs. It is possible to address these issues by:
           o      Including child care at meetings and conducting meetings in safe, nearby locations at
                  convenient hours for women.27
           o      Creating schedules for program participation.
           o      Designing discrete informational material that can be easily concealed if a woman
                  should choose to do so.
           o      Recognizing the time and resources women and girls spend on program activities, and
                  where appropriate, remunerating women’s participation28 or creating a system of
                  incentives for them.
  • Facilitate registration and national identification cards. Such cards are often required in order
    to access the benefits of social protection projects. For survivors of VAWG, the need for such cards
    is especially critical, as they can determine whether a woman has access to important services,
    such as shelters and healthcare. Identity cards are also generally required to own and register
    property, register children in schools, and to access police stations, judicial processes, and states
    benefits, all of which can be crucial protective factors for experiencing violence and for leaving a
    violent relationship.29 Where possible, social protection initiatives should assist women with
    registration so that they are able to benefit from the project and are also less vulnerable to VAWG.
           o      A review of social protection programs found that the requirement to register children in
                  Peru’s Juntos program was positively viewed by women who were previously unable to
                  access services due to a lack of identity papers.30
  • Explore secure methods of transferring cash to women. When cash transfers are involved,
    women may be robbed on the way home, forced to give up the cash to partners, or forced to pay
    bribes. Options to prevent such situations from occurring include asking women whether they prefer


9 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


    in-kind or food transfers, or directly transferring funds to women’s personal bank accounts. If
    possible, assist women with acquiring the proper identification required for opening an account and
    work with banks to facilitate the process.31
           o      The type of transfer most likely to result in gender-equitable outcomes varies widely
                  across region, country, and even season. In Malawi, for example, one study showed that
                  women prefer in-kind or food transfers as they have greater control over food allocation
                  rather than cash.32
  • Establish feedback and grievance mechanisms for project participants. This helps to ensure
    that participants have a voice in the ongoing implementation of the project, rather than just being
    passive beneficiaries. Such an avenue is important for learning about what works well, but is
    especially key for documenting any “backlash” effects resulting from SP projects and preventing
    repetition of harmful interventions.33 A common approach is to provide a point of contact, such as a
    social worker, who is trained to manage
    grievances and who can also support
    survivors through referrals for shelters, Box 5. Promising practices…Bolsa
    legal action, and other services. If these Familia           Program and Promundo,
    services are not available, supporting and Brazil
    coordinating with partners who can
    mobilize to put said services in place is Brazil’s Bolsa Familia Program (BFP) is heralded as one
                                                   of the most successful conditional cash transfer (CCT)
    essential.                                     programs in the world. Similar to other CCT programs,
                                                                BFP targets women, given the evidence that women are
Community Level                                                 more likely to spend income on children and basic
                                                                household needs. Qualitative evidence demonstrated
Community behavior change and awareness-                        that by doing so, male partners were largely excluded
raising activities should be integrated into                    from taking an active role in program requirements and
                                                                that traditional gender norms/roles were even further
social protection/assistance projects whenever
                                                                entrenched. Promundo, a Brazilian NGO, attempted to
possible. The entire community, including                       address this issue by carrying out workshops with men
individuals of different ages, gender, and                      and women (focusing on themes such as violence
diversity, should be involved in efforts to                     prevention, women’s autonomy and decision-making,
change harmful gender norms and the                             maternity/paternity leave, caregiving/household chores,
acceptability of VAWG.                                          workers’ rights for women, women’s economic
                                                                empowerment, etc.) that targeted both rural and urban
  • Work with existing community groups                         communities in two states in Brazil. The project also
    as entry points to achieve both social                      focused on exploring how to engage men in the CCT
    protection and VAWG prevention goals.                       program at the municipal level. Interviews, focus group
                                                                discussions, and surveys revealed various positive
    Encourage the creation of safe spaces                       changes in male attitudes. For example, before the
    where both men and women can discuss                        intervention 13% of men said women shouldn’t have a
    healthy relationships, conflict resolution,                 say in how money is spent within the household, this
    values, and behavior, ensuring these                        percentage dropped to 8% after the intervention.

                                                                For additional details, please visit the Promundo website:
                                                                www.promundo.org.br.

10 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


    discussions are grounded in human rights discourses.34 See Box 5.
           o      If women’s groups do not already exist, support the creation of such groups aligned with
                  women’s needs, including women’s business associations, village savings/revolving
                  funds, enterprises, etc.
           o      Promote mentorship and strategies to raise women’s self-esteem and self-confidence
                  through peer networks, as improved self-esteem and social support can protect against
                  IPV. 35,36
  • Engage with men to garner community support for programs targeting women.37 Involving
    men, particularly community leaders, in programming can help to avoid potential negative
    repercussions in household dynamics. In certain patriarchal societies where women require
    permission from husbands or fathers, involving men will likely improve their participation.




11 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


              RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR INTEGRATING
               VAWG INTO SOCIAL PROTECTION PROJECTS
Guidance/Tools
    Luttrell, C. and Moser, C. (2004). Gender and Social Protection. United Kingdom: Overseas
    Development Institute (ODI).
    Women’s Refugee Commission. (2011). Preventing Gender-based Violence, Building Livelihoods
    Guidance and Tools for Improved Programming. New York: Women’s Refugee Commission.
    World Bank. (2012). The World Bank 2012-2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy: Resilience,
    equity, and opportunity. Washington, DC: World Bank.

    World Bank. (2009). Social Protection and Labor at the World Bank, 2000–08. Washington, DC:
    World Bank.

    World Bank. (2001). Social Protection Sector Strategy Paper: From Safety Net to Springboard.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.

Research
    Baez, J. E., Alam, A., and Del Carpio, X. V. (2011). Does Cash for School Influence Young
    Women’s Behavior in the Longer Term? Evidence from Pakistan. Washington, DC: World Bank.
    Baird, S., McIntosh, C., and Özler, B. (2011). “Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash transfer
    experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4), 1709-1753.
    Baird, S., Chirwa, E., McIntosh, C., & Özler, B. (2010). “The short-term impacts of a schooling
    conditional cash transfer program on the sexual behavior of young women.” Health economics
    19(S1), 55-68.
    Blattman, C., Green, E., Annan, J., and Jamison, J. (2013). Building Women’s Economic and Social
    Empowerment Through Enterprise: An Experimental Assessment of the Women’s Income
    Generating Support (WINGS) Program in Uganda. Innovations for Poverty Action Working Paper.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
    Holmes, R. and Jones, N. (2010). Rethinking social protection using a gender lens. London, UK:
    Overseas Development Institute.
    International Labour Organization. (2007). Women’s Entrepreneurship and the Promotion of Decent
    Work: A Thematic Evaluation. Geneva, Switzerland: Committee on Technical Cooperation, ILO.
    Molyneux, M. (2008). Conditional Cash Transfers: A ‘Pathway to Women’s Empowerment’?
    Research for Development Pathways, Working Paper 5.



12 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF


      Monchuk, Victoria. (2014). Reducing poverty and investing in people: the new role of safety nets in
      Africa - experiences from 22 countries. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
      Van de Walle, D. (2013). Lasting Welfare Effects of Widowhood in Mali. World Bank Policy
      Research Working Paper 5734. Washington, DC: World Bank.


                                                   REFERENCES
1
 UN Women. (2012). Handbook for National Action Plans on Violence Against Women. New York: UN
Women.
2
 Klugman, J., Hanmer, L., Twigg, S., Hasan, T., McCleary-Sills, J., and Santa Maria, J. (2014). Voice
and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank.
3
    Klugman et al., 2014
4
  Organization (ILO), 2013 Asian Development Bank (ADB) and International Labor Organization (ILO).
(2013). Good Global Economic and Social Practices to Promote Gender Equality in the Labor Market.
Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
5
 Note: While violence affects women across all racial, ethnic, age, and socio-cultural and ethnic lines,
certain groups are more vulnerable to violence, including minority, indigenous/afro-descendant,
refugee/migrant women, destitute women, women in institutions or detention, women with disabilities,
lesbian/transgender, older women, and women in situations of armed conflict.
6
    UN Women, 2012
7
 UN Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda. (2012). Social protection: A development
priority in the post-2015 UN development agenda: Thematic Think Piece.
8
    UN Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2012.
9
 Heise, L. (2011). What works to prevent partner violence: An evidence overview. London, UK:
STRIVE.
10
  Kidd, S. (2009). “Equal pensions, equal rights: achieving universal pension coverage for older women
and men in developing countries.” Gender & Development 17(3), 377-388.
11
 Kakwani, N., Son, H. H., and Hinz, R. (2006). ‘Poverty, Old-Age and Social Pensions in Kenya’, IPC
Working Paper 24, International Poverty Centre, UNDP.
12
 Mahmood, R. A., Begum, S., and Islam, A. B. M. S. (2008). ‘Bangladesh’, in S. Irudaya Rajan (ed.)
Social Security for the Elderly: Experiences from South Asia, New Delhi: Routledge.
13
  Britto, P., Williamson, A., Snow, T., and Mankad, K. (2013). Social Protection Programs and early
childhood development: unexplored potential. Australia: Plan International.




13 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF



14
 Bott, S., Guedes, A., Goodwin, M., and Mendoza, J. A. (2012). Violence Against Women in Latin
America and the Caribbean: A comparative analysis of population-based data from 12 countries.
Washington, DC: Pan American Health Organization.
15
     Klugman et al., 2014
16
 Adapted from Ellsberg, M., and Heise, L. (2005). Researching Violence Against Women: A Practical
Guide for Researchers and Activists. Washington, DC: World Health Organization, PATH.
17
     Adapted from ILO and ABD, 2013
18
  Hidrobo, M. and Fernald, L. (2013) Cash transfers and domestic violence. J Health Econ 32(1), 304-
19.
19
     Kidd, 2009
20
   Note: For the WHO multi-country study, population-based surveys were conducted in Bangladesh,
Brazil, Ethiopia, Japan, Namibia, Peru, Republic of Tanzania, Samoa, Serbia and Montenegro, and
Thailand. In five countries, surveys were done in the capital or another large city and one predominantly
rural province. In the other five countries, only one site was surveyed because of logistical and financial
considerations. An analysis of the data revealed that women who worked for cash when their partners
did not were at increased risk of violence in 6 of 14 settings (although this finding only reached
statistical significance in 2 sites: the urban settings in both Brazil and in Japan). Couples in which only
the man worked appeared to be at slightly lower risk of partner violence than couples in which both
partners worked in 8 of 14 sites (the finding reached statistical significance, however, in only 2 sites
probably due to small sample size). Please refer to: Abramsky, T., et al. (2011). “What factors are
associated with recent intimate partner violence? Findings from the WHO multi-country study on
women's health and domestic violence”. Biomed Central Public Health, 11(109). For additional material,
refer to: Garcia-Moreno C, Jansen HA, Ellsberg M, Heise L, and Watts CH. (2006) “Prevalence of
intimate partner violence: findings from the WHO multi-country study on women’s health and domestic
violence”. Lancet, 368(9543):1260-1269. Note: A systematic review of 22 studies conducted in low-
and middle-income countries between 1992 and 2005 found that women’s access to cash employment
was protective against violence in some studies and settings but increased women’s risk of violence in
others. Please refer to: Vyas and Watts, 2009. Note: The studies above are also discussed in: Heise,
2011.
21
  Gibson-Davis, C. M., Magnuson, K., Gennetian, L. A., and Duncan, G. J. (2005). “Employment and
the Risk of Domestic Abuse Among Low-Income Women.” Journal of Marriage and Family 67, 1149-
1168.
22
 Erulkar, A. and Muthengi, E. (2009). “Evaluation of Berhane Hewan: A Program to Delay Marriage In
Rural Ethiopia.” International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 35(1), 6–14.
23
     ADB and ILO, 2013




14 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS RESOURCE GUIDE
  SOCIAL PROTECTION BRIEF



  24
    Sholkamy, Hania. (2011). How Can Social Protection Provide Social Justice for Women? Pathways
  Policy Paper. Brighton, UK: Pathways of Women’s Empowerment RPC.
  25
       ECLAC. (2012). Los bonos en la mira: aporte y carga para las mujeres. Santiago, Chile: ECLAC.
  26
    Note: Controlling behavior, such as preventing women from seeing their friends and family and
  forbidding or restricting their outings is considered a form of VAWG. This type of behavior often
  accompanies, or is a precursor to, physical violence.
  27
    Chopra, D. (2014). Towards Gender Equality with Care-sensitive Social Protection. United Kingdom:
  Institute of Development Studies (IDS).
  28
       Sholkamy, 2011
  29
       Sholkamy, 2011
  30
   Holmes, R. and Jones, N. (2010). Rethinking social protection using a gender lens. London, UK:
  Overseas Development Institute.
  31
       Sholkamy, 2011
  32
       ADB and ILO, 2013
  33
       Chopra, 2014.
  34
   Women’s Refugee Commission. (2011). Preventing Gender-based Violence, Building Livelihoods
  Guidance and Tools for Improved Programming. New York: Women’s Refugee Commission.
  35
       Women’s Refugee Commission, 2011
  36
    Capaldi, D.M., Knoble, N. B., Shortt, J. W., and Kim, H. K.. (2012). “A Systematic Review of Risk
  Factors for Intimate Partner Violence.” Partner Abuse 3(2), 231-280.
  37
       Sholkamy, 2011.



                                              PHOTO CREDITS
  Cover: Bart Verweij / World Bank
  Page 6: Binyam Teshome/World Bank
  Page 11: Scott Wallace/World Bank


This brief was written by Floriza Gennari (GWI), Diana Arango (GWI), Jennifer McCleary-Sills (WBG), and Nidia
Hidalgo (IDB), with comments and editing from Manuel Contreras (GWI), Mary Ellsberg (GWI), Sveinung
Kiplesund (WBG), and Anne-Marie Urban (IDB). Inputs were also provided by Clara Alemann(IDB), Pablo Ibarran
(IDB), and Victoria Monchuk (WBG). Amber Hill (GWI) provided editorial support.




  15 | Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Resource Guide | Social Protection Brief
