93036
Feasibility Assessment for the Development of a Mobile Applications Sector in
                                 Afghanistan
Copyright

© 2014 Information for Development Program (infoDev)/The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Internet: www.infoDev.org
Email: info@infoDev.org
All rights reserved

Disclaimers

infoDev/The World Bank: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed herein are entirely
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of infoDev, the Donors of infoDev, the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank and its affiliated organizations,
the Board of Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
cannot guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations,
and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply on the part of the World Bank any
judgment of the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission
to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

To cite this publication:

World Bank. 2014. Feasibility Assessment for the Development of a Mobile Applications Sector in
Afghanistan.Washington, DC: World Bank.
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements ..................................................................................................................................... 4
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................... 7
   1.0     Mapping of the Business Environment for the SMEs in the ICT Sector ......................................... 9
   2.0     infoDev Initiatives.......................................................................................................................... 13
   3.0     Opportunities for a Mobile Apps Market in Afghanistan .............................................................. 15
   4.0     How to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan ............................................................ 19
   5.0     Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer ..................................................................... 21
Acknowledgements

This study, Feasibility Assessment for the Development of a Mobile Applications Sector in Afghanistan ,
was commissioned by infoDev, a global technology and innovation program at the World Bank. The
study was carried out under the supervision of Anushka Thewarapperuma and was prepared by Altai
Consulting.

Rodolphe Baudeau, Alice Bodreau, and Alexandre Plichon (all of Altai Consulting) conducted this study.
A large number of organizations and individuals facilitated the fieldwork in Afghanistan and contributed
to the work, including the teams from the Afghan Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (MCIT) in Kabul, developers, entrepreneurs and private sector actors, donors, local and
international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and others.

The study also benefits from the comments provided by a group who participated in the peer review
process. The peer reviewers include Maja Andjelkovic, Toni Eliasz, Guillemette Jaffrin, Tim Kelly, Ellen
Olafsen, Siddhartha Raja, and Julian Webb. Rick Doerr also contributed to the final publication. Thanks
also to Carollyne Hutter for copyediting.
Abbreviations and Acronyms

ABADE        Assistance in Building Afghanistan by Developing Enterprises

AISA         Afghanistan Investment Support Agency

AMMOA        Association of Mobile Money Operators in Afghanistan

API          application programming interface

B2B          business to business

B2C          business to consumer

B2G          business to government

BDS          business development services

DFID         Department for International Development (United Kingdom)

GIZ          German Agency for International Cooperation

HR           human resources

ICT          information and communications technology

ISP          Internet service provider

IT           information technology

IVR          interactive voice response

KPI          key performance indicator

MCIT         Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Afghanistan)

MNO          mobile network operator

SEAF         Small Enterprise Assistance Funds

SMEs         small and medium enterprises

SMS          short messaging service
USAID         U.S. Agency for International Development

VC            venture capital

Note: All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.
Executive Summary

Afghanistan has made significant progress in its development since 2001. Yet, these achievements remain
continually fragile because of a volatile security situation and limited human capacity. In spite of these
constraints, the information and communications technology (ICT) sector in the country has witnessed
remarkable growth. An estimated 12 million mobile phone users utilize the services and products of four
private mobile companies and one state-owned company. A recent survey conducted by the U.S. Agency
for International Development (USAID) noted that around 80 percent of women in the country have
regular or occasional access to a mobile phone. The government supports the ICT sector and is adopting
technologies to expand service delivery and support good governance. The potential in this sector is vast
with guaranteed high returns for employment opportunities, generating foreign investment and
producing government revenue.

infoDev focuses on enabling the start-up and growth of innovative, technology-enabled enterprises.
Recognizing the capacity and potential in this sector, infoDev embarked on a feasibility study to gauge
the ICT and mobile applications sector in Afghanistan. The feasibility aimed to map and understand the
current business environment for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in the ICT sector and assess
the overall ecosystem for business incubation. The study also measured the opportunity to create and
support a vibrant mobile applications-focused incubator. The analysis concludes by offering a set of
recommendations and a roadmap on the way forward for implementation.

The feasibility analysis spanned a period of one year commencing from January 2013. The infoDev team
held three workshops during this time to raise awareness and gain feedback from a range of stakeholders
from the government, private sector, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), donors, academia, and
other interested parties. The team interviewed more than 70 key stakeholders. They also conducted
desktop research to measure the opportunities available in the sector.

The results of this research and analysis were a wealth of data on the mobile ecosystem in the country,
current initiatives, and existing gaps. Initial findings from the study reveal a promising terrain to
stimulate the mobile app economy; for example, the existence of a dynamic mobile industry, increasingly
affordable Internet access, a pioneering landscape for mobile innovation and entrepreneurship, and a
strong commitment from donors and the government of Afghanistan. In addition, pressing social issues
provide a window of opportunity for creative solutions to be provided through tech-oriented initiatives.

The study estimated that the mobile app market will grow from its estimated $20–$33 million to $48–
$60 million, at least twice the current size in the next three years. Gaps include lack of relevant skills
and experience needed for the mobile app market (and also absences in resources needed to provide
these skills), a deficiency in the awareness of the potential of mobile technology, and barriers because of
the use of multiple languages and low levels of English language fluency. Methods to access the end
user of mobile products remain nonexistent.

The study notes that increased awareness, relevant skills, and access to practical experience in the mobile
industry are a top priority. As such developers need access to tools that are localized. Finally, an
alternative application distribution mechanism, which enables access to a greater market and capacity
to bill services, is essential. The study underscores the importance of leveraging the existing government
initiatives: an ICT incubator and related programs funded through the World Bank Group, other donor-
driven programs providing access to funding, and locally driven grassroots programs supporting
awareness raising. To address the problem of end-user access, the study offers a game-changing
proposal to establish an app store that is built locally and provides locally relevant content. The app
store can raise further awareness and build a pipeline of entrepreneurs and users to further drive the
mobile market.

The report attached provides a synopsis of the mapping of the ecosystem and a survey of current
initiatives and existing gaps. Recommendations and a roadmap for designing future programs targeting
mobile entrepreneurs are also included in the report. The subsequent PowerPoint offers a unique
presentation of the analysis and results for this specific study.
1.0     Mapping of the Business Environment for the SMEs in the ICT Sector

The study aimed to analyze seven essential components of the ecosystem of SMEs in the ICT sector:
technical environment, ICT players, regulatory environment, human capital, business skills enablers,
financial enablers, and catalysts.



          Technical Environment

The technical environment in Afghanistan in terms of infrastructure, hardware, software, and network has
grown and expanded exponentially. The fiber optic backbone for the country was launched in 2006 and
has been partially completed and this will eventually connect it to international-level bandwidth.1
Although the first telecom operator was launched only in 2003, there are now five carriers operating in
the country. Mobile penetration has soared growing initially from a base of 2 million users in 2007 to
more than 12 million users currently, representing an increase of more than 400 percent.2 This represents
almost two thirds of the overall adult population in Afghanistan. In 2012, 3G technology was launched
and currently smartphone penetration is approximately 8 percent of overall device usage.

Comparatively, Internet usage remains limited with only 1.7 million users on the web in 2011.3 To gauge
the dynamism of Internet usage, the study assessed the number of Facebook users in the country, a
number that grows on a daily basis. This number is expected to increase significantly in the years to come
with Internet prices declining and access to bandwidth rising. Yet a number of impediments remain to the
growth of penetration, including low literacy rates, limited command of English (as local content remains
limited), lack of access to connectivity outside of city centers, and high price points for connectivity.



         ICT Players

When considering the breadth of ICT stakeholders in the country, the range extends from small SMEs to
multimillion dollar ventures. The study surveyed five categories of ICT players: mobile network operators
(MNOs), internet service providers (ISPs), hardware companies, information technology (IT) services
companies, and content providers.4 As indicated earlier there are five MNOs with the four largest serving
a comparable number of customers. There are also 41 licensed Internet ISPs, with mostly business to
business (B2B) and business to government (B2G) clients. Hardware companies tend to focus on
consumer clients with the market dominated by small computer and mobile handsets dealers. IT services
companies tend to have mostly B2B and B2G clients, and their services include software database
development, website development, web hosting, and IT maintenance and support. Mobile software
development in Afghanistan is still in its infancy. Content service providers hold mostly B2B and B2G
clients, and apart from the media, very few Afghan companies provide content to mobile app developers
and MNOs. Their business models focus on revenue sharing (25 to 50 percent of revenue per download),
1
  http://www.instatelecom.com/trf_dsl.html.
2
  https://wirelessintelligence.com/.
3
  www.itu.int.
4
  https://wirelessintelligence.com/.
which can be a challenge as these companies do not benefit from a strong bargaining position with their
potential partners.



           Regulatory Environment

The legal and regulatory framework for the telecom and Internet sector is built on the Telecom Law,
enacted in 2005 and the Telecommunications and Internet Policy approved in 2003. These laws
concentrate on technical elements, rather than on content and services. The laws include no specific
provision for licenses for mobile content or service providers. Content providers are instead regulated
under the national media law. Currently, there is also no regulatory framework for software providers in
Afghanistan, including for mobile applications. SMEs in the country note that any process associated with
the law takes significant time and resources with the actual procedure often times remaining vague. A
new ICT law is currently being drafted that will likely target these existing gaps.




           Human Capital

Afghanistan is one of the youngest countries in the world with 46 percent of the population below 15
years of age.5 This has created a reservoir of human resource potential. However, only a small number of
Afghans have access to higher education because of a lack of capacity. Although universities have
improved their curricula, they still suffer from a shortage of skilled teachers and a lack of hi-tech
equipment and facilities. Major universities in the country produce graduates with IT degrees (roughly
900 per year) with close to 3,500 students currently enrolled. But the graduates’ skill levels are unequal
with many needing further training once they enter the job market. Mobile software development is not
offered in local universities and what is offered for software programming is still very basic. Usage of
Dari and Pashto hampers the access to global knowledge and resources.

With a long tradition of entrepreneurship, the Afghan private sector continues to thrive driven by SMEs,
in spite of a distorted markets, especially in human resources (HR). The country holds name to a number
of large private ventures reaching regional markets (such as the Safi Group or Alokozay Group) and
benefits significantly from a vibrant diaspora with strong networks overseas. Since the fall of the Taliban,
the number of businesses launched has soared. According to the Afghanistan Investment Support
Agency (AISA), 5,283 ventures (176 in the ICT sector) were registered in 2012 compared to 3,539 (19 in
the ICT sector) in 2003. However, with the massive influx of aid money and proliferation of international
agencies as well as foreign military presence, the Afghan private sector has been deprived of locally
grown skilled resources, creating numerous market distortions. As a consequence, labor for the same
skills and capacity is more expensive in Afghanistan than in neighboring countries.




             Business Skills Enablers

5
http://unstats.un.org.
A large number of business development services (BDS), or programs and organizations that promote and
enhance entrepreneurship, currently operate in Afghanistan supported by the donor community, the
government of Afghanistan, and various professional associations. Donors (USAID, World Bank,
Germany Agency for International Cooperation [GIZ] , Department for International Development,
United Kingdom [DFID], and Australian Aid) have been involved in large private sector development
programs focused on SMEs. Approximately 650 BDS providers exist in the country, with their main areas
of involvement being basic business training, business planning, marketing and sales, and legal support.




              Financial Enablers

A variety of funding mechanisms are available to innovative SMEs. Accessing traditional loans within the
banking system continue to be difficult for SMEs. Only 6.3 percent of total loans from Afghan banks are
to SMEs, and typical corporate loans are not adapted to the needs of the Afghan SMEs. However, several
donor initiatives provide grants to SMEs and invest in key infrastructure projects. These include the
following: (1) USAID’s Assistance in Building Afghanistan by Developing Enterprises (ABADE)
Program, which provides matching grants, technical assistance and business advisory services, and
supports improving the business environment by lifting specific regulatory and procedural barriers, and
(2) the Afghanistan Business Innovation Fund (ABIF), which is a donor-backed (DFID and USAID)
investment challenge fund that supports innovative projects within traditional private sectors. Finally,
private investment funds (aka venture capital [VC]) are still very rare in Afghanistan with the Small
Enterprise Assistance Funds (SEAF) backed Afghan Growth Finance (AGF) fund as the most active VC
for SMEs ($25 million committed capital since 2007).



         Catalysts

A number of initiatives within the MCIT, under the umbrella of the E-Afghanistan National Priority
Program, have been designed to leverage mobile infrastructure. MCIT has launched several ambitious
programs to stimulate the IT sector in Afghanistan while improving access of government services to
citizens. With World Bank funding, the Ministry plans to also implement four mGov projects: mGov
strategy, Mobile Service Delivery Platform, DEWAE6 Innovation Support Program, and ICT Village. The
mGov strategy aims to formulate the government strategy for the sector, while training governmental
employees so that they can identify and report opportunities for mobile apps to deliver governmental
services. The Mobile Service Delivery Platform, HOSA,7 will host and make accessible mobile apps that
provide government services, which could include mobile health alerts, school admissions, citizen
surveys, and transports alerts. DEWAE provides $5 million in grants to boost the application economy in
four award categories: mTechnology (apps that address challenges and service delivery, program
management, and performance management), mGovernance (supports a specific impact through the use
of mobile apps for service delivery programs), students (encourage innovative and socially geared
thinking and ideas from students), and IT Champion awards (recognize people who have contributed to

6
http://dewae.mcit.gov.af/en.
7
http://hosa.mcit.gov.af/en.
the promotion of ICT in Afghanistan). The ICT Village is an incubator located in Kabul that is dedicated
to support IT entrepreneurs and will be launched soon.

The ICT sector has seen several professional organizations emerging over the past few years, including
the National ICT Council, Afghanistan Computer Science Association (ACSA), the National ICT
Association of Afghanistan (NICTAA), iHub, and Open Source Afghanistan. Finally, impact events have
taken place in the past couple of years to mobilize the Afghan ICT community, including events
organized by the Kabul Innovation Lab, Open Source Afghanistan, and iHub.
2.0     infoDev Initiatives


infoDev focuses on enabling the start-up and growth of innovative, technology-enabled enterprises. Since
2010, through its Creating Sustainable Businesses for the Knowledge Economy (CSBKE), a
public/private partnership with Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Finland and Nokia, infoDev has supported
a range of cutting-edge global and regional mobile applications initiatives. The study assesses these
initiatives and proposes a model that can be utilized in Afghanistan. Three models were designed to
maximize the development impact of mobile technology and generate innovative entrepreneurship: from
light (mHub) to full (mLab) to virtual (virtual incubator).

mHubs

mHubs are multistakeholder social networks that organize informal gatherings, competitions,
competitions that involve entrepreneurs, local businesses, and individual mobile users, peer-learning
sessions, training and mentorship programs, and national and international conferences. They aim to bring
together organizations and individuals who are interested or willing to work around mobile technologies.
Based on informal meetings, they bring in mobile-centric events to the community, including hackathons,
challenges/events, and information meetings with VCs. They do not require any specific governance in
the way they are designed, at least in the early stages. They can be supported and backed by private sector
organizations whose business interests are in line with the emergence of an active innovation mobile
scene. infoDev has supported mHubs in Nepal, Moldova, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Vietnam, Uganda, Kenya,
and Tanzania.

mLabs

mLabs provide the environment to help nurture and create sustainable mobile businesses. They also act as
role-players in the mobile ecosystem. Since they have a physical location, they can help incubate
technology entrepreneurs who can interact, work, and gain access to tools and expertise to start and grow
their businesses. They offer a wide range of services both to residents and nonresidents. Residents or
incubatees benefit from premium services onsite: office space, Internet access, testing facilities, and
equipment. Nonresidents can also access training and workshops, consulting/mentorship, and access to
investors. The governance schemes for mLabs can vary with leadership from a NGO, private sector
organizations, or a consortium of organizations. infoDev supported mLabs in Kenya, South Africa,
Vietnam, and Armenia.

Virtual Business Incubator

A virtual business incubator acts as an incubator without walls and aims at reaching potential nonresident
incubatees through a variety of mechanisms. It goes beyond a physical space and concentrates on
services. Services provided include training and mentoring, networking, and seed capital. The governance
of the model can vary depending on the type of services offered with examples ranging from foundations
to private ventures. The infoDev supported virtual incubator in Vietnam is helping the existing state-
owned incubator, as well as building a network of entrepreneurs and investors.

Lessons Learned from infoDev Initiatives
For all models, the key is to understand the target audience to be served and their relevant needs. Building
on an existing community is a critical first step. Once the community is built, the brand inevitably can
become strong. It is then possible to attract partners and sponsors that can be sources of revenue and
expand on the brand making it even more relevant to the community. Designing the appropriate
governance for the model is important. The governance has to be in line with the overall objectives of the
initiative, whether a foundation, a NGO, or a private company.

For mHubs, the key is to use a limited number of champions to build the community. Champions should
encourage and pitch new ideas to keep the community attracted, whether it is events (such as hackathons)
or opportunities (new challenges) or exposure to a new technology (training on latest Android API). For
mLabs, building or setting up the physical premises can take considerable time and heavy capital
expenditure. These activities can divert the mLab from delivering other services or getting the brand and
the community installed. A secured location can become a disadvantage as it makes the mLab less
accessible to the audience it wants to reach. In a place where there may not be a critical mass of
innovators, a physical place might be needed where individuals can come together and support each other.
For the virtual incubator, it is possible to be creative in organizing events at no cost. Events are organized
based on existing networking organizations (such as student groups or clubs), and online social network
support the consolidation of the community.

Best Practices from infoDev Initiatives

A number of best practices have emerged among these initiatives that focus specifically on design,
internships, and tools all built to fill in the gaps. To enhance product design, some mLabs have built up a
specific service or a range of services. Expertise and training can be provided to incubatees and non-
residents to select the appropriate platform for their project and to understand and become trained on how
to design a best in class application. Internship and mentorship opportunities allow young graduates or
individual developers to get their first experience in developing apps. Interns can be mentored by experts
from the mLabs, receive training, and work directly on a project or idea generated by the lab and the
community. Finally, access to billing remains a constraint common in many emerging and developing
markets. A number of mLabs aim to tackle the issue either through a dedicated portal that would be
operated by the lab or through a specific entrepreneurial activity that is a part of the incubator.
3.0     Opportunities for a Mobile Apps Market in Afghanistan

Following the analysis of the ecosystem in Afghanistan and taking into consideration data and estimations
from relevant reports,8 this study approximates that the mobile app market will grow from its $21.5–
$33 million to $48–$60 million. The main assumptions for this analysis include an increase in the
number of Internet and 3G users by 15 percent, increase in smartphone penetration by 15 percent,
and a wider focus on innovation and usage because of a number of supporting government initiatives,
including DEWAE and HOSA. The analysis also estimates a growth in the number of local mobile
content providers from the five companies currently active in the market.

The main growth potential impacts SMEs, be it mobile content or software providers. It is estimated that
the market for Afghan-based mobile content providers will grow from $0.5–$1 million to $3–$4 million.
The market for Afghan-based mobile software providers will grow from $1–$2 million to $5–$6 million.
The rest of the growth will be from the mass market, mainly through the market for MNOs. By
understanding these market factors, a more complete picture can be created to know which areas
incubation can support in the Afghan ecosystem.

The analysis and estimations are included below:




8
 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2010/06/16278125/mobile-applications-afghanistan-
mainstreaming-across-government-developing-ecosystem .
Mobile Content Providers to MNO and Mass Market                                                                                                 2013     2016
# of providers (1)                                                                                                               5                       40
Average revenue per provider in $k (2)                                                                                   $       120 $                    100
Total revenue in $k                                                                                                      $      600 $                  4,000
In the slide, ranges of $0.5-$1m in 2013 and $3-$4m in 2016 are presented to take into account the uncertainties in the assumptions taken

Commissioned dev - Mobile Software Providers Afghan-based to Government, Institutions, and Businesses                                           2013     2016
# of providers (3)                                                                                                              10                       20
Average revenue per provider in $k (2)                                                                                   $       150 $                    270
Total revenue in $k                                                                                                      $    1,500 $                  5,400
In the slide, ranges of $1-$2m in 2013 and $5-$6m in 2016 are presented to take into account the uncertainties in the assumptions taken

MNOs to Mass Market - ARPU based Analysis (4)                                                                                                   2013     2016
Average ARPU in $                                                                                                       $          6 $          6
Share of ARPU VAS (5)                                                                                                             3%           5%
Total monthly revenue in $k                                                                                             $      2,160 $      3,900
Total yearly revenue in $k                                                                                              $    25,920 $     46,800
In the slide, ranges of $20-$30m in 2013 and $40-$50m in 2016 are presented to take into account the uncertainties in the assumptions taken

MNOs to Mass Market - Users based Analysis                                                                                                      2013     2016
Average subscription fee in $ (per month)                                                                               $          1 $           1
Average download fee in $ (per month)                                                                                   $        0.3 $         0.3
# of unique mobile users in Afghanistan in k                                                                                12,000       13,000
Share of VAS users (6)                                                                                                           15%           25%
Estimated number of VAS users in k                                                                                           1,800        3,250
Yearly subscription fees revenue in $k                                                                                  $     21,600 $      39,000
Yearly download revenue in $k                                                                                           $      6,480 $      11,700
Total yearly revenue in $k                                                                                              $    28,080 $     50,700
In the slide, ranges of $20-$30m in 2013 and $40-$50m in 2016 are presented to take into account the uncertainties in the assumptions taken

Sources:
(1) Based on estimated number of publishers active on the Afghan market —see "Hyp. Afghan app store" sheet.
(2) Based on interviews with ICT SMEs in Kabul.
(3) The increase in number of actors is based on the impact of mobile initiatives (HOSA) and on the increasing demand from gov. institutions.
(4) Industry benchmarks: Wireless Intelligence, Ovum, and MNOs interviews.
(5) VAS = excludes voice, SMS, and data revenues. Includes mobile money. Highly driven by RBTs in Afghanistan.
(6) Interviews with MNOs.




Market Gap

Although the mobile app market appears primed for growth, a number of critical gaps need to be filled to
correctly seize the mobile app opportunity in Afghanistan. The main gaps can be classified under lack of
access to relevant people and skills, tools, and end users (that is, the mass market).

People and Skills: Surveys and analyses have demonstrated that there is a lack of awareness of mobile
technology and its opportunities in the country. Many Afghans, including students of information
technology themselves, are not aware of the prospects that would be available in this market. The
Afghanistan workforce also lacks the relevant skills and experience required for on the job opportunities
in the sector.

Tools: Along with the lack of skills, Afghans interested in mobile app development do not have the
ability to access the necessary tools to create apps. A majority of the tools available are open source and
easily available online. Since a majority of Afghans do not speak English (or if they do, fluency remains
limited), the tools remain inaccessible to them because of language and cultural barriers.
End Users: Finally, there are barriers for mobile app developers in Afghanistan to access the mass
market. Most Afghans do not have a compatible handset, and when they do, most do not know about
available platforms (such as iTunes). When the platforms are known, a majority of the population does
not have access to credit cards or payment means to purchase the apps. The only channels available for
independent developers and entrepreneurs in Afghanistan today are (1) commissioned development, that
is, not the mass market and (2) negotiation with MNOs.

Opportunities

Within Afghanistan, infoDev’s support to accelerate the growth of the mobile app sector will come as a
complement to the existing MCIT or mGov initiatives and to the growing networking arenas. It will build
on the current momentum around HOSA, DEWAE, and the ICT Incubator, as well as leverage the
existing networking arenas already in place (such as iHub, NICTAA, Open Source Afghanistan,
TechNation, and TechDera). With this understanding, three areas have been identified to deepen the
support to the mobile ecosystem. The initial scope should include the following: (1) increase awareness,
skills, and access to practical experience, (2) provide tools, derived and localized, from mobile open
source software, to accelerate the adoption of mobile technology by entrepreneurs, and (3) enable access
to the mass market and the capacity to monetize services, by creating an alternative application
distribution mechanism for SMEs.

Targeting People and Skills

The immediate opportunities for action to support individuals and skills include raising awareness around
the mobile ecosystem, increasing skills in mobile software, and improving hands-on experience of IT
students. Currently, the level of awareness among individuals and SMEs about the business potential of
mobile technology is still low. Initial efforts should be put into creating a community of interest around
mobile opportunities. A natural first step is to increase awareness through such events as competitions and
hackathons. Awareness can also be raised through industry partnerships (platform and technology
providers), who can support training bootcamps and challenges. Individual’s skills also need to be
adapted to the mobile ecosystem. To date, none of the IT institutes, whether private or public, provide
specific training on mobile software development. All stakeholders interviewed were interested and ready
to adjust their curriculum to include mobile software development courses. These should be adapted to
both current market demand (including Java, SMS, and interactive voice response [IVR]) as well as
anticipate the demand for the next generation of native apps based on major operating systems and
technologies. Finally, IT students need further experience, which can be increased via mentorships and
internships. All institutes surveyed suggested that they would be more than ready to provide students
internship opportunities and project-based courses. This gap can be rectified by adjusting curricula to
include compulsory internships as a part of the course program and by building partnerships between ICT
companies and IT institutes to provide internships and project opportunities for students.

Targeting a Gap in Tools

A list of open source tools and software should be selected that are relevant to the Afghan context while
taking into account the business potential per sector. Open source mobile software is available on all
platforms and can address the needs of many businesses and sectors (such as eLearning, data collection,
or content publishing tools). A localized version of the software would need to be offered to the
community. Support should be provided to private and public initiatives to produce local language
versions (in Dari and Pashto) and documented versions of the software. The tools can then be offered to
the community of developers, entrepreneurs, and training institutions who can in turn utilize the tools as
part of the course offering.

On Accessing the End Users

Since accessing end users remains a significant impediment, developing an independent platform for
service and content providers would benefit the full ecosystem in Afghanistan. The system could replicate
HOSA, the comparable initiative launched by the government, with a dedicated distribution platform for
apps originating in the private sector. It would provide integrated billing access (via airtime or mobile
money) to all MNOs and act as a distribution portal for content and service providers, enabling SMEs to
target the mass-market easily and bill content and services.
4.0     How to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan


Based on the needs assessment, interviews conducted with local stakeholders, and infoDev’s global
experience, a light footprint model that will support current initiatives and fill existing gaps is
recommended. A hybrid of two different models, mHubs and virtual incubators, has been studied to
support the mobile ecosystem. The mLab model was eliminated as a possibility since the goal is to build
on existing incubators initiatives and this gap can be fulfilled by the proposed ICT incubator initiative of
MCIT. In deciding between the mHub and virtual incubator models, both had pros and cons. For the
mHub model, its efficient ability to mobilize and organize a community around the mobile economy,
complementary to current initiatives, and enable national reach through networks of regional IT institutes
were considered pros, while limited support to early-stage startup development and lack of focus on
providing access to finance were considered cons. For the virtual incubator model, pros included focused
support to startups and existing ventures (including through access to finance) and access to international
networks, while cons included the potential to neglect the initial effort required to build technical
capacity, difficulty in reaching the tech community if little tech services are provided, and difficultly in
building a sustainable model as most services will be provided at cost. In order to meet the needs of the
Afghan ecosystem, an amalgam of the mHub and virtual incubator, titled the Mobile Ecosystem
Enhancer, has been recommended.

Governance

Along with the service model, the governance structure for the proposed mobile ecosystem enhancer
needs to be designed with the program’s core objectives in mind. Two governance schemes are applicable
to the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer: fully private or consortium. The fully private scheme, with one or
several privately owned companies, provides added value as the implementers are in the same sector,
would be complementary to the companies’ core business, and there would be a clear leadership structure
and capacity to implement. However, it would be difficult to act as a legitimate centerpiece of the
ecosystem, and there could be a market distortion if only one private actor is selected. The consortium
scheme, an alliance of organizations (whether public or private), can bring in various stakeholders each
with a specific input for the project (such as institutes, the government, or private companies), and offers
broad support and involvement across the ecosystem. However, it could have no clear leadership, it is not
the core business for the stakeholders or participants in the consortium, and it could have limited capacity
to resolve disputes (for example, without a clear memorandum of understanding among the consortium
members stating specific roles and responsibilities).

Services Offered

The program should be built around a portfolio of services to increase technical capacity and the
sustainability of emerging mobile ecosystem. The Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer will aim to provide the
following service lines: (1) mobilize talents and develop skills, (2) support the emergence of sustainable
actors, and (3) provide relevant tech tools to the community.

The aim for the first service line is to rapidly build a strong community of tech entrepreneurs within the
mobile ecosystem, while increasing mobile software skills. The activities (along with their outputs) that
will be provided in this service lines include events (talents mobilized), competitions (ideas and apps
developed), training (upgraded skills), partnerships (training content and technology available), and
internships (increased experience). The organizations and initiatives to support or complement these
activities are the iHub, MCIT ICT Incubator, MNOs, IT institutes, and MCIT’s HOSA.

The second service line, supporting the emergence of sustainable actors, is designed to encourage local
ICT incubators and incubatees. With a proposed Afghan app store, the objective would be to provide the
capacity for SMEs to access the mass market. The activities (along with their outputs) that will be
provided in this service line include mentorship (support to startups), access to finance (access to
international funding and establishing a network of local investors), and support to existing incubators
(focusing on training and incubatees support). The organizations and initiatives to support or complement
these activities are the MCIT ICT Incubator, ABADE, MNOs, and the Association of Mobile Money
Operators in Afghanistan (AMMOA).

The final service line, providing tech tools to the community, will deliver specific mobile software that
will be localized to fodder more opportunities for ideas and entrepreneurship. The activities (along with
their outputs) that will be provided include training on tools (exposure to technology enablers), support of
tools (maintenance and upgrade of tools), software localization (localized tools build services with), and
internships (first-hand experience on tools). The organizations and initiatives to support or complement
are MCIT’s DEWAE, local IT Institutes, SMEs, MCIT’s HOSA, and Open Source Afghanistan.

Focus on Kabul

As a part of the recommendation, Kabul has been identified as the location for the Mobile Ecosystem
Enhancer. It is the hub of most ICT and entrepreneurship initiatives today in Afghanistan so it is a natural
first step to develop mobile app entrepreneurship. By locating the Enhancer in Kabul, it will (1) help
access targeted beneficiaries, (2) participate in galvanizing the Afghan ICT community to create a
momentum, and (3) allow for more numerous and relevant partnerships and opportunities. While it will
be located in Kabul, ad hoc events and training workshops will provide opportunities for national
outreach in other provinces.

Afghan App Store

Accessing end users in Afghanistan remains a hurdle. Afghans do not have a compatible handset, and
when they do, most do not know about the platforms (such as iTunes). When the platforms are known, a
majority of the population does not have credit cards or payment means to purchase the apps. The only
channels available for independent developers and entrepreneurs in Afghanistan today are (1)
commissioned development, that is, not the mass market and (2) negotiation with MNOs. An independent
Afghan app store, built initially on an Android platform (operating system based on a Linux kernel), will
enable content and services providers to monetize their apps. The platform will be the cornerstone
infrastructure of the Afghan app economy and will benefit all stakeholders. It will be the intangible
infrastructure through which all private providers or end-users of mobile apps will be able to connect and
exchange. Its funding is essential to enabling a sustainable ecosystem. Financing the platform depends on
donor involvement as private actors in the country do not have the capacity to invest in the platform
themselves. The platform will be a game changer for app developers to access the end-user and for users
to access Afghan content.
5.0      Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer

Key Performance Indicators

The Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer’s impact will be measured through nine key performance indicators
(KPIs) and is estimated to produce the following results after an initial three-year implementation period:
25 startups created, 20 startup teams receive mentoring and coaching, 425 highly skilled jobs created
(including in existing ventures), 100 internship positions filled, 25 investors identified, 15 plus million
apps downloaded (including 12 plus million in year three), 500 apps commercialized, 40 events
organized, and about 600 individuals trained on mobile technology. In order to reach these results, an
investment of $1.1 million for three years is required. The gross revenue generated in year three is
estimated to be $5 plus million inclusive of revenue generated from the app store.

Budget

The capital needed before sustainability is reached in year three would be approximately $1.1 million.
The initial and running costs will total $800,000. Initially, $400,000 will be necessary to set up the app
store along with other required tools. In year three, another $400,000 will be necessary for maintenance,
running, and advertising costs. After year three, the program should be mostly supported by the revenues
generated by the Afghan app store, partners, and sponsors. In year three, the analysis estimates $270,000
in direct revenue from the app store with another $130,000 in indirect revenue from advertisers, sponsors,
and partnerships. The revenue generated from the app store is based on sales of $5.4 million in year three
(with a 5 percent operating fee).

Risks and Mitigators:

In order to mitigate risks for this initiative, a step-by-step approach is recommended during the
implementation phase, while establishing stronger links with stakeholders in the ICT sector

            Risks                                      Mitigators
            Gap between skills built and market        Establish strong links with the private sector and
            demand                                     mGov programs to dimension and design the
                                                       training curricula to their needs.
                                                       Implement the program in a modular or step-by-
                                                       step approach so as to take corrective measures
                                                       when necessary.
            Lack of absorption capacity and            Conduct additional research to size the potential
            difficulty to identify the right           audience and get a thorough assessment of the
            candidates                                 needs by type of candidates.

            Lack of coordination with other on-        Establish strong links with ongoing initiatives, such
            going initiatives: risk of duplication     as the ICT incubator, from start to differentiate the
                                                       offering of each initiative and create
            Difficulty in attracting sufficient        complementary programs.
            candidates because of multiplication of
            offers for IT students and SMEs
                     FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
                 OF A MOBILE APPLICATIONS SECTOR IN AFGHANISTAN




Copyright 2013
AGENDA




     1. Introduction
         1.1 Definition
         1.2 Context
         1.3 Objectives
         1.4 Timeline

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan

     5. How to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer



                                             2
1.1 INTRODUCTION > DEFINITION
Over the course of the project, reference will be made to the “mobile app economy” or the
“mobile applications sector.”

                                         What is the mobile app economy?

•   A range of economic activity, including enterprises, involved along the value chain of creating, distributing, and
    consuming digital content, services, and transactions over mobile technology.

•   Enterprises active in the app economy include app startups, device manufacturers, mobile operating system
    providers, network operators, software and content agencies, and others.




                                IVR


                                                          3
1.2 INTRODUCTION > CONTEXT
Several drivers contribute to make Afghanistan an attractive country to further develop
mobile entrepreneurship.

                      Afghanistan is a promising territory to spur the app economy


   A dynamic mobile               An increasingly              A pioneering territory     A strong commitment
       industry                 affordable Internet            for mobile innovation     from donors and GIRoA
• Afghanistan has a          • Etisalat, MTN, and             • Afghanistan was one of   • Donors have shown a
  thriving mobile sector       Roshan have launched             the first countries in     strong commitment to
  with 4 large mobile          3G                               the world to launch        support innovative
  operators (including 2     • Smartphones are                  mobile money services      approaches in the
  telecom giants,              penetrating the market           with Roshan. Mobile        fields of health,
  Etisalat, and MTN)           with decreasing entry            money is now offered       education, agriculture,
• Coverage is now              prices                           by Etisalat and other      democracy &
  satisfactory               • Fixed Internet prices            MNOs are planning to       governance
  nationwide and prices        have sharply declined            launch their own         • Previous initiatives on
  have steadily                since 2011 with the            • Other innovative           app development
  decreased over the           launch of the ADSL offer         initiatives include m-     supported by USAID
  past few years               of Insta Telecom,                Agriculture services,      proved very popular
                               allowing some                    such as Malomat          • Afghan Government is
                               households to have a                                        committed to launch
                               connection at home                                          strong mGov initiatives


 + Major social issues open a window for creative approaches to address them, including tech-driven initiatives.

                                                          4
1.3 INTRODUCTION > OBJECTIVES
The feasibility assessment for the development of a mobile applications sector in Afghanistan
encompasses 4 main objectives:



1                          2                             3                      4
                                     Map more
         Map and                  specifically the               Assess the
     understand the                ecosystem for               feasibility to
                                                                                        Provide
    current business                  business               create/support a
                                                                                    recommendations
    environment for             incubation (with a           mLab (looking at
                                                                                       on the way
       high-growth              deep-dive on tech’           different models
                                                                                        forward
    oriented firms in           businesses, and/or             proposed by
     the ICT Sector                    mobile                     infoDev)
                                    applications)




                    The overarching goal of the project is to support the emergence
                            of a mobile applications sector in Afghanistan.


                                                     5
1.4 INTRODUCTION > TIMELINE
Two workshops have been organized to share findings and collect feedback from the project
stakeholders:


    January                                           May 21st:                              July 2nd:
     30th:                                       First workshop on                      Final workshop on
    Kick-off                                      module 1 and 2                         module 3 and 4
    meeting




         Secondary       5 weeks
          research
                 Interview of 40 to 50
                                           7 weeks
                      individuals
                                         Opportunity
                                                           3 weeks
                                         assessment
                                                        Finalizing
                                                                       1 weeks
                                                       assessment
                                                             Additional interviews
                                                                                       2 weeks
                                                               and benchmark
                                                                                   Formulation of
                                                                                                    2 weeks
                                                                                 recommendations



                                                       6
AGENDA
     1. Introduction

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector
         2.1 Introduction
         2.2 Technical Environment
         2.3 Overview of the ICT Players
         2.4 Regulatory Environment
         2.5 Human Capital
         2.6 Business Skills Enablers
         2.7 Financial Enablers
         2.8 Catalysts
         2.9 Main Donors Active in the ICT Sector in Afghanistan

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan

     5. How We Plan to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer
                                             7
2.1 MAPPING > INTRODUCTION
Seven components of the ecosystem of SMEs in the ICT sector have been identified as
essential and will be developed in this section:



         Technical                                                          Regulatory
                                             ICT Players                                                Human Capital
        Environment                                                        Environment
• Exposure to                    • Current scene of the           • Existing laws and          • Human resources,
  technology, Afghan               ICT players in                   regulatory frameworks        skills, and knowledge
  tech environment,                Afghanistan                      that relate to ICT or        that impact the mobile
  including Internet and                                            other legal factors          app economy in
  data access                                                       that would impact            Afghanistan
                                                                    mobile app
                                                                    entrepreneurs

                           Business Skills                    Financial
                                                                                            Catalysts
                             Enablers                         Enablers
               • Set of programs and               • Existing opportunities     • Ongoing projects and
                 organizations present               to access capital in         existing organizations
                 in Afghanistan to                   Afghanistan via grants,      that support mobile
                 enhance                             loans, or equity             app entrepreneurship
                 entrepreneurship                                                 in Afghanistan




                                                              8
2.2 MAPPING > TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT
Mobile usage has soared in Afghanistan. Today, as many as 12 millions Afghans are
mobile phone users.

                                                                                14,000,000                                     +417%
                                        • Since the first operator was                                                                              11,902,989
                                          launched in 2003, Afghanistan         12,000,000                                                  10,937,872
                                          has seen a tremendous uptake                                                               9,603,563
                                                                                10,000,000
                                                                                                                            8,018,383
                                          of its telecom market. 5               8,000,000                          6,696,453
                                          carriers are now operating in
                                                                                 6,000,000
                                          Afghanistan                                                    4,482,441
                                                                                 4,000,000
                                        • Mobile penetration has grown                          2,303,228
 Mobile penetration                       from about 2 million users in          2,000,000

    has boomed                            2007 to almost 12 million                     -
                                          users at the beginning of                              Q1'07      Q1'08    Q1'09   Q1'10      Q1'11   Q1'12   Q1'13

                                          2013* which represents 2/3                        Mobile phone users evolution (Q1 2007 to Q1 2012)*
                                          of the Afghan adult
                                          population
                                        • Among VAS offered today by MNOs, Ring Back Tones** (RBT) are by far the most
                                          successful: according to MNOs, between 18% to 30% of their customer base has at least
                                          once used this service, i.e., between 2 million to 3.5 million users

                                        • 3G has been launched in March 2012 in Afghanistan and is now offered by 3
      Smartphone
                                          operators: Etisalat, MTN, and Roshan
     penetration is
                                        • Smartphone penetration is estimated at 8% of total devices in circulation by several
        growing                           MNOs

Source: (*) https://wirelessintelligence.com/; (**) Interviews with MNOs.

                                                                            9
2.2 MAPPING > TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT > INTERNET ACCESS IN AFGHANISTAN
The number of Internet users has reached 1.7 million in Afghanistan in 2011 and is
expected to grow significantly in the years to come with prices declining.

                                                                                           500,000                               +178%                  460,000
                                       • At the end of 2011, the number                    450,000
                                         of Internet users can be                          400,000                                           350,000
                                         estimated to 5% of the total                      350,000
                                                                                                                               289,000
                                                                                           300,000
                                         population* corresponding to                      250,000                 228,000
     Internet usage                      approximately 1.7 million of                      200,000 165,000
                                         Internet users (i.e., people who                  150,000
    remains limited
                                         have accessed Internet over the                   100,000
     but has grown                       last month) in Afghanistan, or                     50,000
         rapidly                         much more according to other
                                                                                                -
                                                                                                   Mar-11          Sep-11      Mar-12      Sep-12        Mar-13
                                         sources                                                  Facebook users evolution (March 2011 to March 2013)
                                      • The dynamism of Internet usage is also reflected in the number of Facebook
                                        connections ,which has experienced a strong growth over the past 6 months
                                        (+33%)** with 460,000 Facebook accounts

                                       • While Internet offers used to be almost exclusively for corporations given the very
    Internet prices                       high prices of subscriptions (in 2002, monthly connection cost up to $10,000 for 64
   have gone down                         kbps, in 2007 it cost up to $250),
     with access to                    It is now affordable for rather affluent households:
  higher bandwidth                        – For example, INSTA now offers a 256/128 kbps connection for 1,250 AFN/month
                                             (~$22) and up to 2,048 kbps connection

Source: (*) http://www.itu.int; (**) Socialbakers.
Note: (***) Back in 2005, the Ministry of Communication planned to increased internet penetration from 0.25% to 10% in 2010.

                                                                                 10
2.2 MAPPING > TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT > OPTICAL FIBRE BACKBONE & INTERNET
The fiber optic backbone is partly completed, linking Afghanistan to international
bandwidth. Barriers to Internet access still remain.

                                     • In 2006, the Afghan
                                       government launched an
                                       initiative to build a 4,810km
                                       optical fiber cable ring
    The backbone
                                       around the country linked
  launched in 2006                     with Afghanistan’s neighbors
   has been partly                   • More than 2,678 km have
     completed                         been completed today,
                                       including connectivity with
                                       Iran, Pakistan, Tajikistan, and
                                       Uzbekistan
                                                                                                      Afghanistan’s optical fibre backbone

                                     • In spite of all those developments, penetration growth has been slower than
                                       expected and several factors could impediment a further development of Internet
                                       usage:
       Barriers to                     – Low literacy rate and limited command of English (as local content remains
    Internet access                       limited)
      still remain                     – Connection prices have decreased but remains out of reach for the majority of
                                          the population
                                       – Lack of access outside city centers

Source: USAID and Internews report; Ministry of Communication and Information Technology; Afghan Telecom; http://www.instatelecom.com/trf_dsl.html.

                                                                             11
2.3 MAPPING > OVERVIEW OF THE ICT PLAYERS

ICT players in Afghanistan range from multimillion dollar ventures to small SMEs.

                                 Four categories of ICT players have been identified:
            MNOs and ISPs - Hardware companies - IT and software companies - Content providing companies
                                                                        MNOs and ISPs
 • MNOs: There are 5 operating carriers in Afghanistan. The four largest ones are:



 - 6.3m users*                              - 4.7m users*                              - 5.7m users*
                                                                                                                            - 4.5m users*
 - Offers mobile money                      - Offers a range of VAS                    - Offers 3G
 - Offers 3G                                  based on short code and                                                       - Offers mobile money
                                                                                       - Offers a range of SMS
 - Launched their own web                     SMS, including a music,                                                       - Offers 3G
                                                                                         based apps, including
   portal Kahkashaan that                     Islamic, educational,                                                         - Offers a range of apps
                                                                                         Ring Back Tone (RBT)
   supports SMS, IVR, USSD,                   game content                                                                    through SMS and IVR and
   SDK, web, and WAP apps,                  - The platform is provided                 - Offers four main IVR
                                                                                                                              Ring Back Tones (RBT),
   including RBT                              by regional contractors                    services: TeleMufti,
                                                                                         TeleDoctor, TeleLawyer             - Will launch a web and
 - Local content is provided                  (India, Pakistan)                                                               mobile portal in end of
   by Yama Ramin and Tolo                   - Local content is provided                  that provide advices and
                                                                                         TeleVasar for classified             May 2013: should
 - Offers Malomat**: an IVR                   by ACTC                                                                         support WAP, Web, USSD
   and SMS-based m-                                                                      ads
                                                                                                                              and SMS apps
   agriculture app                                                                     - MTN play, a web portal,
                                                                                         will be launched in Q2
                                                                                         2013
 • ISPs:
     - There are 41 licensed Internet ISPs in Afghanistan - Targeting large corporations/organizations that are less price
     - Clients: mostly B2B and B2G                          sensitive
                                                          - Access is mostly provided through WiFi and VSAT technology
Source: (*) https://wirelessintelligence.com/; Interviews. Note: (**) In partnership with Mercy Corps and DAI – IDEA NEW.

                                                                                  12
2.3 MAPPING > OVERVIEW OF THE ICT PLAYERS
IT services and content providers companies are usually SMEs facing similar
challenges in terms of recruitment, training, access to market, and sustainability.
                                                                        Hardware companies
 • Clients: mostly B2C                                                               • Essentially imported
 • The market is dominated by small computer and                                     • There are a limited number of large players and
   mobile handsets dealers                                                             authorized dealers mostly for PCs


                                                                    IT services companies
 • Clients: mostly B2B and B2G
 • Services include software database development, website development, web hosting, IT maintenance and
   support
 • Very few players specialize in one area, mobile software development is still in its infancy
 • IT services market had a limited number of players in 2007 (less than 30). It has grown to an estimated 176**
   active players to date


                                                               Content providers companies
 • Media are natural content provider for mobile app developers. Tolo, for example, provides content to several
   MNOs
 • Apart from the media, very few Afghan companies provide content to mobile app developers and MNOs
 • Clients: mostly B2B and B2G
 • Business models: revenue sharing, i.e., 25% to 50% of revenue per download
 • This revenue sharing model can be a challenge as those companies don’t benefit from a strong bargaining
   power with their potential partners
Source: (*) https://wirelessintelligence.com/; (**) AISA; Interviews.

                                                                                13
2.4 MAPPING > REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT > BACKGROUND
The legal and regulatory framework for the telecom and Internet sectors is built
on the Telecom Law and the Telecommunications and Internet Policy.

     2002    • Decree 4517 granting the MCIT authority to issue licenses and spectrum frequency permits to
               private investors and the power to adopt policies, laws, regulations and procedures.
     2003    • New Telecommunications and Internet Policy approved by the council of Ministers.
             • MCIT establishes the Telecom Regulatory Board (TRB), an interim body responsible for monitoring
               licenses and spectrum permits.

     2004    • New National Numbering Plan (NNP) and National Frequency Table drafted by TRB.

     2005    • New Telecom Law enacted.

     2006    • Establishment of the Afghanistan Telecom Regulatory Authority (ATRA) as a permanent and
               independent regulatory body, in replacement of TRB.


     2010    • E-Afghanistan National Priority Program presented as one of the 22 NPPs and endorsed by Joint
               Coordination and Monitoring Board (JMCB).
             • The E-Afghanistan Program is serving as the national development framework for the ICT sector
               for the next 3 to 5 years.

     2013    • New ICT law / amendment currently being drafted by MCIT for approval mid-2013.




                                                      14
2.4 MAPPING > REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT > REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR MOBILE SERVICE PROVIDERS
The current regulatory and legal framework concentrates on technical elements,
rather than on content and services. A new ICT Law is currently being drafted.
                          • 10 licenses distinguished in Internet policy
   The licensing          • There are no specific licenses for mobile content or service providers. The Value
     regime                 Added Services (VAS) concern MNOs and has not been issued so far
                          • No licensing regime for short code services

                          • ATRA is responsible for supervising the allocation of short codes to private actors
     Short code           • Procedure includes initial agreement with a provider (MNOs) and then getting the
                            allocation of the short code by ATRA
     procedure
                          • Based on a registration fee (5,000 AFN) + a fee by category (Gold, 70k AFN, Silver 67k
                            AFN, Normal 57k AFN, and an annual renewal fee of 2,000 AFN)
                          • As per the Constitutional Law, the Ministry of Information and Culture is responsible
 Content providers          for the regulation of content
   fall under the         • There is no involvement of the MCIT / ATRA, apart for regulation of the content
     media law              filtering policy
                          • This is not likely to be addressed by the new ICT Law

   While software         • There is currently no regulatory framework for software providers in Afghanistan,
 providers have no          including mobile applications
                          • Software providers can operate under the general business license regime (Ministry of
 specific regulatory
                            Commerce / AISA)
     framework            • This is not likely to be addressed by the new ICT Law
                          SMEs face regulatory challenges while developing mobile apps:
SMEs complain that getting short codes or having content approved by the Ministry of Information and Culture takes
time and significant resources. The process is not always clear to them.

                                                         15
2.5 MAPPING > HUMAN CAPITAL > POTENTIAL
Afghanistan is one of the youngest countries in the world but only a small number of
Afghans have access to higher education.
                                         • 46% of the Afghan population is below 15
   Afghanistan is a                        years of age. Afghanistan is the 8th youngest
 reservoir of human                        country in the world*
      resource                           • Between 2001 and 2012, primary school
     potential…                            enrollment rose from around 1 million to
                                           nearly 8.2 million**


                                         • Universities have improved their curricula.
                                           They still suffer from a shortage of skilled
  …but only a small                        teachers and a lack of equipment and                Afghanistan’s population pyramid graph***
 number of Afghans                         facilities
   have access to                        • Some institutions, such as the American University of Kabul have positioned themselves
  higher education                         as “state of the art”
 because of lack of                      • General access remains very low: In 2012, a record of nearly 40,000 university places
      capacity                             got awarded for a formal admissions capacity of 34,260 students****
                                         • Private training organisations complement university tuition and allow young Afghan to
                                           combine studying and having a job at the same time


   Language issues
    limit access to                      • Dari and Pashto constitute barriers to access to global knowledge content,
                                           especially on the Web, since these languages are not very widespread
  global knowledge
Source: (*) http://unstats.un.org; (**) Unesco; (***) United States Census Bureau (2012); (****) Ministry of Higher Education.

                                                                                    16
2.5 MAPPING > HUMAN CAPITAL > ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Afghanistan has a long tradition of entrepreneurship. The private sector is booming
driven by SMEs, in spite of market distortions, especially in the field of HR.

                         • Afghanistan has given birth to large private ventures reaching regional markets
 Afghanistan has a
                           (e.g., the Safi Group or Alokozay Group) as well as SMEs
  long history of
                         • Afghan entrepreneurs often benefit from strong networks overseas thanks to the large
 entrepreneurship          Afghan diaspora in North America, Europe, Pakistan, and Iran



                         • According to AISA:
  The number of
                           – 5,283 ventures have been registered in 2012 compared with 3,539 ventures in
      businesses
                             2003
launched since the
                           – 176 ventures in the ICT sector have been registered in 2012 compared with 19
 fall of the Taliban         ventures in 2003. Ventures in the ICT sector represent 3% of the newly registered
     has soared              ventures in 2012



                         • The massive influx of aid money and international agencies, as well as foreign military
Afghanistan suffers        presence, has deprived the Afghan private sector from precious skilled resources and
 from a distorted          created numerous market distortions
    HR market            • As a consequence, for the same skills and capacity, labor is more expensive in
                           Afghanistan than in neighboring countries



                                                       17
2.5 MAPPING > HUMAN CAPITAL > IT SKILLS
IT degrees are delivered by major universities and private institutes. Close to 3,500
students are currently enrolled.

                                          • 830 IT students graduated in 2013, with an overall
                                            3,500 IT students enrolled*
                                                                                                                                           1,000
                                          • Students from public universities are mostly full time,                         1,500
                                            while students at private institutes are mostly part
    Around 900 IT                           time                                                                                            500
  students graduate                       • After graduation, the majority of students go to work
                                                                                                                                     500
      each year                             for banks and government ministries. A lot of the
                                            graduates, in particular from the private institutes,                     Kabul University & ICTI
                                            are already employed                                                      Herat University
                                          • Curricula are centered around programming,                                Nangarhar, Mazar, Khost, & Polytechnic
                                                                                                                      Private institutions
                                            database, and network management



                                         • Graduates need further training once they                        # Private institutes…               74
                                           enter the market; 100% of private businesses
     …but the skills                       interviewed have indicated that they conduct                    … of which CS degree     20

     levels are still                      their own in-house training**
                                                                                                          … of which Kabul based           15
        unequal                          • Internship and hands-on experience are still
                                           missing for students
                                         • Mobile software is not taught and software programing is still very basic

Source: (*) Ministry of Education; (**) Altai Consulting and interviews of universities and institutes.

                                                                                      18
2.5 MAPPING > HUMAN CAPITAL > IT SKILLS
The curriculum taught within the leading universities and institutes focuses on
network and database. Internships and hands-on projects are still rare.

                          Kabul University                      Kardan Institute             American University

    Launch                        2008                                2009                              2006

 Admission test                 Koncor                               Koncor                           Koncor

 Dedicated time    • All students are full time        • Most students are part time     • All students are full time

                   • 4 years                           • 3 years                         • 2 years
                   • General curriculum includes       • General CS are mostly all       • General education includes
   Curriculum
                     maths, physics, Islam, history,     basics required                   maths, physics, humanities,
    General
                     language, and introduction to     • CS core courses includes          and introduction to information
                     IT                                  introduction to all IT fields     technology
                                                       • 1 year
                   • 2 years                                                             • 2 years
                                                       • 2 specializations: network or
  Curriculum       • Specialization includes                                             • Specialization includes
                                                         software
 Specialization      network, database, and                                                network, database, security,
                     software engineering              • Programming includes asp,         programming
                                                         .net, php, java, C++
                   • Internship mostly within
                                                       • Required as part of the final
  Internship /       governmental organs
                                                         year                            • Internship program recently
    Project        • Mandatory project for 4th year                                        started with IT private actors
                                                       • Usually within current job
                     students

     Alumni        • No alumni network                 • No alumni network               • No alumni network

                                                           19
2.6 MAPPING > BUSINESS SKILLS ENABLERS
A large number of business development services (BDS) currently operate in
Afghanistan supported by the donor community, GIRoA ,and professional
associations
                                       • Since 2007, the USAID-funded ASMED program has directly and indirectly provided
  Donors have been                       business skill training to over 20,000 clients throughout the country, has supported
  involved in large                      more than 9,300 Afghan businesses, and facilitated access to bank loans and equity
                                         financing to 103 of those companies*
    private sector
                                       • ABADE is succeeding ASMED with a goal to generate $180 million of investment in
    development                          the private sector, targeting SMEs and innovation, with a initial target of more than
  programs focused                       400 recipients**
       on SMEs                         • Other donors and entities, such as the World Bank and GIZ (New Market
                                         Development Project), DFID, and AUSAID play a major role in private sector
                                         development
                                       • There is an estimated number of 650 BDS providers in Afghanistan***, their main
                                         areas of involvement include basic business training, business planning, marketing and
                                         sales, legal support, and others
                                       • A national association of BDS has been created to group BDS providers: Afghan
   An estimated                          Consulting Companies Association
 number of 650 BDS                     • Afghan Ministries (such as MoCI) are supporting entrepreneurs through targeted
   providers now                         BDS programs
     operate in                        • Afghan Chamber of Commerce and Industries (ACCI) support entrepreneurs through
    Afghanistan                          training sessions, business matchmaking events, and fairs
                                       • Portals, such as Afghanistan Building Markets, have been put in place to help Afghan
                                         businesses access market and support them in getting access to tenders***
                                       • Some specific initiatives have positioned themselves as business accelerators, e.g., the
                                         Herat incubator
Source: (*) ASMED; (**) ABADE; (***) http://afghanistan.buildingmarkets.org/

                                                                               20
2.7 MAPPING > FINANCIAL ENABLERS > OVERVIEW
Apart from the banking sector, other funding mechanisms are available to
innovative SMEs. Venture capitals (VCs) are still a rarity in Afghanistan.
                                       • As of September 2012, loans by Afghan banks to SMEs accounted only for 6.3% of
  Accessing loans                        total loans*
 within the banking                    • This is partly because of the limited capacity of the recipients to complete the
 system is difficult                     collateral documentations required by the Banks
      for SMEs                         • Typical corporate loans are not adapted to the needs of Afghan SMEs, with an
                                         average mark at $250k


                                       • ABADE is planning to generate massive investment in the private sector within the next
                                         four years, with a specific focus on innovation and through grant mechanisms
   Several donor
                                       • DFID has created Imurabba, the Afghanistan Business Innovation Fund (ABIF) in 2011
 initiatives provide
                                         running until 2014 to support SMEs
 grants to SMEs and
                                       • TFBSO has been operating since 2011 in Afghanistan and is the main supporter of the
    invest in key                        International Center for Afghan Women’s Economic Development, which will be
   infrastructure                        launched in May 2013
       projects                        • The World Bank is funding, through its FSRPP* project, the deployment of a
                                         modernized inter-bank card and mobile payments switch


 Private investment                    • Private investment funds are still a rarity in Afghanistan
  fund, aka VCs are                    • SEAF-AGF has been active since 2007 and devoted part of its funding to ICT ventures,
    still very rare                      including Rana technologies
Source: (*) Da Afghanistan Bank, Financial Supervision Department, Nov. 2012.

                                                                                21
2.7 MAPPING > FINANCIAL ENABLERS > ABADE
Following ASMED, USAID has launched ABADE, its new framework to provide
assistance to SMEs in Afghanistan.
                                                          ABADE framework
•   Time frame: 4-year program, from November 2012 to October 2016
•   Implementing partners: VEGA / IESC
•   Objectives: increase domestic and foreign investment, stimulate employment within the private sector
•   Key targets:
        - Generate $180 million in private sector investment
        - 365 public-private alliances
        - 41 innovation public-private alliances

                                                              Components
                                                    Technical assistance and business
        SMEs and Public-Private                                                                           Business enabling environment
                                                           advisory services
• Through a competitive process,                  • Technical assistance provided to                   • Improve business environment by
  awards to SMEs ABADE to provide                   recipients and program                               lifting specific regulatory and
  matching grants on a 1:2 basis                    stakeholders, including operations                   procedural barriers, including
• Public Private Innovation Alliance                & management, access to finance,                     support to ministries and analytical
  (PPAs) are designed to stimulate                  and quality                                          studies
  innovation focused initiatives.
  ABADE funding to be matched on
  a 1:1 basis

                                                                   Roll out
•    1st round of requests for application launched in Feb. 2013           •   SMEs enterprises alliances (Jan. to Sept. 2013), estimated
•    PPAs innovation alliances (Jan. to Sept. 2013), estimated                 funding $10m, total awards 100, average award $250k
     funding: $3m, total awards 15, average award $150k

                                                                      22
2.7 MAPPING > FINANCIAL ENABLERS > IMURABBA - AFGHANISTAN BUSINESS INNOVATION FUND
The Afghanistan Business Innovation Fund (ABIF) is a donor-backed investment
challenge fund that supports innovative projects within traditional private sectors.

                          • ABIF is a $7.5 million investment challenge
                            fund financed by DFID & AUSAID, launched        400   358
                            in 2011 and due to run until March 2014         350
                                                                            300
 ABIF is now into its     • ABIF offers grants as an incentive to invest    250
       second               in innovative business models, products, or     200                            170

 competitive round          services / typical grant size is $250k          150
                                                                            100
   of investment          • Committed capital to date: $2.5 million and      50         14   13
                                                                                                                 33   24
                                                                                                  7
                            7 projects funded
  challenge with 7                                                            0
                                                                                     1st round               2nd round
 projects funded so       • Key sectors include:                                  Dec. to July 2012       Dec. To July 2013
          far               – Horticulture, livestock, carpets, furniture
                                                                                     Concept notes     Draft shortlist
                            – Health care, household services                        Final shortlist   Projects funded
                            – Mining services


                          • The challenge is mostly advertised through the partnering networks of AISA and ACCI
                            (including local provincial branches) along with dedicated road shows & workshops
                          • Throughout the selection process, applicants, supported by the ABIF team and a
     ABIF wants to
                            selected number of BDS firms, move from the initial concept note to a complete
    incentivize, not        Business Plan (BP) / financial model, including a 4-year cash forecast
       subsidize          • The grantees propose different milestones within their BP: funding is provided upon
                            completing of milestones supported by documentation, to ensure that the agreed
                            upon investments have been made
Source: ABIF Interview.

                                                        23
2.7 MAPPING > FINANCIAL ENABLERS > IMURABBA - AFGHANISTAN BUSINESS INNOVATION FUND > THE AL-HADI PROJECT
One of the grantees of the first round, the Al-Hadi project introduces the first
branded pharmacy chain of Afghanistan embedding mobile into its approach.
                         Project background
 • Al-Hadi Ltd is a family-owned business active in the pharmaceutical
   sector since 1994 (import)
 • It has the license to import more than 80 products and a national
   distribution network
 • There are to date no pharmaceutical chain in Afghanistan
 • Counterfeit medicines are a real issue on the market




                Bringing in innovation through mobile
 • The Al-Hadi project introduces the first pharmacy chain to leverage
   the commercial potential of quality assurance while specifically
   targeting lower income customers

 • Using mobile technology to support the brand strategy
        - Every product sold by 786 is barcoded. Customers will be
          able to send the barcode by SMS to a short code number, 786
        - Once the barcode has been verified against the 786 database,
          the customer will then receive an automatic reply confirming
          the product and the expiry date
 • The project is currently in pilot phase, with 5 shops being set up.
   If the pilot is successful, 15 additional shops will be launched across
   Kabul


Source: ABIF.

                                                                      24
2.7 MAPPING > FINANCIAL ENABLERS > VCS > SEAF
The SEAF backed Afghan Growth Finance (AGF) fund is the most active VC in
Afghanistan for SMEs.

                         • AGF is a $55 million investment
                           fund seeking to provide long-term
                           assistance to SMEs
                         • Investments range from $100k to $4
                           million
   Afghan Growth         • Committed capital to date: $25
  Finance has been         million
      active in          • Key sectors include
  Afghanistan since        – It & Technologies
        2007               – Dry fruits and Nuts
                           – Transports and logistics
                           – Cold and dry storage
                           – Carpets
                           – Marble and stone



 …and invested, for
                        • The objectives is to help Rana tech to become first ISP/ICT company to offer
 instance, in Rana        broadband Internet services to all 34 provinces of Afghanistan.
   technologies

Source: SEAF-AGF.

                                                       25
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > OVERVIEW OF THE MGOV INITIATIVES
Initiatives within the MCIT, under the umbrella of the E-Afghanistan National Priority
Program, have been designed to leverage the mobile infrastructure.

                                                             MCIT Policy
• The MCIT has launched several ambitious initiatives to stimulate the IT sector in Afghanistan, while improving the access of
  governmental services to Afghan citizens
• Those initiatives include:
  - eGov projects
  - mGov projects


                           The MCIT is implementing 4 mGov projects, funded by the World Bank




1                                 2                                     3                                 4
                                        Mobile Service                            DEWAE
         mGov strategy                                                                                              ICT Village
                                       Delivery Platform                Innovation Support Program


    • The aim is to formulate      • Awarded to                         • Awarded to AIMS                   • The aim is to gather all IT
    the mGovernment strategy         Paywast/Ustronics                  • In 4 years, a total of $5           related private and public
    and includes governmental      • Includes the development             million will be awarded             organizations in the same
    employees training               of 30 mobile apps                    through grants                      area
                                     delivering governmental                                                • Includes an ICT incubator
                                     services




                                                                   26
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > 1 MGOV STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK
The MCIT is working on formulating the mGov strategy. Training has been provided to
governmental employees so that they can identify mobile apps opportunities.
                                                           Scope of work
• The aim is to :
      - Formulate the mGovernment strategy
      - Train governmental employees so that they can identify and
        report opportunities for mobile apps to deliver governmental
        services

• Timeframe:
     - The report published 2013
     - About 150 governmental employees and 1,500 individuals have
        already been trained

• Two other documents will be published in the coming months that will help shape the mGov strategy: the ICT policy and the IT
  industry report

• « The report will provide an assessment of the current situation and a recommendation of the mobile strategy that can be
  implemented in Afghanistan until 2016» Mr. Payab - MCIT

• The report emphasizes that although the mGov strategy is centrally designed through the MCIT, its success will require local
  representatives that can raise awareness and build capacity locally

• Health, education, and agriculture will be addressed as a priority


                                                Expressed needs / Opportunities
• Needs to be create synergies between all mGov projects: “all          • Capacity building is key
  these projects should go hand in hand”

                                                                   27
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > 2 MGOV MOBILE SERVICE DELIVERY PLATFORM
The mGov platform will be set up within the next 6 months with a initial delivery of
10 applications. The platform will be called HOSA.*
                        Organization in charge
    • Paywast/Ustronics:
      - Launch year: 2011
      - Location: Kabul
      - Ownership: Subsidiary of UStronics
      - Manager: Khaled Qaderee
      - Staff: 30 employees
      - Core business: Providing SMS-based services

                                                                Scope of work
    • Develop and launch a platform that will host and make accessible mobile applications that provide governmental services
          - The platform will support IVR, SMS, and USSD apps. It will be available in Dari, Pashto, and English
          - The platform will provide hosting to applications developed by private companies as long as they offer a governmental service
          - An API will be provided for approved third party applications to connect to
    • In addition to the platform, 30 mobile applications providing governmental services will be developed
          - Mobile applications are developed in collaboration with ministries. Apps copyright will belong to the ministries
          - Billing will vary: some apps might be free for end-users, others might not be
    • Timeframe: 24 months contract. 1st step: October 2013, the platform and 10 mobile applications launched
          - Tentative apps (still in discussion) include: citizen survey, exams results, mobile health alerts, school admissions, transports
            alerts, disease surveillance and outbreak reporting, request and tracking

                                                     Expressed needs / Opportunities
    • Create a formal association for mobile developers where they           • Create a platform similar to the platform developed today for
      can exchange their ideas (following the model of AMMOA)                  the mGov project to host apps not linked to government
    • Enhance the current curriculum of universities                           services
•    Note: (*) HOSA means “easy, convenience”

                                                                        28
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > 3 DEWAE – INNOVATION SUPPORT PROGRAM
The Innovation Support Program will last until 2015 with a $5 million grants to boost
the application economy.
                  Organization in charge
• AIMS:
  - Launch year: 1997, a UNDP-funded NGO until 2008
  - Location: Kabul
  - Executive Director: Mr. Azizi
  - Staff: 17 employees
  - Core business: Management Information System and
    Geographic Information System

                                                     Time frame and governance
• Time frame: 4-year contract
• $5 million of grants will be awarded in 5 batches:

        1st batch                    2nd batch                   3rd batch                      4th batch                  5th batch
     April-May 2013                Sept-Oct 2013               May-June 2014                 Feb-March 2014             August-Sept 2015


• DEWAE reports to the Special Executive Board constituted of : two representatives of the MCIT, one representative of the Ministry of
  Higher Education, one of the Ministry of Education, one of the Ministry of Public Health, one of the Ministry of Rural rehabilitation and
  development program, one of the Ministry of Agriculture, one of the Computer Science Department at Kabul University
• Applications will be first reviewed by a Panel of experts: 7 experts from the public and the private sector will shortlist applications. A
  panel of judges: 3 to 5 representatives from the public and the private sector will award the grants. Members of both panels remain
  to be appointed

                                                   Expressed needs / Opportunities
• Create a mentorship program to accompany grants winners                 • Create a certification body as there can be doubt on the
• Create a technology awareness program                                     authenticity of apps and software offered in Afghanistan

                                                                     29
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > 3 DEWAE – INNOVATION SUPPORT PROGRAM
The scope of grants focuses on 4 categories with the objective of making
governmental services accessible to a wide audience.
                                                        Scope of grants
• Process:
  - 4 different types of grants
  - For mTechnology, mGovernance and Students award, AIMS in collaboration with the MCIT will issue challenges on the topic of
     government services that could be made more accessible. Applicants will have to answer those challenges
  - « It will be a two-way traffic »: AIMS will gather challenges raised by the public and issue some of them for the competition

   mTechnology awards                mGovernance awards                    Students awards                 IT Champion awards
To award and support the          To reward and support a            To encourage innovative and       To reward the services of
development of mobile apps        specific impact through the        socially geared thinking and      people who have
to address challenges and         use of mobile apps for             ideas, targeting students in      contributed to the
services delivery, program        service delivery programs          the field of technology           promotion of ICT in
management, and                   • 28 Practice awards               • 27 Young ICT Innovator          Afghanistan
performance management               - Value: $80,000                  awards                          • 21 IT Champion awards
• 28 Idea awards:                    - Concepts ready to roll          - Value: $5,000                   - Value: $2,500
  - Value: $2,000                      out                             - Mobile apps                     - The Special Executive
  - Concept                                                          • 27 Technologists awards             Board will nominate
• 28 Solution awards:                                                  - Value: $5,000                     those awards
  - Value: $5,000                                                      - Any IT solution
  - Concept +
    implementation plan
• 28 Practice awards:
  - Value: $80,000
  - Ready to roll out


                                                                30
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > 4 ICT VILLAGE
The ICT Village, a public-private initiative will not be operational in the coming year.
But an incubator dedicated to support IT entrepreneurs will open by the end of 2013
                                                     Organization in charge
• Ownership: MCIT                                                     • Location: Kabul
• Management: through private contractors                             • Scope: support to IT entrepreneurs




                                                          Scope of work
• The ICT village is a medium/long-term plan of the MCIT to locate all IT-related organizations in one location in Kabul: the MCIT
  office will be established in the ICT village as well as headquarters of private companies such as software companies and Mobile
  Network Operators

• Included in the ICT village is the ICT incubator which should be launched in 2013:
  - It will be located in Kabul. Location is still under discussion

• The incubator will be set up within the next 6 months; it should be up and running
  by December:
  - Currently in the first phase of the request for expression of interest phase
  - Final proposals should be received by end of May
  - Mid-summer: the incubator manager should be in place

• The Incubator is would possibly host:
  - Ideas & projects coming out of the Innovation Support Program, DEWAE
  - Talents having gone through the Skills Development Project (World Bank/MCIT)

• The incubator would have to reach sustainability within 2 to 3 years



                                                                 31
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

The ICT sector has seen several professional organizations emerging over the past few
years.
                         •   National ICT Council
                              - Formed in 2007 to define & coordinate technological standards across ministries
                              - Chaired by 1st VP, members include key Ministers & representatives from private
                                sector, media association, ICT consumers
   Professional          •   ACSA: Afghanistan Computer Science Association
  organizations               - Founded in 1999 to advance professional excellence in ICT
                              - Projects include localization of software, ICT awareness campaign, promotion of
  represent the                 internet policy, regulatory reform
 interest of both
the public and the       •   NICTAA: National ICT Association of Afghanistan
                              - Formed in Feb 2006 as an alliance & umbrella association of non-government ICT
  private sector                players
                              - 3 permanent seats at National ICT Council are reserved for NICTAA
                         •   NISPAA: National ISPs Association of Afghanistan
                              - GIPI-AF (Global Internet Policy Initiative) initiated establishment of NISPAA in
                                2006
                         •   iHub
                               - Informal network of IT professionals organizing monthly events open to all
                               - Soon to start “weekend code”
  3 organizations        •   AMMOA
 are covering new             - Newly formed associations of the 4 leading MNOs to promote mobile money
                              - Acts as a lobbying and coordinating entity. Sponsored by USAID
      grounds
                          • Open Source Afghanistan
                              - Promotes open source software in Afghanistan
                              - Recently held an event at Nangarhar University

                                                       32
2.8 MAPPING > CATALYSTS > EVENTS
Impactful events have taken place in the past couple of years to mobilize the Afghan
ICT community.
      Kabul Innovation Lab                  Open Source Afghanistan                           iHub
• Organized by: Internews,              • Organized by: Open Source           • Organized by: Farshid Ghyasi
  sponsored by USAID                      Afghanistan, last event sponsored     (Netlinks) and Javid Hamdard
• Participants are media, information     by FirstRate Afghanistan (private     (Internews)
  and ICT and companies and NGOs          ICT company)                        • Participants are ICT students and
• Goal: To develop innovative           • Participants are ICT students and     professionals, any ICT enthusiast
  technology-based systems to             professionals                       • Goal: informing the ICT
  improve the reach of the media,       • Goal: Provide awareness and           community on opportunities in
  professional standards, and             training on Linux and Free/Open       Afghanistan and on the latest
  quality of content                      Source Software (FOSS)                technologies available

                                                                              Latest: April 3rd 2013
Latest: February 11th to 14th 2013      Latest: February 19th to 21st 2013
                                                                              • Frequency: once a month,
• Frequency: once a year                • Frequency: once a year
                                                                                usually the first Thursday of the
• 1 day session and 3 days              • 3 days event
                                                                                month
  workshop                              • Number of events completed: 7
                                                                              • A couple of hours long sessions
• Number of events completed: 2         • Location varies. The last event
                                                                              • Number of events completed: 12
• Location: in Kabul                      was organized in Jalalabad
                                                                              • Location: in Kabul




                                                         33
2.9 MAPPING > MAIN DONORS ACTIVE IN THE ICT SECTOR IN AFGHANISTAN
The most active donor in Afghanistan on ICT and entrepreneurship is USAID, as well as the
World Bank and DFID.



                                                                            • Funds the deployment of a modernized inter-bank
                                                                              card and mobile payments switch

                                                                            • Funds 4 mGov projects for the MCIT: i) mGov
• The Financial Access for Investing   • The Mobile Solutions Technical
                                                                              strategy, ii) Mobile Service Delivery Platform, iii)
  in the Development of                  Assistance and Research program
  Afghanistan program is helping         aims at fostering the rapid          DEWAE Innovation Support Program, iv) ICT Village
  the Afghan government and the          adoption and scale-up of mobile
  private sector develop a robust        money, mobile technologies, and           • In collaboration with GIZ, funds the New
  financial sector. Includes AMMOA ,     mobile data solutions                       Market Development Project, which aims at
  which groups the four main MNOs                                                    the revitalization of private sector activities
  of Afghanistan and aims at                                                         in Kabul, Mazar, Jalalabad and Herat
  developing the mobile money
  economy
                                       • TFBSO’s initiatives include the
                                         Herat incubator and the American
                                         University

                                                                            • Funds Imurabba, previously known as ABIF (the
• ABADE is succeeding ASMED with a                                            Afghanistan Business Innovation Fund): a $7.5
  goal to generate $180 million of                                            million investment challenge fund financed by
  investment in the private sector,                                           DFID & AUSAID, launched in 2011 and due to run
  targeting SMEs and innovation,     • Event aiming at developing
                                                                              until March 2014. Offers grants as an incentive to
  with a initial target of more than   innovative technology-based
                                                                              invest in innovative business models, products or
  400 recipients                       systems organized once a year
                                                                              services / typical grant size is $250k. Committed
                                       since 2012 by Internews
                                                                              capital to date: $2.5 million and 7 projects funded.

                                                                34
AGENDA



     1. Introduction

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country
         3.1 Introduction
         3.2 Three Models
         3.3 Lessons Learned
         3.4 Best Practices / Suggested Ideas
         3.5 Operational KPIs
         3.6 Financial KPIs

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan

     5. How we Plan to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer


                                                35
3.1 INFODEV INITIATIVES > INTRODUCTION
Some infoDev activities are focused on mobiles. Its program Creating Sustainable Businesses
for the Knowledge Economy program (CSBKE) has supported 12 initiatives to date.
                          • CSBKE was launched in 2010 and is based on a public/private partnership with the
   Promote and              Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Finland and Nokia
  support mobile          • With a focus on mobile applications, business incubation, and technology
 entrepreneurship           entrepreneurship, it has supported the launch of 10 regional initiatives



                                                                         Georgia
                                                                             Armenia
                                                                                 Azerbaijan
       Moldova

                                                                                          Nepal

                                                                                              Vietnam

             Uganda
                Kenya
            Tanzania


        South Africa




                                                      36
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS
Reviewing infoDev supported initiatives in other countries sheds light on different concept
models* than can be used to engage entrepreneurs around mobile technology.
                                        • All initiatives are designed to maximize the development impact of mobile
                                          technology and generate innovative entrepreneurship
    mHub, mLab, and                     • The concept models are different and go from a light footprint model based on
    virtual incubator                     social networking—mHub—to a full incubator model—mLab
     follow different                   • The virtual incubator model is an alternative model, focusing more on supporting
          models                          entrepreneurs than on technology
                                        • Depending on the countries and initiatives, governance schemes vary (and range
                                          from NGOs to fully private contractors)

                                                                     infoDev’s initiatives




1                                                         2                                                           3
                    mHub                                                        mLab                                               Virtual incubator


 • An mHub is an informal                                     • An mLab provides the                                      • A virtual business incubator
   network gathering a                                          environment to help nurture                                 acts as an incubator without
   community of individuals and                                 and create sustainable mobile                               walls and aims at reaching
   organizations around the                                     businesses. It also acts as a                               potential incubatees through a
   opportunities of the mobile                                  role player in the mobile                                   variety of mechanisms
   ecosystem                                                    ecosystem
Note: (*) The models are here presented for the purpose of discussion. Initiatives on the ground adjust to local market conditions and are often built on a portfolio of
services across models.

                                                                                   37
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 1 MHUB
An mHub is an informal network gathering a community of individuals and organizations
around the opportunities of the mobile ecosystem.
                         • A mHub is a social network focused on mobile
   An mHub is a          • Its aim is to bring together organizations and individuals who are interested or
 social networking         willing to work around mobile technologies
        hub              • It is an informal network building a community of shared practice, lobbying to lift
                           the constraints of the ecosystem and channelling opportunities



                         • The social networking hub is typically based on:
                               - Regular informal meetings bringing together industry professionals, individual
Based on informal                developers and academics
meetings, it brings            - An online platform acting as a forum and a networking tool for the community
in mobile-centric        • In addition, mHub can be used as a channel to advertise or organize specific events
  events to the            such as:
                               - Hackathon
   community                   - Challenges and contests
                               - Informal meetings with VCs



And does not need        • As it is mostly based on informal networking, an mHub does not require any specific
   any specific            governance in the way it is designed, at least in the early stages
   governance            • It can be endorsed or animated by a private organization whose business interests
  requirements             are in line with the emergence of an active innovative mobile scene


                                                       38
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 1 MHUB > CASE STUDY NEPAL
The infoDev supported program in Nepal, Mobile Nepal shows what can be achieved by
setting up a networking hub.
                  Key figures                                      Services and activities
• Mobile Nepal, a mHub, started its activities in    • Raise awareness among students about the
  June 2012                                            potential of mobile for innovation
• Location: Nepal                                    • Programs at university, training sessions, and
• Ownership: local private contractor                  modules
  YoungInnovations                                   • Competition and challenges, including
• 1 full time project manager + 1 project              hackathon
  coordinator                                        • Pitching events, idea submission
• Budget : $25k for 2 years / additional grants      • Online forum, discussions and community
  from the WB ($15k + $25k) to organize events
• Funding secured for 2 years

                                                              Projects
Among the many projects of Mobile Nepal
• Hackathon: 3 organized so far. The latest included 39 participants, 10 applications developed over 2 days, and 3 winning apps
• Training: 6 sessions, including 1 iOS, 3 Android (basic), and 2 development fest in association with Google Developer Group
• Workshop: 1 advanced workshop on Android apps development
• Outreach and talk program: focus group discussions, visits to universities to raise awareness around mobile applications, organized
  events
• Regular meetings: every 2nd and last Saturday of the month, open discussions around mobile technology
• Events: Pivot Nepal currently running, competition for mobile app ideas, 116 submitted, 15 selected, $1,000 for the top 3 ideas,
  $3,000 for the wining idea

                                                     Local mobile ecosystem
• Mobile penetration in Nepal: 62%, 3G available but only covers         • No access to international credit card; thus, billing is an issue
  30% of the population. Smartphone penetration remains low                with mobile money still in its infancy

                                                                    39
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 1 MHUB > CASE STUDY NEPAL
Mobile Nepal was built on: starting small, an appetite for constantly bringing new ideas, and
the involvement of a private actor.
        Thoughts on the mobile app sector
• Mobile entrepreneurship is mostly smartphone apps
  and most developers are focusing on this ecosystem:
  - “As a company we have worked with the ministry of
     public heath to launch a SMS-based app. It took us 2
     years to launch the solution which is too long for
     young entrepreneurs.”
• Creating a local app store is an option to bypass the
  billing constraint:
  - The local app store will work only on Android
  - It will require cooperation from the MNOs


                                                            Key learnings
• Built the community first and then establish the partnerships:
  - 10 to 15 champions have been identified to get traction from the communities
  - The large set of partners includes business organisations, such as the local Chamber of Commerce for Pivot
  - “Focusing on mHub, and getting to know the sector and be identified within the sector was good.”
• Always bring new ideas into the hub to keep up the brand:
  - Topics and organization of the hackathon have constantly changed
  - New events and meetings organised (Pivot, Spaceapps challenge)
• To have a private company in charge of the program brings additional value




                                                                  40
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 2 MLAB
An mLab provides the environment to help nurture and create sustainable mobile businesses.
It also acts as a role player in the mobile ecosystem.
                         • An mLab will have a physical location, incubating technology entrepreneurs who
   An mLab is an
                           can interact, work, gain access to tools and expertise to start and grow their
 infrastructure for        businesses
       mobile
                         • It also aims at playing a leading role in the mobile ecosystem, supporting
   entrepreneurs           nonresidents and acting as a gateway to access industry players and investors


                         • Residents benefit from premium services on site:
                               - Office space / Internet access / testing facilities / equipment
  It offers a wide       • In addition, a wide range of services are proposed to both residents and
 range of services         nonresidents:
                               - Training / workshops
 both to residents             - Consulting / mentorship
 and nonresidents              - Access to investors
                         • The location is often used to organize various events in relation with the community:
                               - Mobile Monday, code sharing, contests, hackathon, and others


                          • An mLab can be an NGO, run by a private organization or by a consortium of
                            organizations
    Governance
                          • Given the wide objectives of an mLab, a consortium of organizations seems to be
 schemes can vary           appropriate as it brings together various stakeholders with each its own area of
                            expertise, for example, university, private IT venture, government


                                                      41
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 2 MLAB > CASE STUDY EAST AFRICA
mLab East Africa was launched as an incubator, based on a consortium of 4 public and private
organizations. It hosts a yearly start-ups pitching competition: Pivot East.
                Key figures                                   Services and activities
• mLab East Africa started its activities in        • Incubation space and facilities
  2011                                              • Support mobile entrepreneurs
• Location: Nairobi, Kenya, but also covers             ‐ Training
  Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi                     ‐ Business skills
• Ownership: Consortium of 4 organizations,             ‐ Access to finance
  public and private                                • Marketing intelligence
• Team: CEO, 2 assistants, 1 admin, 1 com, 1        • Training programs
  tech, 1 social media                              • Events (hackathon, Devcamp)
• Budget for 2 years: $700k grants, $350k           • Challenges
  generated revenue. Objective of 50% self-
  funded for 2013

                                                   Incubated projects & tools
• 6 incubated projects supported with a target of an additional 5 in 2013:
    ‐ 3 projects targeting mass market, through health, students, agriculture
    ‐ 3 projects focusing on businesses, 2 products with mobile payment for retailers and one mobile marketplace
    ‐ In addition, mentorship and other incubation services provided to another 5 companies
• The main channel to reach the target audience is through the organization of a yearly competition: Pivot East
    ‐ It is a start-ups pitching competition, on a regional base. Advertised through social media, dedicated workshops, and road shows
    ‐ All entries are managed online, processed by a jury
    ‐ The event is sponsored by major players of the industry: Qualcomm, Intel, Microsoft, Facebook, and Nokia

                                                     Local mobile ecosystem
• Mobile penetration: 30m mobile subs, 3G coverage in all major         • Access to billing remains a big challenge for developers and
  cities, smartphone penetration around 2m, Android lead                  editors of content and services

                                                                   42
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 2 MLAB > CASE STUDY EAST AFRICA
For mLab East Africa, building a sustainable model requires to bank on start-ups targeting
mass market.
         Thoughts on the mobile app sector
• Developers and business model
   ‐ Strong belief that skills and money will come from the
     mass market. “The idea is to support companies that
     will scale beyond service / commissioned
     development.”
   ‐ Looking for $35k to $50k micro VCs, “We are trying to
     built a community of local investors, which could help
     bridge the gap between expectations of the VCs versus
     the capacity of the start-ups.”
• mLab as an equity partner?                                                            The Pivot East 2012 edition
   ‐ “Long-term revenues for the lab will come from the
     success of the people we incubate.”

                                                           Key learnings
• mLab East Africa is a consortium of 4 organizations, both private and public, each bringing an area of expertise
   ‐ eMobilis: a training institute, focusing on mobile software
   ‐ iHub: bringing the network and the reach to the tech community
   ‐ The University of Nairobi / School of Computing
   ‐ World Wide Web Foundation, for curriculum and content
• The challenge of sustainability
   ‐ Building the physical premises took a lot of capital expenditures and time
   ‐ “A lot of our operations have revolved around fundraising, instead of delivering.”
   ‐ Once brand is installed and strong partners and sponsors on board, it has been possible to sponsor each space of the premises




                                                                  43
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 3 VIRTUAL BUSINESS INCUBATOR
A virtual business incubator acts as an incubator without walls and aims at reaching potential
incubatees through a variety of mechanisms.

  Virtual business        • A virtual business incubator goes beyond a physical space
   incubators are         • Three types of concepts exist:
                                - Incubators offering mainly business development services
 concentrating on               - Networking focused incubators
      services                  - Finance focused incubators


                          • Virtual incubator will focus on three types of different service concepts: training and
                            mentoring, networking, and seed capital
    Services are          • Training and mentoring:
    delivered to                - The focus is on developing entrepreneurial capacities to get start-up off the
                                  ground. Typical example is to connect a would be entrepreneur with a mentor to
 entrepreneurs to                 coach the business plan phase
   help them get          • Networking:
 their business off             - The aim is to bring together entrepreneurs and investors into the same network.
                                  Typical examples are business plan competition or mobile Mondays
     the ground
                          • Seed capital:
                                - The objective is to provide seed investment capital combined with short or long
                                  term mentoring


 Governance can           • Governance of virtual incubators may vary depending on the type of services
vary depending on           provided
   the type of            • Examples of governance vary from foundation to private venture
     services

                                                        44
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 3 VIRTUAL BUSINESS INCUBATOR > CASE STUDY VIETNAM
The virtual incubator in Vietnam is supporting the existing state-owned incubator as well as
building a network of entrepreneurs and investors.
                Key figures                                    Services and activities
• Location: Hanoi also covers main cities in        • Mobile social network:
  Vietnam                                               ‐ Demo days
• Ownership: private Topica (main business is           ‐ Development camps
  eLearning)                                        • Virtual incubator / support to
• Team: 1 project manager, 1 admin, 2 team            entrepreneurs, incubators:
  members                                               ‐ Start-up events
• Budget for 2 years: $300k grants. Objective           ‐ Training for incubation managers
  of sustainability within 2 years                  • Virtual incubator / network of investors:
                                                        ‐ Develop network of international and
                                                          local investors / business angels

                                                            Projects & tools
• Initial KPIs: 8 mobile events – 700 participants, 5 start-up events- 500 participants, Demo day events – 100 participants, investment
  network – 10 deals generated
• Training to Vietnam incubators managers:
    ‐ Mostly directed at government run incubators. Ongoing training sessions based on use cases (start-up & entrepreneurs)
• Start-up events
    ‐ Close links with all main universities. Very successful in attracting young audience to events, mostly mobilizing through Facebook
       (9,000+ followers)
• Investment network: business angels group set up, but no investment generated so far
    ‐ The event is sponsored by major players of the industry: Qualcomm, Intel, Microsoft, Facebook, Nokia

                                                  Local mobile & ICT ecosystem
• Mobile penetration: 3G widely used in all major cities,               • Private mobile software ventures exist, only small size. Most of
  smartphone penetration: iOS, Android, Windows                           the services billed are through MNOs, with revenue share for
                                                                          editors
                                                                   45
3.2 INFODEV INITIATIVES > 3 MODELS > 3 VIRTUAL BUSINESS INCUBATOR > CASE STUDY VIETNAM
Topica has come up with a simple and cheap way to build a strong network of would be
entrepreneurs, targeting mostly the youth.
       Thoughts on incubation & the local ICT sector
• Target the youth:
    ‐ Vietnam has numerous start-ups in the ICT domain
    ‐ Topica has been targeting students, mostly through universities
      and entrepreneurs clubs
    ‐ “They are the ones who are missing the finance and the
      capacity for IT.”
• Network: online and regional
    ‐ The network has been mostly consolidated through a very
      active online community via Facebook
    ‐ But also completed by a set of satellite centres to reach the                     The Pivot East 2012 edition
      region, through contacts with local students and entrepreneurs
                                                                                            A start-up event in a coffee shop
      clubs

                                                           Key learnings
• A simple methodology to build the virtual network:
    ‐ Mostly based on organizing events for entrepreneurs to network
    ‐ Potential investors are also coming
    ‐ The venue generally takes place in a coffee shop, with a deal with the owner => no cost
    ‐ 700 entrepreneurs reached so far
• For Topica, supporting this initiative is complementary to its core business:
    ‐ Main business is on eLearning. By building the network of entrepreneurs, Topica gets access to use case, for which they produce
      online videos that thy distribute on their eLearning platform, as online teaching material
    ‐ They are quick in delivery, able to take risk and to provide the business support




                                                                   46
3.3 INFODEV INITIATIVES > LESSONS LEARNT

Some lessons learnt are common to all models. Others are specific to each model.

                                             Lessons learnt across all models
    • The key is to understand who you are serving and what are their needs. Building on the community you
      want to reach is a critical first step
    • Once the community is built, the brand becomes strong. It is then possible to attract a large set of partners
      & sponsors that will generate revenues and make the brand even more relevant to the community
    • Designing the appropriate governance for the model is important. Whether a foundation, an NGO, a private
      company, the governance has to be in line with the overall objectives
1                                        2                                           3
               mHub                                         mLab                                  Virtual incubator
• Use a limited number of champions          • Building or setting up the physical       • Possible to be creative in organizing
  to build the community: once on-             premises can take a lot of time and         events at no cost
  board they will act as ambassador            capital expenditure…                      • Events are organized based on
  for the hub and bring their network        • … which can divert from delivering          existing networking organizations
  of partners and individuals                  other services or getting the brand         (students groups, clubs)
• New ideas are constantly needed to           & the community installed                 • Online social network support the
  keep the community attracted,              • A secured place can become a                consolidation of the community
  whether it is events (for example,           disadvantage as it makes the mLab         • Attracting and building the network
  hackathon) or opportunities (new             less accessible to the audience it          of business angels is not a short
  challenges) or exposure to a new             wants to reach                              term effort, it requires more time
  technology (training on latest
                                             • In a place where you don’t have the         and effort
  Android API)
                                               critical mass of innovators, you
                                               might need a physical place where
                                               individuals can come together and
                                               support each other


                                                               47
3.4 INFODEV INITIATIVES > BEST PRACTICES / SUGGESTED IDEAS
Best practices have emerged among the initiatives interviewed: they include focusing on
design, internship, and tools all built to fill in the gaps.
                          •   Some labs have built up a specific offer or a range of services in regards to
                              product design:
                                - Based on findings that the capacity to design products (user interface, user
                                  experience) was poor
 Enhance product
                          •   Expertise and training are provided to incubatees and nonresidents to:
     design                     - Select the appropriate platform for their project
                                - Understand and get trained on how to design a best in class application
                          •   This new area of expertise also provides more attractiveness toward the lab
                              reinforcing its position as a hot bed for innovation


                          • In most of the countries where infoDev initiatives are based, it is hard for developers
                            to try and find an internship in relation to new mobile technology
Provide internship        • Some labs have created and provided internship opportunities for young graduates
 and mentorship             or individual developers to be able to get their first experience in developing
  opportunities             application
                          • The interns are mentored by experts from the labs, receive training and work
                            directly on a project or idea generated by the lab and the community


                          • Access to billing is a constraint common to many emerging countries
   Open access to         • Some labs are trying to tackle the issue either through a dedicated portal that would
  the mass market           be operated by the lab or through the project of an incubatee (for example, a start-up
                            who wants to provide a market place)

                                                         48
3.5 INFODEV INITIATIVES > OPERATIONAL KPIS
Five operational KPIs have been defined as a framework to identify which model can be
operationally successful in a given context.

    KPIs
              •   Definition
                                            mHub                                mLab                      Virtual Incubator
              •   Typical output                                                                         Based on mentoring model

              •   Ability to engage                                        •   Lab = innovation hot           •   Limited community
                                        •   Based on events
  Reach &         with the                                                     bed + focal point                  mobilization
                  community             •   Dependent on online
 community                                  tools
                                                                           •   Access to nonresidents         •   Engagement through
              •   # of IT individuals                                          also through events                mentorship


                                                                           •   Both online + physical
              •   Brand equity          •   Mostly online                                                     •   Mostly online
                                                                               location
   Brand      •   x% of brand           •   Dependent on
                                                                           •   Dependent on
                                                                                                              •   Impact of quality of
                  awareness / equity        community                                                             ideas / projects
                                                                               community

                                                                           •   Full scope provided to         •   Mostly focused on
              •   Scope of services     •   Mostly events and
                                                                               residents                          access to finance &
                  provided                  informal gatherings
  Services    •   # of projects /       •   Depends on
                                                                           •   To nonresidents                    business development
                                                                               through events and                 services
                  indiv. supported          partnerships
                                                                               meeting                        •   Mentorship

              •   Capacity to                                                                                 •   Limited to challenges
                                        •   Specific as per type of        •   Strong potential of
                  generate                                                                                        / contests organized
Partnership                                 events or community                physical location
                  partnerships                                                                                •   And / or quality of
                                            addressed                      •   Event based
              •   # of partners                                                                                   ideas catalyzed


              •   Depth of financial                                       •   Incubated projects act         •   Core expertise of such
                                        •   Through challenges &
  Access to       support provided
                                            networking events
                                                                               as a showcase                      incubator
   finance    •   # of projects             only                           •   Capacity to attract the        •   Capacity to attract the
                  funded                                                       best ideas                         best ideas


                                                                      49
3.6 INFODEV INITIATIVES > FINANCIAL KPIS
Building a sustainable model remains a challenge. Each model has its own strengths and
weaknesses.

    KPIs
              •   Definition
                                           mHub                               mLab                     Virtual Incubator
              •   Typical output                                                                      Based on mentoring model


              •   Level of Capex
                                                                         •   Cost of setting up
   CAPEX          required             •   Low Capex required
                                                                             physical location
                                                                                                           •   Low Capex required
              •   x% of total budget


                                                                         •   Management team +
              •   Level of running     •   Limited to                                                      •   Limited to
                                                                             maintenance of
    OPEX          cost                     management team
                                                                             location
                                                                                                               management team
              •   x% of total budget   •   Event based                                                     •   Event based
                                                                         •   Event based


  Revenues    •   Revenues             •   Mostly from sponsoring        •   From sponsoring               •   Mostly from sponsoring
                  generated from           events                            events                            events
    from          partners             •   Limited contribution          •   From physical location        •   Limited contribution
  partners    •   x% of running cost       to running cost                   (rents)                           to running cost


  Revenues    •   Revenues
                                       •   Based on sponsorship,         •   Access to office space
                  generated from                                                                           •   Access to business
     from                                  e.g., Industry sponsor            or testing labs
                  services                                                                                     development services
                                           for a training session        •   Mostly sponsorship
   services   •   x% of running cost

                                                                         •   Possible if governance        •   Possible if governance
  Revenues    •   Revenues                                                   allows equity                     allows equity
    from          generated from
                                       •   Not applicable                •   Commissioned based            •   Commissioned based,
                  capital
   capital                                                                   e.g. % of funding                 e.g., % of funding
              •   x% of running cost                                         raised / apps                     raised / apps
 investment                                                                  published                         published

                                                                    50
AGENDA




     1. Introduction

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan
         4.1 Overview of the Mobile App Ecosystem in Afghanistan
         4.2 Sizing the Opportunity
         4.3 How to Get There?
         4.4 Key Triggers
         4.5 Applying the Most Appropriate Model in Afghanistan

     5. How we Plan to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer



                                              51
4.1 OPPORTUNITIES > OVERVIEW OF THE MOBILE APP ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN
An overview of the ecosystem of SMEs in the ICT sector can be provided through seven
essential components:
                  Technical                           ICT Players                           Regulatory
                 Environment                                                               Environment
         •   12m mobile users              Four categories of ICT               •   Concentrates on
                                           players:
         •   8% smartphone                                                          technical elements,
                                           • MNOs and ISPs
             penetration                                                            rather than content
                                           • Hardware providers
         •   More than 5%                                                           and services
                                           • IT services providers
             Internet penetration                                               •   A new ICT law
                                           • Content and media
                                               providers                            currently being
       Human Capital                                                                drafted

• A young population                                                                                      Catalysts
  with growing access to            Addressable Afghan mobile app market
  education                                                                                  • MCIT mGov initiatives:
• Long tradition of                                                                            HOSA, DEWAE, and the
  entrepreneurship                                                                             ICT incubator
• 3,500 IT students                                                                          • Numerous ICT related
  enrolled out of whom                                                     Financial
                                                                                               organizations and
  830 IT students will                                                     Enablers
                                    Business Skills                                            events, including iHub,
  graduate in 2013                    Enablers                •     Grant programs are         NICTAA, Open Source
• Mobile software                                                   available, e.g.,           Afghanistan,
                            •   An estimated number
  development not                                                   ABADE, Imuraba             TechNation & TechDera
                                of 650 BDS providers
  included today in                                           •     Loans and VCs are
                                now operate in
  curriculum                                                        rare to non-existent
                                Afghanistan
                                                                    in Afghanistan

                                                         52
4.2 OPPORTUNITIES > SIZING THE OPPORTUNITY
The mobile app market is deemed to grow from $21.5-33m to $48-60m. The main growth
potential concerns SMEs, be it mobile content or software providers.
                                              Mobile content providers
   Mobile services providers                                                                                Mobile software providers
                                                     Afghan-based
         Foreign-based                                                                                            Afghan-based
                                            • To date < 5 actors
 • No local technical providers                                                          •   To date < 10 actors
                                            • Main content is music & TV
   identified                                                                            •   Commissioned developments
                                              voting
 • Service providers also                                                                •   Mostly IVR / SMS based services
                                            • Revenue share with MNOs
   provide localized content                                                             •   Smartphone apps picking up only recently
                                              25%-40%


                                                                         $3-4m                                                                 $5-6m
                                                                 $0.5-                                                                $1-
                                                                  1m                                                                  2m
                                                                                             Government &
                                     MNOs                                                                                                   Business
                                                                                              institutions


                                                               $40-50m
                                                                                                                  Key assumptions
                                                                                         • Increased connected users with Internet & 3G to 15% in
                                                                                           2016
                                                        $20-
                                                                                         • Increase smartphone penetration to 15% in 2016
                                                        30m*                             • Impact of DEWAE & HOSA on innovation and usage


                               Mass market                                                        Estimates 2013                        Estimates 2016


Source: Estimates based on mobile applications in Afghanistan, a World Bank report, international benchmarks, and interviews with actors; (*) Based on current VAS
estimate of which 90% is RBT.

                                                                                53
4.3 OPPORTUNITIES > HOW TO GET THERE? > GAPS IDENTIFIED
Serious gaps have been identified when it comes to seize the mobile app opportunity in
Afghanistan.
1
                          • Lack of awareness: awareness of mobile technology and its opportunities remains low,
                            including among IT students. This is not a surprise since so far no IT institute includes
                            mobile app development in its curriculum
     People & Skills
                          • Skills and experience: companies often remark that their junior employees, although
                            IT graduates, lack not only skills in mobile app technology but also practice in IT in
                            general

2
                          • A majority of Afghans don’t speak English and even if developers and ICT students are
                            more likely to, English fluency remains inconsistent
     Accessing Tools      • Mobile apps development necessitates tools. Some of those tools are open source and
                            easily available online but remain inaccessible to Afghans because of language and
                            cultural barriers

3                         • The developers and entrepreneurs mastering mobile technology and who have
                            identified opportunities complain of barriers to access the mass market:
                            – Most Afghans don’t have a compatible handset
    Accessing the End       – When they do, most don’t know about the platforms (for example, iTunes)
    Users (that is, the     – When they do, most don’t have credit cards or payment means
      mass market)        • The only channels for independent developers and entrepreneurs in Afghanistan today
                            are:
                            – Commissioned development, i.e., not the mass market
                            – Negotiating with the MNOs


                                                         54
4.3 OPPORTUNITIES > HOW TO GET THERE?
3 areas have been identified to deepen the support to the mobile ecosystem. These should
come as a complement to the MCIT / mGov initiatives and the growing networking arenas.

                         • With 10 government applications available before the                 mGov initiatives
    Build on the           end of the year, HOSA can have a positive collateral                         HOSA
                           effect in boosting apps usage & adoption                     Stimulate usage & adoption of mobile
    momentum                                                                                            apps
   around HOSA,          • DEWAE aims at supporting the emergence of
                                                                                                       DEWAE
  DEWAE, and the           innovative ideas both from students and the ICT sector           Stimulate ideas & innovation
   ICT incubator         • The ICT incubator is to focus on bringing sustainable
                                                                                                 ICT INCUBATOR
                           innovative ICT SMEs to the market                                  Grow ideas into business


                         • With the networking activities deployed by several organizations, e.g., iHub,
  Leverage the             NICTAA, Open Source Afghanistan, and TechNation & TechDera, a tech community is
    existing               emerging
networking arenas        • It provides an active arena of tech-driven individuals and institutions, both from the
                           academic and private sector that can be leveraged


                         • In collaboration with the existing initiatives, there still is a need to deepen the support
How could infoDev          provided to the mobile ecosystem in Afghanistan. Initial scope should include:
  accelerate the           – Increase awareness, skills, and access to practical experience
                           1
mobile app sector          – Provide tools, derived and localized from mobile open source software, to
                           2
    growth in                 accelerate the adoption of mobile technology by entrepreneurs
   Afghanistan?            – Enable access to the mass market and the capacity to monetize services, by
                           3
                              creating an alternative application distribution mechanism for SMEs

                                                        55
4.4 OPPORTUNITIES > KEY TRIGGERS > 1 POTENTIAL ACTION PLANS ON PEOPLE & SKILLS
Immediate opportunities for action include raising awareness around the mobile ecosystem,
increasing the skills in mobile software, and improving hands-on experience of IT students.
                         • The level of awareness among individuals and SMEs about the business potential of
                           mobile technology is still low
  Raise awareness
                         • Initial efforts should be put into creating a community of interests around mobile
   around mobile
                           opportunities
     ecosystem
                         • A natural first step is to increase this through events (competitions or hackathons)
   opportunities
                         • This should also be done through industry partnerships (all main platforms and
                           technology providers), who can provide training boot camps and challenges

                         • To date, none of the IT institutes, whether private or public, provide specific
                           training on mobile software development
 Adapt the skills to     • All stakeholders interviewed were interested and ready to adjust their curriculum to
    the mobile             include mobile software development courses
    ecosystem            • This should be adapted as per the current market demand, with a focus on java,
                           SMS, and IVR technology, as well as anticipate the demand for the next generation
                           of native apps based on major operating systems and technologies
                         • Most ICT private actors interviewed stated that IT graduates lack hands-on
      Increase             experience
  experience of IT       • All IT institutes suggested that they would be more than ready to give to their
                           students internship opportunities and project-based courses
   students with
  mentorship and         • This gap can be bridge by:
     internship                - Adjusting curriculum to include compulsory internships
                               - Building partnerships among ICT private sector companies and the main IT
                                 institutes to provide internships & projects opportunities
                                                      56
4.4 OPPORTUNITIES > KEY TRIGGERS > 2 POTENTIAL ACTION PLANS ON TOOLS
Providing mobile open source tools that are relevant to the Afghan market could help
accelerate adoption by tech entrepreneurs of business ideas & projects.

                         • Select a list of open source tools and software relevant to the Afghan context
                           taking into account the business potential per sector
                         • Open source mobile software are available on all platforms and can address many
                           business issues / sectors:
    Select open               - eLearning
   source mobile              - Data collection and monitoring
     software                 - Content publishing tools
                              - Streaming radio
                              - Geo-localization tools




                         • Support private and public initiatives to produce a local (Dari, Pashto) and
                           documented version of the software
      Provide a          • Bring the set of localized tools to the community of developers, entrepreneurs, and
  localized version        training institutions who can then use them to:
 and bring it to the          - Learn and improve their technology skills
     community                - Launch projects and prototypes to improve hands-on experience
                              - Grab a business opportunity provided by the technology with a minimum of
                                investment in capital and little barrier to entry



                                                     57
4.4 OPPORTUNITIES > KEY TRIGGERS > 3 POTENTIAL ACTION PLANS ON ACCESSING THE END USERS
Accessing the end users remains a hurdle. Replicating HOSA, with a dedicated distribution
platform for apps coming from the private sector, would benefit the whole ecosystem.
                           • The platform would provide integrated billing access (via airtime and mobile money)
   A independent             to all MNOs
    platform for           • It would act as a distribution portal for content & service providers enabling SMEs
 service & content           to target the mass market easily and bill content and services
      providers            • It should be designed to benefit all stakeholders: users, MNOs, providers

         Benefits for MNOs                            Benefits for mobile content & service providers
• Boost of app usage                       • A unique brand is marketed as providing local content & services:
• Revenue share deal                         heighten reach
• Identification of talented SMEs          • Direct access to end users and integrated billing system with all MNOs
                                           • Revenue share deal


                                                      Platform
• The platforms allows access to IVR, java and SMS…            • The platform is marketed under a unique brand
• … as well as smartphone apps



                                          Benefits for the end users
• Users are exposed to one brand, marketed as the portal • Each service listed by the platform can be free or at
  that delivers local content and services                 cost
• Access to the platform is free of charge               • Users are billed as per airtime or using mobile money
• Services are available across all networks               payment

                                                          58
4.5 OPPORTUNITIES > APPLYING THE MOST APPROPRIATE MODEL IN AFGHANISTAN > MHUB IN THE AFGHAN CONTEXT
The mHub model would concentrate on providing mobile centric services, with the primary
objectives of complementing the mGov initiatives and existing networking arenas.

             KPIs                                                   Pros                                                               Cons

                                           • Comes as a complement of ICT incubator                           • Difficulty to raise interest among
  Reach & community                          and in support of existing social network                          developers with no physical location
                                           • Focus on marketing the MCIT initiatives                          • No ownership of events & ideas

                                           • A brand could be built around the tools                          • Brand could be inaudible if strong efforts in
            Brand                            provided (such as HOSA or Open Source                              marketing other initiatives are made in
                                             tools)                                                             parallel without synergies

                                           • Services designed to support identified gaps                     • Can drain out interests from community of
          Services                         • Focus on mobile technology training and                            developers and entrepreneurs
                                             training on tools                                                • Maintenance of the tools

                                           • Dedicated partners for the tools
                                                                                                              • Links more difficult with private actors
        Partnership                        • Partnership with IT institutes on training
                                                                                                              • Capacity to attract sponsors
                                             and projects

                                                                                                              • Redundant with the role of the ICT
    Access to finance                      • Could be added but not the primary focus
                                                                                                                incubator?

                                           • Very low Capex needed, limited Opex
                                                                                                              • If low brand equity, impact on capacity to
       Sustainability                      • Capacity to attract sponsors to self fund                          attract sponsors
                                             events & training
Note: (*) The models are here presented for the purpose of discussion. Initiatives on the ground adjust to local market conditions and are often built on a portfolio of
services across models.

                                                                                   59
4.5 OPPORTUNITIES > APPLYING THE MOST APPROPRIATE MODEL IN AFGHANISTAN > MLAB IN THE AFGHAN CONTEXT
The mLab model would provide the full scope of services, be strongly supportive of the
private sector, and be solely dedicated to the mobile ecosystem.

             KPIs                                                   Pros                                                               Cons

                                           • Physical location: a must to catalyze the                        • Comes in competition with all other ICT
                                             community                                                          incubators, even though it is purely focused
  Reach & community
                                                                                                                on mobile
                                           • Focus on marketing the MCIT initiatives
                                                                                                              • Community is too small?
                                           • Brand could be built on full scope: services,                    • Can comes in competition with branding
            Brand                            tools, hot bed for innovation                                      effort of ICT incubator if not hosted in the
                                           • Easier to establish links with private sector                      same structure

                                           • Full scope of services provided                                  • Redundancy of services offered by different
                                                                                                                incubators
          Services                         • Possibility to set up internship and                             • Need to coordinate incubators in order to
                                             mentorship programs onsite                                         avoid duplication
                                           • Physical location is an asset to attract                         • Too many recipients, risk of too few
        Partnership                          sponsors and establish long term                                   sponsors and partners
                                             partnerships                                                     • Risk of redundancy

                                           • Could act as a role player in providing                          • Competition with other ICT incubators
    Access to finance                        access to donor-funded private sector                            • Lack of focus on building the applicants
                                             investment programs (e.g., ABADE)                                  business skills

                                           • Physical location provides a long-term asset
       Sustainability                        for potential revenue
                                                                                                              • Negative impact of high running costs

Note: (*) The models are here presented for the purpose of discussion. Initiatives on the ground adjust to local market conditions and are often built on a portfolio of
services across models.

                                                                                   60
4.5 OPPORTUNITIES > APPLYING THE MOST APPROPRIATE MODEL IN AFGH. > VIRTUAL INCUBATOR IN THE AFGHAN CONTEXT
The virtual incubator model comes as a support to already existing IT incubation initiatives,
with a focus on building the community of ideas, entrepreneurs, and local investors.

             KPIs                                                   Pros                                                               Cons

                                           • Will be based on the reach of MCIT / mGov                        • No fully owned community
  Reach & community                          initiatives, thus national and at least for 3
                                             years                                                            • Dependency on other initiatives

                                                                                                              • With no specific branding, could lose
            Brand                          • More of a supportive brand                                         impact and capacity to attract the best
                                                                                                                ideas

                                           • Core activity to provide support and                             • Should all incubators be included?
          Services                           training to incubators                                           • Risk of redundancy with the many BDS
                                           • Strong focus on access to BDS and finance                          already available
                                           • Will focus on building partnerships with
                                                                                                              • Limited number of actors
                                             financial enablers
        Partnership                                                                                           • Difficulty to coordinate with all donors and
                                           • Capacity to attract and build networks of
                                                                                                                governmental initiatives
                                             local investors

                                           • Access to financial enablers                                     • The market place of ideas, entrepreneurs,
    Access to finance                                                                                           and local investors may not be large
                                           • Build local investors network                                      enough at the beginning to be attractive

                                           • Low Capex involved                                               • Potential negative impact of low brand
       Sustainability                                                                                           equity in attracting sponsors and partners
                                           • Capacity to self fund events
Note: (*) The models are here presented for the purpose of discussion. Initiatives on the ground adjust to local market conditions and are often built on a portfolio of
services across models.

                                                                                   61
AGENDA




     1. Introduction

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan

     5. How we Plan to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan
         5.1   Model & Governance
         5.2   Services Offered
         5.3   Focus on the Afghan App Store
         5.4   Risks & Mitigators

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer



                                               62
5.1 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > MODEL & GOVERNANCE > MODEL
We recommend following a light footprint model that will support current initiatives and fill
the gaps, as it is more relevant to the Afghan context.

 Building on existing    • No need to open new physical premises
incubators initiatives
                                Two different models can be considered to support the mobile ecosystem

        Model                               mHub                                  Virtual Incubator
                                Build a community of techno            Support other incubators and provide
     Core focus
                                        entrepreneurs                            access to finance
        Reach                              National                                   National
                         • Relatively low cost                       • Relatively low cost
                         • Efficient to mobilize and organize a      • Focused on supporting startups and
                           community around the mobile economy         existing ventures, incl. access to finance
        Pros
                         • Complementary to current initiatives      • Comes in support of various incubators
                         • Enables national reach through networks     initiatives, with dedicated services
                           of regional IT institutes                 • Access to international networks
                                                                     • Could miss the initial effort required to
                         • No or limited support to early stage
                                                                       build tech capacity
                           startup development
                                                                     • Difficulty in reaching the tech community
        Cons             • Not focused on providing access to
                                                                       if few tech services are provided
                           finance, a critical step in the Afghan
                                                                     • Difficulty in building sustainable model as
                           context
                                                                       most services will be provided at cost

   We recommend a hybrid of the mHub and Virtual Incubator: the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer.
                                                         63
5.1 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > MODEL & GOVERNANCE > GOVERNANCE
The governance of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer should be looked at in line with its core
objectives.
  Designing the right   • The overall objectives is to support SMEs and the private sector
     governance
                              Two governance schemes are applicable to the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer

       Scheme                          Fully private                                   Consortium
                                                                          An alliance of organizations, whether
      Description       One or several privately owned companies
                                                                                    public or private
                        • Brings additional value as the
                                                                        • Can bring in various stakeholders each
                          implementer(s) are in the same sector
                                                                          with a specific input for the project:
                        • Complementary to company’s core
         Pros                                                             institutes, private companies, gov.
                          business
                                                                        • Broad support and involvement across the
                        • Clear leadership, capacity to implement
                                                                          ecosystem
                          and roll out

                        • Difficulty in acting as a legitimate center   • No clear leadership identified
                          piece of the ecosystem                        • Not core business for the stakeholders /
         Cons
                        • Market distortion if only one private           participants to the consortium
                          actor is selected                             • Limited capacity to resolve disputes




                                                        64
5.2 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > SERVICES OFFERED
We recommend that the program should be built around a portfolio of services, with the aim
of increasing technical capacity and the sustainability of the emerging mobile ecosystem.

                                    The Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer will…

1                                      2                                      3
    Mobilize talents and develop             Support the emergence of                Provide tech tools to the
                skills                          sustainable actors                         community

• Mobilize talents and ideas               • Provide support to startups          • Localize mobile software tools
  around the opportunity of the              and existing actors toward             that can have a sectorial or a
  app economy                                investment readiness,                  social impact
• Increase skills, with basic and            including:                           • Demonstrate / train IT
  advanced mobile software                       • Mentorship                       individuals and entrepreneurs
  training to be proposed to as                  • BDS                              on the potential for venture
  many IT individuals as possible                • Access to finance
                                                                                  • Cooperate with universities
• Support IT universities and              • Provide capacity to the
                                                                                    and IT institutes in localizing
  institutes to adjust curricula             community to access the mass
                                                                                    the tools to bring hands on
• Provide more internship                    market and monetize content
                                                                                    experience to students
  opportunities to students to               & services by building an
  increased level of hands on                independent Afghan app store
  experience                               • Support other incubation
                                             initiatives, through training,
                                             and access to services for
                                             incubatees


                                                          65
5.2 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > SERVICES > MOBILIZE TALENTS AND DEVELOP SKILLS
The aim is to rapidly build a strong community of tech entrepreneurs within the mobile
ecosystem, while increasing mobile software skills.

    Activities           Output                                                Components
                                            • Organization of regular meetings, e.g., once a month, to gather entrepreneurs and
                         Talents              tech individuals or groups interested in the mobile ecosystem
     Events             mobilized           • Organization of tech driven events, such as hackathon or dev camp to promote
                                              specific sectorial agenda, e.g., mHealth, mAgriculture, mLearning

                      Ideas and apps        • Competitive events based on idea submission and selection, best ideas / team to be
 Competitions           developed             funded and nurture in relation with other incubation programs

                                            • Provide basic mobile software training to IT students and IT professionals
                                            • Provide advanced mobile software training to IT students and IT professionals
                      Upgraded skills       • Provide specific tech platform training, e.g., Android or Windows phone, to IT
    Training                                  students and IT professional
                                            • Provide support & resources to IT universities / institutes to design and incorporate
                                              mobile software into curricula
                                            • Built partnerships with local IT SMEs to get them involved in events, training, and
                    Training content &        workshops
  Partnerships       techno available       • Built partnerships with main mobile platform providers to get them involved in
                                              events, training, and workshops
                                            • Use network of partnering IT companies & IT institutes to generalize internship
                         Increased            programs for IT students
  Internships           experience          • Get IT students / institutes to participate to hands on projects, such as hackathon or
                                              dev camp

  Organizations
   Initiatives                           ICT incubator                MNOs                IT Institutes            HOSA / MCIT

                                                             66
5.2 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > SERVICES > SUPPORT THE EMERGENCE OF SUSTAINABLE ACTORS
This module is designed to support local ICT incubators & incubatees. With the Afghan app
store, the objective is to provide the capacity for SMEs to access the mass market.

    Activities           Output                                              Components
                                         • Provide mentorship, business or technical, to projects incubated within other
  Mentorship       Support to startups
                                           incubators as well as to any mobile technology startups

                        Access to        • Build connexion and give access to international funding programs, such as WB,
   Access to          international        ABADE, or ABIF, to mobile entrepreneurs
  finance (1)            funding         • Organize mobile startups pitching events to create network of entrepreneurs and
                                           financial institutions, whether private or public

   Access to         Network of local    • Organize mobile startups pitching events to try and attract network of local business
  finance (2)           investors          angels

                                         • Build legal and business framework for the Afghan app store: contract with MNOs,
                                           develop revenue sharing agreement among all parties, content regulation, and
  Afghan app                               management
                      Access to mass
                                         • Build technical infrastructure, including mobile and web store front, gateway
     store               market            interconnected to MNOs billing systems, content management platform for services
                                           providers
                                         • Manage store, animation, marketing, litigation

   Support to        Focus on training   •   Support other ICT / innovation incubators, with a focus on mobile
                                         •   Provide training module regarding mobile software to incubatees
     existing         and incubatees     •   Provide access to finance
   incubators            support         •   Build specific mentorship alliances with incubated projects

  Organizations
   Initiatives         ICT incubator          ABADE, ABIF, WB            MNOs             AMMOA

                                                            67
5.2 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > SERVICES > PROVIDE TECH TOOLS TO THE COMMUNITY
Specific mobile software tools will be localized to provide more opportunities for ideas and
entrepreneurship.

    Activities           Output                                                 Components

                                            • Use available localized tools to promote mobile technology toward tech and
  Training on          Exposure to            entrepreneurs, through events
     tools         technology enablers      • Train IT students, business students, and SMEs on how to use tools and leverage them
                                              to build services



   Support of       Maintenance and
                                            • Maintain tools, including documentation and product upgrade
     tools          upgrade of tools


                                            • Assess and prioritize mobile software tools available either by economic sector,
    Software                                  health, education, agribusiness, or linked to specific activities with economic or social
                    Localized tools to
                                              potential, such as mLearning, monitoring, or gaming
  localization      build services with     • Build localized versions of tools that have the largest potential for Afghanistan, also in
                                              relation with HOSA and DEWAE programs



                       First hand           • Cooperate with universities and IT institutes to use localization projects as enablers to
  Internships      experience on tools        gain experience for IT students



  Organizations
                                          IT institutes            SMEs           HOSA / MCIT           Open Source AF
   Initiatives

                                                              68
5.2 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > SERVICES > WHY FOCUSING ON KABUL?
Kabul is the hub of most ICT and entrepreneurship initiatives today in Afghanistan. It is a
natural first step to develop mobile app entrepreneurship.


                         • Most ICT students are completing curriculum in Kabul either at Kabul University,
                           Polytechnic, ICTI, or within a private institute
                         • The private sector regarding ICT is also mostly based in Kabul: MNOs manage their
                           network from there and ICT SMEs are for a large majority in Kabul
                         • The MCIT, a major actor of the development of ICT in Afghanistan, is focusing on Kabul
 Kabul is the hub
                           with the ICT village and the ICT incubator
 of the Afghan ICT
                         • Numerous initiatives concerning ICT and entrepreneurs are based in Kabul: the ICT
    community              incubator but also monthly iHub meetings, International Center for Afghan Women’s
                           Economic Development, and others
                         Locating the Enhancer in Kabul will help accessing targeted beneficiaries, participate
                         in galvanizing the Afghan ICT community to create a momentum, and allow for more
                         numerous and relevant partnerships opportunities




                         • Other provinces will be targeted through ad hoc events and training workshops,
 National outreach       • which can be implemented through partnerships with initiatives and associations
  through ad hoc           already targeting the provinces: the Open Source Afghanistan event was organized in
 events & training         Jalalabad in February 2013; the DEWAE - Innovation Support Program aims at building
                           awareness of its grants in the provinces


                                                      69
5.2 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > SERVICES > A PLACE FOR WOMEN
The Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer will welcome female entrepreneurs the same way it will
welcome their male counterpart.
   A reservoir of                       • 830 IT students will graduate in 2013, with an overall 3,500 IT students enrolled*
 female IT students                     • On average, 10%** of those students are women

                                        • Roya Mahboob founded her software company, Afghan Citadel
                                          Software Co. in Herat in 2010
                                        • The company develops software for private and public entities
     A role model:                        and now employs 25 people, 18 of whom are women
    Roya Mahboob,                       • She also launched http://www.womensannex.com/, a web
    CEO of Afghan                         platform that hosts videos and blogs of women from Central
        Citadel                           Asia
                                        • Her profile in Time’s 2013 list of the 100 most influential
                                          people in the world, written by Sheryl Sandberg, COO of
                                          Facebook, has put her on the map for international recognition

                                        • The International Center for Afghan Women’s Economic
                                          Development, hosted by the American University of
                                          Afghanistan and funded by a $5 million grant from the
                                          U.S. Department of Defense Task Force for Business and
 Potential partners                       Stability Operations
                                        • Techwomen, launched by TechNation, an Afghan IT firm,
                                          the National ICT Alliance of Afghanistan (NICTAA) and
                                          other ICT professionals
Source: (*) Ministry of Education; (**) Interviews of universities and institutes; (***) http://auaf.edu.af/about/international-center-for-afghan-womens-economic-
development/.

                                                                                  70
5.3 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > FOCUS ON THE AFGHAN APP STORE
Accessing the end users remains a hurdle. An independent Afghan app store, built initially on
Android, will enable content and services providers to monetize their apps.
                           • The platform would provide integrated billing access (via airtime and mobile money)
   A independent             to all MNOs
    platform for           • It would act as a distribution portal for content & service providers, enabling SMEs
 service & content           to target the mass-market easily and bill content and services
      providers            • It should be designed to benefit all stakeholders: users, MNOs, providers

         Benefits for MNOs                            Benefits for mobile content & service providers
• Boost app usage                          • A unique brand is marketed as providing local content & services:
• Revenue share deals                        heighten reach
• Identification of talented SMEs          • Direct access to end users and integrated billing system with all MNOs
                                           • Revenue share deals


                                                      Platform
• The platform allows access to IVR, java, and SMS…            • The platform is marketed under a unique brand
  … as well as smartphone apps                                 • The initial focus is on Android



                                          Benefits for the end users
• Users are exposed to one brand, marketed as the portal • Each service listed by the platform can be free or at
  that delivers local content and services                 cost
• Access to the platform is free of charge               • Users are billed via airtime or through mobile money
• Services are available across all mobile networks        payment

                                                          71
5.3 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > FOCUS ON THE AFGHAN APP STORE
The Afghan app store is the infrastructure that will foster the Afghan app economy. Its
funding is key in enabling a sustainable ecosystem.

                         • The platform is the intangible infrastructure through which all private providers or
 The platform will         end-users of mobile apps will be able to connect and exchange
   be the corner         • It will benefit providers, MNOs, and mobile content and service providers by fostering
       stone               mobile app adoption in Afghanistan, galvanizing its usage and providing a framework
 infrastructure of         for revenue share deals
  the Afghan app         • It will benefit end-users as it will facilitate access to mobile app whatever the
 economy and will          operator end-users have chosen
 benefit all actors      • It will facilitate payment through an integrated billing system that is beneficial to both
                           providers and end-users

                         • Private actors today either don’t have the interest or the capacity to invest in the
                           platform by themselves:
                           – MNOs are already investing in proprietary platforms, incentives for them to partner
                              and fund the platform by themselves are low
   Financing the           – Other private actors do not have access to sufficient funding
 platform depends          – The MCIT is in the process of creating its own platform dedicated to apps providing
     on donors                governmental services
    involvement          • In the media sector in Afghanistan, USAID is currently funding a platform that will
                           enable producing automated media ratings. The objective is to provide transparency
                           to the media and advertisement sector.
                           – The initial investment is of $250k with an objective of a commercially viable
                              platform within 2 years

                                                        72
5.3 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > FOCUS ON THE AFGHAN APP STORE > THE PLATFORM
The platform will be a game changer: for app developers to access the end-user and for
users to access Afghan content, with an initial focus on Android.

                                                   Afghan app store


                               Browse catalogue                  Update installed apps



                                      Paid                                    Free            App published
                                                   Application details



                                                                                              Technical and
                        Select billing method                                  Download     editorial validation



                                                                                            Description, price,
                  Airtime               Mobile Money                                             app.file
Download




                                        Register with                                       Load or update app
                Check credit
                                         MM account

                                                                                          Content management
                MNOs Billing
           OK    Gateway                     NOK




                                                                         73
5.3 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > FOCUS ON THE AFGHAN APP STORE > THE CUSTOMER JOURNEY
The Afghan app store will be accessible via a smartphone app with a primary focus on
Android.
1                                      2                             3
     Marketing & branding                    Distribution                                                Delivery

                                       Available on Google Play /
                                                                                                               New releases
                                       Android smartphones
                                                                                      Afghan Apps




                                                                             Discover APPS 100% Afghan
                                                                             made!




    • The Afghan app store is          • The Afghan app store is         • The app store is available for free
      advertised using relevant          published and made              • All that is required from the end user is a
      media, with a focus on web         available for download on         connection to Google Play, that is, an Android
      banners: blog, web, and others     Google Play                       smartphone, data, and a Google account
    • Facebook network with an         • Download mechanisms can         • The Afghan app store displays a list of apps, with
      information page on the            also be triggered by SMS,         a brief description of what it does, including text
      Afghan app store service           email, via Facebook or a          and images
                                         website




                                                              74
5.3 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > FOCUS ON THE AFGHAN APP STORE > THE CUSTOMER JOURNEY
Users can browse through the available applications and download them for free or for a fee
that is paid using their operators billing system.
4                                                          5                                                                                                                     6
               Discover                                                                                   Billing & download                                                                    Use

New releases                                                       Application                                Application                            Application


                                                                                                                                                     Enter your mobile money
                                                                                               50 Afgh                                    50 Afgh    login and password:
                                           Download
                                                                                                                                                     Login :
                    Editor’s choice
                                                                                                                                          50 Afgh    Passwork :

                    Once you have installed this                                                                                                                       Confirm
                    application, your friends will no
                    longer hear from you.
                    It is highly addictive and will help
                    you run your business in a better                                                                                       BUY
                    way.
                    You can check online on your
                    upcoming meetings, add                         Editor’s choice                            Editor’s choice
                    comments and take notes during a
                    conference.                                    Once you have installed this               Once you have installed this
                    Become a fast efficient                        application, your friends will no          application, your friends will no
                    entrepreneur.                                  longer hear from you.                      longer hear from you.
                                                                   It is highly addictive and will help       It is highly addictive and will help
                                                                   you run your business in a better          you run your business in a better
                                                                   way.                                       way.




    • The user can browse through                              • If the application chosen is •                                         Payment confirmation is                      • The application selected is
      all the available                                          for free, the user can                                                 issued per SMS                                 downloaded onto the
      applications, per categories,                              download it directly         •                                         The user can also check                        smartphone
      per latest releases                                      • If it is a paid application,                                           the list of past purchases                   • The user can now enjoy the
    • Each application is                                        the user is prompted to                                                                                               app or services
      presented in detail,                                       login, using its operators
      including users rating                                     login ID
                                                               • How the service will be
                                                                 charged can then be
                                                                 selected, using airtime or a
                                                                 mobile money account


                                                                                                                              75
5.4 ACCELERATE THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM IN AFGHANISTAN > RISKS & MITIGATORS
In order to mitigate risks for this initiative, a step-by-step approach is recommended during
the implementation as well as establishing strong links with stakeholders in the ICT sector.

                          Risks                                                      Mitigators

                                                              •   Establish strong links with the private sector and
•   Gap between skills built and market demand
                                                                  mGov programs to dimension and design the
                                                                  training curricula to their needs

                                                              •   Implement the program in a modular/step-by-step
                                                                  approach so as to take corrective measures when
                                                                  necessary


•   Lack of absorption capacity and difficulty to             •   Conduct additional research to size the potential
    identify the right candidates                                 audience and get a thorough assessment of the
                                                                  needs by type of candidates



•   Lack of coordination with other ongoing                   •   Establish strong links with ongoing initiatives,
    initiatives: risk of duplication                              such as the ICT incubator, from start to
•   Difficulty to attract enough candidates because of            differentiate the offering of each initiative and
    multiplication of offers for IT students and SMEs             create complementary programs



                                                         76
AGENDA




     1. Introduction

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan

     5. How we Plan to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer
         6.1   KPIs
         6.2   Budget
         6.3   Roadmap
         6.4   Feedback from Workshops




                                             77
6.1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > IMPACT

The Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer’s impact will be measured through nine KPIs:


 After 3 years…

        25 startups created                            15+ million apps downloaded
                                                         (including 12+ million in year 3)

        20 startup teams have received                 500 apps commercialized
         mentoring and coaching

        425 highly skilled jobs created                40 events organized
         (including in existing ventures)

        100 internship positions filled                About 600 individuals trained on mobile
                                                         technology

        25 local investors identified                         Investment required: $1.1m for 3 years

                                                     Gross revenue generated: $5+ million in Year 3
                                                                                With the app store

                                                    78
6.1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > KPIS > MOBILIZE TALENTS AND DEVELOP SKILLS
This module should address IT students in priority, and set an ambitious target in the number
of students going into the mobile app economy.

    Activities                 KPIs                  Risks & challenges                     Mitigation strategies

                       • 1 monthly event:
                         hackathon, dev                                                  • At least all 5 major cities exposed
     Events              camp, pitching         • Activities too concentrated in Kabul
                                                                                           (roadshows)
                         events
                       • Reach 1,000 people

                       • 1 yearly
                                                                                         • Identify clearly the technology
                         competition            • Confusion with HOSA and DEWAE
 Competitions          • 150 applicants           activities
                                                                                           platform, for example, Android
                                                                                           with links with Afghan app store
                       • 5 projects selected
                       • 10% of IT graduates                                             • Organize onsite training, for
                                                • Full-time students not available or      example, in the IT institutes
                         trained
                                                  interested in attending                • Provide specific support and
    Training           • 300 IT professionals
                                                • Difficulty for IT institutes to          training to IT teachers
                       • 20% of IT institutes
                                                  implement mobile curricula             • Development and adaptation of
                         supported
                                                                                           curricula
                       • 10 local
                         partnerships
  Partnerships         • 3 technological
                                                • Limited interest from international    • Connect with foundations
                                                  partners
                         partnerships

                       • 10% of IT graduates                                             • Increase number of hands on
                                                • Limited number of SMEs offering
  Internships            enrolled on mobile-
                                                  internship opportunities
                                                                                           projects with IT institute, such as
                         centric internships                                               app prototypes or tools


                                                          79
6.1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > KPIS > SUPPORT THE EMERGENCE OF SUSTAINABLE ACTORS
The Afghan app store is the cornerstone of this module to support the emergence of the app
economy. It requires a strong involvement of local MNOs.

    Activities                 KPIs                 Risks & challenges                     Mitigation strategies
                       • 20 startups
  Mentorship             supported

                       • 2 startups funded
                         per year on average
                                               • Limited seed funding available for    • Involve key international
                       • 6 mobile startups
   Access to             pitching events
                                                 tech startups                           stakeholders at a very early stage
                                               • Limited interest of local investors   • Involve international Afghan
  finance (1)            organized per year
                                                 for tech ventures                       diaspora
                       • 25 local investors
                         identified

                       • All MNOs on board                                             • Collect MNOs vision and inputs at a
                       • Afghan app store                                                very early stage of the project
                                               • No legal and tech agreement with
                         available within 6                                            • Use competition to boost attraction
                                                 several or even all MNOs
  Afghan app             months
                                               • Lack of apps providers                  of the Afghan app store
     store             • 50 apps available
                         within 1st year
                                               • Number of download below              • Localize hit international games to
                                                 expectations                            boost attractiveness
                       • 600k download
                         within 1st year

   Support to          • 100% of ICT
                                               • ICT incubators do not get involved    • Involve ICT incubators
     existing            incubators
                                                 with mobile entrepreneurship
                         supported
   incubators


                                                         80
6.1 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > KPIS > PROVIDE TECH TOOLS TO THE COMMUNITY
The tools provided to the tech community should match their needs and interests, and be
easy to adopt and maintain.

    Activities                KPIs                Risks & challenges                        Mitigation strategies

    Software          • 10 tools localized   • Difficulty in bringing tools that        • Design framework for selection that
                                                                                          includes easy to use / exploit as a
  localization                                 need limited IT capacity to use
                                                                                          must have

                      • 5 workshops
  Training on           organized
                                             • Tools do not meet the needs of
                                                                                        • Test interest & appetite of tech
                                                                                          community before localizing the
     tools                                     local IT / entrepreneurs
                      • 300 people reached                                                tool


   Support of         • 100% of tools                                                   • Tools selection criteria should
                                             • Tools potentially difficult and costly
                        maintained and                                                    include robustness and ease of
     tools                                     to maintain over time
                        upgraded                                                          maintenance


                      • 30% of tools co-     • Limited number of IT institutes on       • Involve institutes from the very
  Internships           developed with IT      board with localization projects           early stages, that is, design and
                        institutes                                                        selection




                                                        81
6.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > BUDGET
After 3 years, the program should be mostly supported by the revenues generated by the
Afghan app store, partners and sponsors.
       Revenue for Year 3 (growth phase)                                    Costs (initial & running)

                     AFGHAN APPSTORE                           CAPEX required for the set up of the
                     - Usage based fee (per application        Afghan app store + tools                 CAPEX
   $270k                                                                                                (Total)
                       used, etc.)
                     - Subscription based
            Direct                                                                                        $400k
           Revenue
                                                                               +
                                                               MAINTENANCE COSTS for the
                     ADVERTISERS & SPONSORS                    platform

                     - Advertising and sponsorship
                       revenues


   $130k             PARTNERSHIPS
                                     +                         RUNNING COSTS (such as events or
                                                               training)                                 OPEX
                                                                                                        (for Year 3)
                     - Techno and platform providers to
                       support services and activities         ADVERTISING COSTS to support the            $400k
      Indirect       - Mobile hardware manufacturers           brand of Afghan app store
      Revenue



                 Capital needed before sustainability in year 3 would be about $1.1m.
                                                          82
6.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > BUDGET > ASSUMPTIONS FOR RUNNING COSTS YEAR 3

Yearly running costs amount to a total of $400k for year 3. Training and recruitment of
experts are an important part but key to trigger a massive impact.
                 Item                                     Assumption                                Costs


                                4 full-time local project managers, in charge of organization and
          Human resources       daily operations, one dedicated to the app store. 2 part-time       $182k
                                experts, one for training, one for mentorship


                                Covers share of office space, laptops, and communications as
           Office expenses                                                                          $31k
                                well as the yearly audit


                                Covers roundtrip tickets every 3 months - for each of the experts
          Travels & logistics                                                                       $31k
                                and 5 roundtrip travels to the provinces


                                12 events per year, 1 competition, training design & workshops
          Offered activities                                                                        $135k
                                and app store maintenance


             Branding &
                                TV and other media                                                  $20k
             advertising


             Total yearly
                                                                                                    $400k
            running costs



                                                            83
6.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > BUDGET > ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE AFGHAN APP STORE
The Afghan app store could generate sales of $5.4m in year 3, with an increased number of
available apps.
       Item                          Assumption                    Year 1       Year 2           Year 3

  Number of apps         Number of apps increases as more
                                                                     50          200              500
    available            actors gets in

                         15 to 30% of Android smartphone
 Number of active
                         users are active on the Afghan app        100,000     250,000           500,000
     users
                         store
                     x
 Download per user
                         The more apps, the more downloads           6            12                  24
     per year
                     =
Downloads per year                                                  600k        3,000k           12,000k
                     x
                         Number of paid apps increases with
   % of paid apps                                                   10%          20%              30%
                         app quality
                     x
   Average price         Based on current VAS pricing                $1         $1.25             $1.5
                     =
   Gross revenue                                                    $60k        $750k            $5.400k


       With an operating fee of 5%, year 3 revenue for the Afghan app store will reach $270k.
                                                              84
6.3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > ROADMAP
Key milestones for year 1 of Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer initiative are represented in the
roadmap below.
                         Q1                               Q2                                   Q3                               Q4

Implementing       Host                            Development of
                                   Staffing
  partner        selection                         range of service

                     Governance
 Governance            defined

                                   Negotiation of partnerships           Negotiation of private
 Partnerships                      with institutes & universities         sector partnership

                                                                    First training               Design of mobile                     Training
   Training                                                            session               curricula for IT institutes              sessions

                        Kick-off    Dev Camp         Pitching         Pitching           Pitching            Pitching      Pitching     Pitching
   Events                event
                                           Hackathon       Dev Camp          Hackathon          Competition       Hackathon           Dev Camp

Mentorship &
                                                                                                      Start ups are enrolled
 internship

                                   Specifications & contract with                    App store design &
  App store                                     MNOs                                   development
                                                                                                                               Launch


                                              Selection and design
    Tools                                           of tools
                                                                                        4 tool localized


                                                                85
6.4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > FEEDBACK FROM WORKSHOPS
All stakeholders agree on the potential of the mobile app sector in Afghanistan. They insist
on having a collaborative approach and premium support to the private sector.


Business environment and the mobile ecosystem in
                                                               Incubation model and recommendations for action
                  Afghanistan

• Stakeholders agree on the initial key findings               • Stakeholders agree that a full mLab, such as
  regarding the business environment for SMEs                    incubator, would replicate the MCIT incubator
• Current sizing of the number of people having                  initiative
  access to Internet and potential target within 3             • The portfolio of services and the approach
  years is debated. The view presented in the                    proposed by the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer is
  analysis is seen as pessimistic                                considered as appropriate
• All stakeholders insist on the necessity to focus the
                                                               • The app store is seen as an opportunity to unlock
  activities on Kabul first and then reach out to the
                                                                 the mass market for SMEs and entrepreneurs
  provinces
• Stakeholders also suggest that infoDev initiative            • Stakeholders insist that security is a key issue when
  should support and not duplicate the current                   it comes to implementing the app store and that it
  initiatives launched by the Afghan government /                should be addressed accordingly, for example, by
  MCIT (HOSA, DAWAE)                                             using an independent testing / certification entity
                                                               • Other billing alternative, especially within the
                                                                 banking sector, should be looked at
                                                               • Stakeholders insist that the app store is a
                                                                 temporary solution




                                                          86
6.4 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MOBILE ECOSYSTEM ENHANCER > FEEDBACK FROM WORKSHOPS
The Afghan app store is the infrastructure that could foster the Afghan app economy.
Ownership and security are perceived as main constraints.

                         • The app store would benefit small private tech actors who cannot at present address
   The app store is        the mass market
      forseen by         • Android seems the right platform to build the app store on
  stakeholders as a      • Being able to access the billing infrastructure of the MNOs through the app store is a
     tremendous            must
     opportunity         • The app store is a good short or mid-term temporary solution to lift the billing
                           constraint



                         • Security could be an issue, and it should therefore be addressed very carefully
                           – Security of the overall platform
       Ownership           – Quality and reliability of the applications that will be released on the app store
      and security       • Stakeholders suggest that an independent entity be in charge of supervising a testing
     are perceived         procedure / certification before publication on the app store
 as the main issues to   • Ownership of the app store should be very clear
        address            – Content management will be sensitive
                           – If successful, the revenue fees should be allocated in transparent manner
                         • Other billing solutions should be looked at, especially with the banking sector




                                                       87
AGENDA




     1. Introduction

     2. Mapping of the Business Environment for SMEs in the ICT Sector

     3. Description of Current Initiatives Outside the Country and Relevance to
        Country

     4. Opportunities for Incubation in Afghanistan

     5. How we Plan to Accelerate the Mobile Ecosystem in Afghanistan

     6. Implementation of the Mobile Ecosystem Enhancer




                                             88
