                                           93069




           SAFANSI
    South Asia Food & Nutrition Security
                 Initiative




      2013-2014 Annual Report
         and Work Program




1
© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
All rights reserved.
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included
in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in
this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of
any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this
work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.


2
Contents
South Asia Food & Nutrition Security Initiative ............................................................ 1
Abbreviations and Acronyms ...................................................................................... 5
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................... 8
Overview of the SAFANSI Program .............................................................................. 9
SUNITA: a Special Focus on Nepal ............................................................................................................... 9
Generating National Dialogue and Action .............................................................. 11
Women and Nutrition .................................................................................................. 15
Using Cash Cards to Incentivize Families to Make Better Nutrition Choices in Bangladesh
(TF099422) .......................................................................................................................................................15
Enhancing the knowledge and awareness of critical factors that promote food and nutrition security
among women’s groups in South Asia (TF015348) ...................................................................................16
Focusing on the First 1,000 Days in Bhutan (TF012082) .........................................................................18
Promoting Breastfeeding in India (TF013556)............................................................................................19
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion for Food and Nutrition Security Nepal (TF015361) ...............19
How Communities Manage Food and Nutrition ...................................................... 21
Using a Social Observatory to Monitor Community Food and Nutrition Security in India
(TF011993) .......................................................................................................................................................21
Addressing Nutritional Needs in Bihar, India (TF012081) .......................................................................21
Community Managed FNS Initiatives in India (TF012676)......................................................................23
Mobilizing Communities to Address Nutrition and Promote Good Health in Nepal (TF013868)....23
Community Based Behavior Change for Nutrition in Nepal (TF012285) ..............................................24
Creating Tools for Practitioners .................................................................................. 26
A Multi-sectoral Simulation Tool (MST) for Scaling Up Nutrition (TF098429) ...................................26
Using Political Economy Analysis to address Food and Nutrition Security (TF010794).....................27
Agriculture and Food and Nutrition Security ............................................................ 30
Improving Agricultural Productivity through Farmer Field Schools in Bangladesh (TF016677) .......30
Foodgrains Storage and Trade Policy in India (TF014636).......................................................................30
Improving Food Security in Tribal Areas in India (TF012122) ................................................................31
Strengthening Agricultural Education and Policy Making in India (TF014041) ....................................31

3
Agriculture and Food Security in Nepal (TF016678) .................................................................................32
Agricultural Extension and Nutrition through ICT (TF014901) .............................................................32
Appendix 1: Update of Active SAFANSI Grants by Country: Reporting Period 1
April 2013—31 March 2014......................................................................................... 34
Afghanistan .......................................................................................................................................................34
Bangladesh ........................................................................................................................................................34
India ...................................................................................................................................................................36
Nepal..................................................................................................................................................................42
Pakistan..............................................................................................................................................................46
Regional .............................................................................................................................................................47
Sri Lanka............................................................................................................................................................51
Appendix 2: SAFANSI-funded Activities ................................................................... 53
Pipeline/Work Program .............................................................................................. 59
SAFANSI Dashboard .................................................................................................... 60
Results Framework ...................................................................................................... 62




4
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AES    Agriculture and Environmental         ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural
Services                                     Research

APRIGP Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive        IYCF   Infant and Young Child Feeding
Growth Project
                                             MIS    Management Information Systems
AusAID Australian Aid
                                             MST    Multisectoral Simulation Tool
BCC     Behavioral Change Communication
                                             NAAS National Academy of Agriculture
BE      Bank Executed                        Science

BEES Business, Enterprise and Employment     NLSS   Nepal Living Standards Survey
Support for Women in South Asia
                                             PEA    Political Economy Analysis
BMGF Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
                                             PRMPR Poverty Reduction and Equity
BNNC Bangladesh National Nutrition
                                             RAT    Rapid Assessment Tool
Council
                                             RE     Recipient Executed
BPNI    Breastfeeding Promotion Network of
India                                        RRNI   Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives

CNCC Community Managed Nutrition and         SAR    South Asia Region
Care Centers                                 SASDA South Asia Sustainable
CMHN Community Managed Health and            Development and Agriculture
Nutrition                                    SASDL South Asia Sustainable Development
DECIE Development Research Group             and Livelihoods
Impact Evaluation                            SASDS South Asia Sustainable Development
DECPI Development Research Group             and Social
Poverty and Inequality                       SASEP South Asia Economic Policy and
DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and       Poverty
Trade (Australia)                            SASHN South Asia Health Nutrition and
DfID  Department for International           Population
Development (UK)                             SASSP South Asia Social Protection
EU      European Union                       SERP Society for the Advancement of
FFS     Farmer Field Schools                 Rural Poverty

FNS     Food and Nutrition Security          SHD    Sunaula Hazar Din (Nepal)

GOI     Government of India                  SHD-CANP    Sunaula Hazar Din
                                             Community Action for Nutrition Project
IAPP Integrated Agricultural Productivity
Project                                      SUNITA Scaling Up Nutrition Initiative
                                             Technical Assistance

5
SO     Social Observatory                 USAID United States Agency for
                                          International Development
TA     Technical Assistance
                                          UNICEF United Nation’s Children Fund
TTL    Task Team Leader
                                          WFP    World Food Program
TWISA Transport, Water, Information and
Communication Technology Water and
Sanitation South Asia




6
A worker plucking green chilies from Thabul-pind vegetable fields, Pakistan. Credit: Visual News
Associates/World Bank


Food security exists when all people,
at all times, have physical and
economic access to sufficient, safe
and nutritious food to meet their
dietary needs and food preferences
for an active and healthy life.

7
Executive Summary
Since SAFANSI was first formed in 2010, it has financed 53 activities, of which 21 are complete and
32 are underway. Looking back at the portfolio since its inception, one can see a trend. We started
at the national, and even the international, level undertaking analyses and engaging governments on
food and nutrition security issues. The high-level dialogue has yielded results with a Nutrition Action
Framework in Afghanistan supported by five key ministries; food and nutrition data and priorities
incorporated into Bangladesh’s current Five Year Plan; a multi-sector food security and nutrition
report produced as a joint effort by the Nepal National Planning Commission, the Central Bureau
of Statistics, WFP, UNICEF, DfID, Australian DFAT, EU, and the World Bank; and the
development of an Integrated Nutrition Strategy for Pakistan.
We have added in more focused work on nutrition at the community and household levels. There
are several studies on women’s agency and the impact of food and nutrition security, and there are
now studies on how agriculture can better impact nutrition. We are also financing more rigorous
impact evaluations to understand the efficacy of ongoing programs and innovative pilots.
The pipeline of activities that are seeking funding from future phases of SAFANSI looks even more
innovative, with what appears to be a gradual trend from Bank-executed analysis to recipient
executed innovation and piloting.
This annual report reviews SAFANSI’s work at the national level, the community level, the focus on
women, activities in agriculture. It also highlights tools for practitioners that have been created and
can be used now by the development community and client governments.
Now that we have a critical mass of materials that have been created, we are financing programmatic
knowledge management and communications that will identify trends in SAFANSI program
findings and better disseminate SAFANSI products to maximize impact.




8
Overview of the SAFANSI Program
The South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI) was established in 2010 to
address the South Asian Enigma—how chronic malnutrition remains intractable despite high
economic growth—by fostering the crosscutting actions that will lead to measurable improvements
in food and nutrition security. 1 Over the last 4 years, SAFANSI has been enabling stakeholder
platforms that can operationalize cross-sectoral action and enable more effective domestic
stewardship of the food and nutrition security agenda. The ultimate objective of SAFANSI has
been to increase the commitment of governments and development partners to more effective and
integrated food and nutrition-related policies and investments.
SAFANSI’s strategy focuses on 3 pillars:


               Analysis                             Advocacy                           Capacity Building


    •Improved evidence                     •Improving awareness of                 •Strengthening regional
     and analysis on the most               FNS-related challenges,                 and in-country policy
     effective ways to                      and advocacy for                        and programming
     achieve FNS outcomes                   action amongst relevant                 capacity to achieve FNS
     in SAR                                 stakeholders                            outcomes




SUNITA: a Special Focus on Nepal
Nepal’s Scaling Up Nutrition Initiative Technical Assistance (SUNITA) fund is a window of the SAFANSI
Trust Fund started at the suggestion of Government of Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT). 2 Activities financed by SUNITA complement SAFANSI’s efforts to provide
technical support in the form of analytical work, evaluations of interventions and technical
assistance to target actions that effectively address gaps in nutrition interventions. SUNITA is
financing a number of tasks that are adding to the breadth of research and technical assistance in
Nepal. These activities include:
      •    A review of Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF), which has been completed;
      •    The development of a toolkit for defining determinants of malnutrition at district level,
           which has recently shared and discussed this tool-kit and recommendations with relevant
           stakeholders, including the National Planning Commission;


1SAFANSI is a multi-donor trust fund financed by DFID and administered by the World Bank. As Trustee and
Administrator, the World Bank is responsible for program development, implementation, and monitoring & evaluation.
2   Formerly Australian Agency for International Development (AUSAID)
9
     •   Consultant support for the implementation of nutrition tasks is currently in progress and
         aiming to sensitize the Bank’s portfolio;
     •   A district level nutrition survey covering the baseline is planned and a subsequent impact
         evaluation for the Sunaula Hazar Din is in progress;
     •   A phase wise training of social mobilizers, elaboration of training materials, backstopping of
         social mobilizers and elaboration of semi-annual newsletter for Sunaulo Hazar Din is also
         planned;
     •   The Rapid Results Institute, an international organization, which has developed the Rapid
         Results Initiative, supported the pilot in four different Wards in Sunaulo Hazar Din; a
         completion report is available in which lessons learned inform the project’s Operational
         Manual and have indicated that such community-driven initiatives, given the right support,
         can yield desired results;
     •   A review of a FNS Thematic report, which is based primarily on the findings of the Nepal
         Living Standards Survey (NLSS) 2010/11, which covered 5,988 households and included
         anthropometric data collected from approximately 2,500 preschool children under 60
         months of age.
Though most of these activities have ended, the remaining activities in Nepal will be financed by the
main SAFANSI regional windows.




10
Generating National Dialogue and
Action
Generating national dialogue is often one of the first and most important ways to engage citizens
and policy makers about critical issues that will result in actionable change. SAFANSI has used
several strategies to fight social stigma and bad behavior as it relates to food and nutrition through
initiatives across 7 countries in South Asia. Bringing problem-solvers and beneficiaries together
promotes sustainable solutions, as detailed in current initiatives below.
In Afghanistan (TF098874), SAFANSI has supported a High-Level Task Force on Food and
Nutrition Security to build national commitment and capacity for planning. Over the last year, the
program completed an extensive Nutrition Action Framework with the support of 5 key
ministries:
     •   Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock
     •   Commerce and Industry
     •   Education
     •   Public Health
     •   Rural Rehabilitation and Development
It has been essential for the policy-makers to deliver an effective national campaign to deal with
food and nutrition insecurity. Using an evidence-based, multisectoral approach, the program has
done this through the lens of equity related to gender, poverty and geographic location.
Additionally, six short knowledge reports were successfully produced to disseminate new knowledge
about scaling up multi-sectoral collaboration to combat malnutrition. The reports focused on
enhancing skills for infant and young children in villages and raising nutrition awareness for young
women, which also addressed women’s empowerment issues. Additionally, a rapid assessment of
iron and folic acid during pregnancy was conducted.
The reports look at innovative pilot programs across various Ministries and specifically how they
translate into policy solutions with the potential for scale-up. Specifically, two reports offer unique
suggestions for improving nutrition awareness in areas where it is lacking by working with Ministries
that currently have minimal work focusing directly on nutrition. The “Baby Friendly Village” pilot
program was intended to promote appropriate infant feeding practices not only among mothers, but
also among their broader community and social support networks, especially among their mothers-
in-law and husbands. For this intervention, Care for Afghan Families received a South Asia
Development Marketplace for Nutrition award from the World Bank and its development partners.
Afghanistan has high rates of malnutrition and a high infant mortality rate of 77/1000 births. Infant
and young child feeding practices are a key determinant of malnutrition in Afghanistan, and thus far,
relatively little attention has been given to this issue. This report was prepared to inform the scaling

11
up of infant and young child feeding through the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan’s Basic Package of Health Services.
SAFANSI financed technical expertise to the Government of Bangladesh (TF016363) on current
patterns of nutrition, anticipated trends in food supply and demand (and the stresses to food
security), and the current state of farm-nonfarm linkages to boost rural incomes to enhance the
country’s agriculture and rural development strategy. The updated findings have been incorporated
into the Bangladesh’s current Five Year Plan and should be included into subsequent plans and the
ongoing National Food Policy Plan of Action 2008-2015.
Six background papers are being written to address the issues that are currently preventing the
agriculture sector from being productive. Additionally, lags in agriculture commercialization, and
changing agricultural production patterns and the structural changes in rural households are
affecting nutrition are addressed. The reports also address how rural incomes (and thereby access to
food) are changing or constrained.
Building this dialogue relies heavily on an effective engagement and communication strategy. A
series of seminars and workshops addressing issues from the six papers have been conducted, and
several workshops have been scheduled for the coming year.
In Nepal (TF098873), SAFANSI has used multiple approaches to address food and nutrition
insecurity as it relates to gender, social exclusion (caste, religion), poverty, and geographic location.
The program has focused on building national commitment to address the issues though:
     •   Gaining commitment through government and development partners
     •   Strengthening national capacity and programming
     •   Building evidence, analysis and awareness of food and nutrition security
This activity has been successfully implemented via several discrete activities under the overarching
objective. Not only did the project successfully help establish a Secretariat at the National Planning
Commission (NPC) to address a multi-sector nutrition plan in partnership with the WFP and
UNICEF, but it also developed a strategic communication and advocacy plan that was incorporated
into the larger communication plan for the NPC.
Through another SUNITA initiative (TF010274), as part of the Nepal Living Standards Survey
(NLSS), 5988 households were surveyed across Nepal, providing information on nutrition—in
particular, the height, weight and age of all children 59 months or younger. Data was also collected
on breastfeeding practices, all as part of the anthropometry module in the survey. From this data, a
thematic report on multi-sector food security and nutrition has been produced as a joint effort by
the National Planning Commission, the Central Bureau of Statistics, WFP, UNICEF, DfID,
Australian DFAT, EU, and the World Bank. The report was completed, published and shared with
all relevant stakeholders and represents a comprehensive and reliable source of information on the
status of national and regional food security and the nutritional status of the population.
Additionally, another project (TF014834) has been preparing training materials, work plans, and
methodology to train social mobilizers and coaches in a results-based community driven approach to
reducing malnutrition. The outputs of this work were manuals for coaches and social mobilizers,

12
various nutrition focus area-specific notes, posters, and reporting templates for coaches and
supervisors. These outputs are being used for the training of coaches and supervisors involved in
Sunaula Hazar Din-Community Action for Nutrition Project implemented by the Ministry of
Federal affairs and Local Development and financed by the World Bank. This training of coaches
and supervisors provides them with the skills and knowledge to facilitate selected communities to
undertake a demand driven approach to bring about behavior and attitudinal changes in order to
address malnutrition (in their respective
communities). The outcomes relating to
behavior and attitude change will be assessed
by an impact evaluation built in the project.
The below photo shows an event launch for
one of the nutrition initiatives in a community
outside Kathmandu.
Another study (TF015218) has provided
small area estimates of food security and
nutrition indicators at the sub-district level
across Nepal. Specifically, the study estimates
(prevalence,    gap    and      severity)   for
undernourishment, measured by caloric intake; and food poverty , measured by the monetary value
of consumption intake expressed in local prices.
All SUNITA activities have successfully supported, as envisaged, the development and
implementation of the Nepal Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan, which is the cornerstone for enabling
the country to address the problem of persisting malnutrition. This support has ranged from
supporting the Nutrition Secretariat at the National Planning Commission, including enabling it to
carry out certain critical pieces of work—e.g., a capacity assessment, and communication and
advocacy strategy. The all-important, Food and Security Thematic Report, provides the evidence
base of the situation in the country, while the review of Infant and Young Child Feeding Program
indicates to program planners of the gaps in both design and implementation.
Further, more detailed work on profiling the determinants of malnutrition in different districts with
the help of a tool-kit, and an estimate of sub-district measures of food insecurity and food poverty
will help to contextualize and plan specific interventions at the decentralized levels in order to
achieve the desired outcome (reduced malnutrition), which is now the most important level to
influence results, however equally challenging too. Finally the technical support being provided to
the SHD project which supports community-level interventions to support the critical first 1000
days continues to be important to demonstrate a different way of addressing the problem.
Pakistan (TF012245) is also addressing the most effective ways to achieve food and nutrition
security, with a particular focus on equity related to gender, poverty and geographic location.
In July 2011, the Government of Pakistan devolved primary responsibility for food security to the
provinces along with responsibility for many other sectors. In 2012, SAFANSI began a program to
increase Government commitment to nutrition across a broad range of sectors in the provinces. The
work focuses on targeted population subgroups, specifically women and female children, due to the
13
high burden of morbidity and mortality due to malnutrition. The increased Government
commitment is not empirically measured, but it can be observed by statements from senior officials
at the federal and provincial levels. SAFANSI has also provided a framework for development
partners and government to orient their investments. Policy guidance notes are a key result and are
guiding the provinces in developing their inter-sectoral nutrition strategies. This has introduced
greater rigor and better use of evidence in the nutrition planning process in the provinces with a
multi-sectoral approach.
Four provinces have drafted a policy note (one for each province) that contributed to an Integrated
Nutrition Strategy for the country. This Strategy will serve as a guide for the implementation of a
multi-sectoral response to address malnutrition in the province. Thus far, Sindh province’s strategy
has been approved, and the remaining provinces have final drafts pending approval.
Building on a successful program in Latin America, SAFANSI worked with planners to develop
footage and a video that would be relevant and appropriately showcase the problems associated with
the misalignment of nutrition and health indicators in the country. It targets behavioral change and
communications programs for parents, health workers, and grassroots nutrition workers.




14
Women and Nutrition
Since at least 1994, gender inequity has been well recognized as perhaps the strongest driver of
malnutrition in South Asia, and yet it remains a key challenge to be overcome. Women play a crucial
role in areas of food, health, care and are also responsible for a substantial portion of global food
production. However in South Asia, women typically tend to have weaker control over household
resources, tighter time constraints, less access to information and health services, and lower self-
esteem. Their lack of power and choice in the household impairs their abilities to make decisions
about their children’s health, nutrition and education, and also prevents them from accessing the
services they need to protect their own health, nutrition and survival. This, in turn, affects their
children’s birth weights and growth, as well as the kind of care they receive.
Seventeen SAFANSI activities have looked at the links between gender and malnutrition, and the
ways in which women can be empowered to be catalysts for change.
Furthermore, SAFANSI will continue to focus its South Asia Gender and Nutrition Mapping to target
adolescent girls and mothers in order to break down the complex layers by which gender impacts
trans-generational nutrition pathways. Nutrient deficiencies suffered in utero are exacerbated by the
low age of first pregnancy in the region. This linkage will be used to leverage gender’s strategic
position in the complex FNS equation for the improvement of nutrition indicators in many
SAFANSI/Bank activities.

Using Cash Cards to Incentivize Families to Make Better Nutrition Choices
in Bangladesh (TF099422)
By making financial assistance contingent upon a beneficiary’s actions, a conditional cash transfer
program has the ability to catalyze change in a community quickly. Incentivizing participants to do
things such as enroll their children in school, or
attending counseling and knowledge sharing sessions
to educate parents and caregivers about the benefits of
balanced diet, is what has made this pilot successful.
SAFANSI is has been assessing the Bangladesh
conditional cash transfer pilot program in order to
improve its design and implementation. The goal was
to assess value and impact on the socioeconomic
conditions of the beneficiary families, food security,
and how the additional income is allocated among                         Cash cards
education, food, and other expenses. The program
has been delivering funds bi-monthly through an electronic cash card issued by the Bangladesh Post
Office.
In the last year of the project, payments amounting to $1.9 million had been made to over 14,000
beneficiary families complying with co-responsibilities.
15
The impact evaluation suggests beneficiary households on average had a significant increase of 11%
in their monthly food consumption. Moreover, beneficiary households were found to spend
significantly more on consumption of
proteins—meat, eggs, dairy, fish and
pulses—particularly for households
participating in the nutrition program,
compared         to      non-beneficiary
households.
Under the Shombhob CCT pilot for
example, the beneficiary was considered
to be the household, although it was the
mother (or primary caregiver) who was
the prime recipient of services. The pilot
was able to have a positive impact in
improving the welfare of extremely poor
households as well as household
                                                  A woman accepting payment at a CCT facility
consumption patterns towards more
proteins, given it is the usually the wife
and/or mother who is responsible for making these decisions. Mothers were motivated to see their
child improve and grow by implementing the nutrition knowledge and practices they learned about
and through regular growth monitoring, and with cash transfers received in the mother's account,
the woman's role in decision-making for the family was that much stronger.
While not necessarily evident from the impact evaluation, anecdotal evidence (including focus group
discussions that were carried out with beneficiaries) suggests that the perception of women and
children in the household saw a shift as they were now considered assets given their role was now
linked to positive monetary benefits. Many beneficiary mothers reported that their husbands were
very supportive of their attendance in the program and would actively encourage their participation.
Bangladesh has always recognized the role of the woman in improving or changing household
behavior and the pilot has served to strengthen and reinforce the policy dialogue on the importance
of social and economic empowerment of women for long term human development.
The Government of Bangladesh has since requested the World Bank for an operation that would
scale up the pilot with nutrition interventions. Results from the pilot are expected to be disseminated
with policymakers and other stakeholders over the coming months.

Enhancing the knowledge and awareness of critical factors that promote
food and nutrition security among women’s groups in South Asia
(TF015348)
The Business Enterprise and Employment Support for Women in South Asia (“BEES Network”)
uses grassroots organizations and stakeholders at the policy making, implementation and technical
levels to achieve this goal. SAFANSI is working to through this network to better understand the

16
food and nutrition security issues of particularly marginalized populations and to maximize
innovations and learning across the region.
The project aims at consolidating the learnings from individual member experiences, understanding
through consultations and a gap analysis, food and nutrition security interventions that need to be
achieved and further supported.
Helping the BEES Network access stakeholders and reach communities to achieve results has
ensured development and customization of nutritional messages according to specific nutritional
challenges in communities.
In Bangladesh, SAFANSI studied populations that had a history of low nutritional status and are
below poverty line or are considered ultra-poor to understand:
     •   Existing community food security
     •   Food habits and dietary intake by 24 hour recall method
     •   Local practices at achieving food and nutrition security that can be strengthened
In one example, the Manusher Jonno Foundation (MJF) established 22 rice banks in 7 unions of
the Chittagong Hill Tracts to overcome the seasonal food shortages. MJF provided the initial
investment to purchase 10 tons of rice while the communities provided materials for the silos and
labor. MJF and the community jointly developed the guidelines for operating these banks.
The rice is distributed to poor cultivators in the lean period every year and is recovered during
harvest. An interest rate is charged to account for loss and damage. Rice stored in the bank is treated
as a revolving fund. Every family who receive rice during the lean period has to return 20 additional
kilograms during harvest. As a result, over 32,000 kg of rice has been earned as interest. The extra
rice is used to meet maintenance costs incurred in operating the grain bank.
These banks have been spreading to neighboring communities and the government has
acknowledged it as a successful instrument in fighting poverty among the Jumia people. Some
management committees now want to extend activities and provide essential items such as dal
(lentils), edible oil and sugar. Enabling these banks to become economic models ensuring nutrition
security at low rates is the logical next step in making the initiative sustainable.
Findings from the Bangladesh GAP Analysis show that the region lags behind the rest of the
country. Progress towards better food security and nutrition will require a combination of policies
and programs that together improve household food security, a healthy environment, access to basic
health and social services, and care for children and mothers. If interventions are to have their
intended goals they must be sensitive to the special needs and problems of this region, including the
unique socio-cultural characteristics of each ethnic group and the difficulties in delivering services to
a remote and widely dispersed population.




17
Community rice banks keep a widow
out of debt
Mayarani Chakma is a widow with no
wealth who lives in Shamukchhari village
with her only son. Her husband died of
Malaria two years ago, and she incurred
debt to pay for his funeral and to meet
living expenses. She was deprived from
all government support due to widows
in her situation and faced a dire
situation.
However, Mayarani was able to access
and borrow rice from a community rice
bank. She borrowed 15 units of rice,
from which she sold several, and kept
the rest. From the money she saved, she
invested in and is now cultivating rice in
3 acres of rented land. She has paid off
her loan and continues to support
herself and family independent of debt.




Focusing on the First 1,000 Days in Bhutan (TF012082)
Creating awareness of malnutrition with policymakers is critical to improving the quality of life for
generations of people in Bhutan. Nutrition critically impacts the first 1,000 days of life of a child—
from inception, through pregnancy and the first 24 months after birth.
SAFANSI conducted a multi-sectoral assessment in Bhutan to address the key determinants of
under-nutrition in the country, and take stock of current programs and what is still not being
addressed. Additionally, the assessment reviewed institutional and implementation arrangements in
public and private sectors to address under-nutrition.
Recommendations were to develop a multi-sectoral nutrition plan of action under the direction of
the Nutritional Core Committee, with full sectoral involvement that includes capacity development
of personnel, organizations, and systems to address low birth weight, stunting and poor food
choices during time of fasting. The program has also advocated for significant incorporation of
public nutrition into national policy for the country.
The program’s interim policy note was able to feed into the country's eleventh five-year plan as well
as the new government's electoral agenda. As a result, nutrition was a key focus area in the eleventh
plan and also in the manifesto of the new government. The eleventh plan indicators include specific


18
ones on nutrition, particularly on stunting, and the new government has also listed commitments on
achieving results on the nutrition front.

Promoting Breastfeeding in India (TF013556)
The prevalence of child under-nutrition in South Asia is very high. With iron deficiency in under-
fives ranging from 55% and 81% in Bhutan, India, Nepal and Bangladesh, and sub-clinical Vitamin
A deficiency in children under six years ranging between 28%
and 57%, South Asia is also home to persistently high levels
of micronutrient deficiencies (iron, vitamin A and iodine).        India, Bangladesh, Pakistan,
Despite rising household incomes, undernutrition continues         Afghanistan, and Nepal are
to be high, even amongst the richest quintiles (e.g. 26% of        among the 36 countries in
children in the highest wealth quintiles in India, 26% in          the world that account for
Pakistan and 30% in Bangladesh are underweight). One of            90% of the global child
the explanations for this Asian Enigma is its association with     malnutrition burden.
women’s overall status, as well as their nutritional status
throughout their lives, from childhood through adolescence and
adulthood, early marriage, and early and frequent childbirths.
Besides food insecurity, the other important drivers of malnutrition in South Asia are: i) inadequate
water and sanitation coverage, ii) gender inequality, and iii) inadequate childcare. Optimal infant and
young child feeding practices (IYCF) remain very critical to childcare. Optimal IYCF practices,
especially breastfeeding, play a significant role in reducing diarrhea, pneumonia and thus stunting, as
well as in preventing child undernutrition and deaths from neonatal infections, diarrhea and
pneumonia. IYCF practices in South Asia remain far from satisfactory, and action to strengthen
policy and program support to enhance optimum IYCF practices across South Asian countries is
both urgent and important.
This task supports the Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India (BPNI) in their effort to highlight
gaps in policy, programs and investments to enhance breastfeeding rates. It also aims to engage
various sectors of the government, policy makers, funding agencies and civil society groups from
South Asia countries and build their capacities to mainstream IYCF in the national agendas.

Gender Equality and Social Inclusion for Food and Nutrition Security Nepal
(TF015361)
In conjunction with two World Bank activities requested by the government of Nepal, this activity
leverages the work of two projects: (i) Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project, and (ii) the
Community Action for Nutrition Project. The goal of this work is to support the development and
incorporation of gender-aware, and culturally appropriate behavioral change communication (BCC)
messages to improve the effectiveness of food and nutrition security projects in Nepal.
Since the summer of 2013, the programs have been incorporating greater gender sensitivity in
developing behavior change messages for nutrition, as well as incorporating gender sensitivity into
the Ministry of Agriculture’s policies and programming.

19
In particular, local input has allowed the messaging to be relevant to the local context, bringing the
voice of the beneficiaries to the forefront of the design of the IYCF messaging.
Second, the research would contribute an
understanding of knowledge and beliefs, attitudes
and practices that prevail with regard to care             Stimulating Donor Collaboration
practices and decision-making for different                The USAID-funded SUAAHARA Project
member of the household including fathers and              plans to conduct formative research on
mother-in-laws, across the major ethnic and caste          nutrition related behaviors that will
groups in two major regions of Nepal. The                  supplement the SAFANSI work in two ways:
research also captures the perspective and possible
                                                           • It will focus on socially-excluded groups;
roles of pharmacists and vendors, health care                  and
workers, and media in improving the nutritional            • It will allow for adaptable
practices. The evidence gathered will lead to                  communication tools using participatory
designing of BCC messages that are most effective              methodologies.
in actually resulting in change in practices, rather
than mere increasing awareness, among individuals
linked to caring for mother and child during this critical stage. Such knowledge and associated
“social marketing” strategies will be used, not only in better designing the interventions and
implementation strategies for current projects, but also in the design of future FNS projects or even
projects outside of the sector operating in those areas.
Third, the development of a sector level results framework could catalyze the inclusion of gender
and social inclusion early in the project cycle of future investments in a concrete, sustained, and
measurable way. This exercise will help the government better assess level of gender and social
inclusion in agriculture and nutrition sector projects, so that it can better prioritize and allocate
resources to operationalize the findings of the extensive existing background work. For instance, the
study will identify measures to mainstream GESI in agriculture specific policies (such as seed,
fertilizer, subsidy and marketing), to understand gender differentiated division of labor for selected
agricultural subsectors, and to improve access to production resources and inputs of women and
members from marginalized groups, among others. The tool will also help managers to better design
future projects with the ability to track performance on gender and social inclusion. For the tool to
be used and valuable, the process has involved understanding the needs and value-add of this
exercise, while working closely with the government and other development partners. The
consultation and dissemination activities would develop capacity at these ministries that will impact
future projects in Nepal.




20
How Communities Manage Food and
Nutrition
Using a Social Observatory to Monitor Community Food and Nutrition
Security in India (TF011993)
In India, SAFANSI is working with many
communities with the goal of improving food and
nutrition indicators across the country using
                                                            The Social Observatory is an
integrated and gender-smart solutions.
                                                            integrated learning system
The project is creating a Social Observatory (SO)           incorporating various monitoring and
within the largest rural livelihoods project ever           evaluation tools to measure change,
implemented in the world, in order to change the            assess the effectiveness of the
culture of project monitoring and evaluation by             project, and pinpoint design and
more scientific techniques, the principle of open           implementation challenges.
data access, and attention to processes of change.
This enables the identification of which pathways to
food and nutrition work, and which pathways are most
effective.
Over the last year, 11 impact evaluations that examine how different elements of the UNICEF
framework contribute to improved FNS outcomes have been designed, and baseline surveys are
complete for 5 impact evaluations. Additionally, Management Information Systems (MIS) are being
set up for two FNS focused interventions. Seven research projects have helped to identify current
learning needs, define an appropriate case study or quick turnaround survey, and then implement
interventions based on these.

Addressing Nutritional Needs in Bihar, India (TF012081)
The World Bank’s Regional Assistance Strategy (RAS) for nutrition, 2010-2015 identified a study of
nutrition sensitive actions in multiple sectors in one geographical area as one of the key approaches
to improve nutrition in South Asia. In this context, the state of Bihar in India has been chosen as the
geographical focus area for experimenting with multisectoral approaches in nutrition, and to explore
the possibility for mainstreaming food and nutrition initiatives across sectors.
The SAFANSI work being done in Bihar has addressed effectively mainstreaming nutrition sensitive
actions across multiple sectors and program platforms to enhance their food and nutrition security
impact. This has demonstrated improved nutritional outcomes in specified geographical areas
through incorporation of nutrition actions in World Bank operations across Rural Livelihoods,
Local Government (Panchayati Raj Institutions) and Water and Sanitation sectors. The objective is
being measured through improved food and nutrition indicators in three Bank operations of

21
different sectors in Bihar: (i) the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project, which is ongoing with
development of the design of Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot within it and its roll out; (ii)
the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project; and (iii) the Rural Water and Sanitation Project for Low
Income States.
Over the last year the SAFANSI work in Bihar has been able to accomplish the incorporation of
nutrition sensitive interventions in the three World Bank Sectoral Projects mentioned above. Of
these, two were new projects, which were under development and provided an opportunity to
engage with in its early stages of formulation in order to provide technical inputs and support to
incorporate nutrition actions within them. The ongoing Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project developed
the design of the Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Model with technical support from the
World Bank. An external evaluation of this model is under finalization.
The specific SAFANSI inputs in the Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence pilot of the Bihar Rural
Livelihoods Project includes technical support to develop the design of the pilot as well as support
the implementation of the pilot during the feasibility phase. In addition, technical support is
provided for developing Training Modules and Training of Trainers related to the pilot and in the
development of the Kitchen Garden module within the Food and Nutrition Security Component.
The Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence pilot being implemented in the feasibility phase has the
potential to be scaled up not only within the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project but also provides the
opportunity to implement this model in other states.
As a key part of this project, poor and vulnerable women are not just beneficiaries of the nutrition
sensitive interventions but agents of change in their community. The project provides support to
women through information
sharing and awareness building,
develops their capacity, and
strengthens their voice and role in
decision-making. It also facilitates
women’s access to resources and
services so that they can meet
their own nutrition and health
needs as well as for their families
and community.
An external evaluation of the
Multisectoral Convergence Model
is planned which will not only assess the outcomes and impact of nutrition sensitive interventions
on nutrition outcomes, but would also include the impact on women’s empowerment through this
model.
A map of Bihar and the districts covered by the Projects is shown above.




22
Community Managed FNS Initiatives in India (TF012676)
SAFANSI continues to support an effort to enhance institutional capacity of rural livelihood
projects for effective planning, designing, implementation and monitoring of food security and
nutrition initiatives.
A project addressing community managed FNS initiatives in high poverty states has been working
with the Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty (SERP) in Andhra Pradesh, with a team of
consultants and community professionals to provide training, capacity building and hand holding
support to State Rural Livelihoods Missions to the states of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.
A bio-metric based MIS pilot for Community Managed Nutrition and Care Centers (CNCCs) in
Bihar has been successfully completed, and the project also informed the design of a new generation
nutrition operation via Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (APRIGP), which aims to
link agriculture livelihoods to household level nutrition security. A paper comparing the CMHN
approach with other national and international experiences, particularly Oportunidades (Mexico) and
Familia Bolsa (Brazil), was developed to document lessons from integration of social protection
programs with nutrition outcomes and inform the project design.
Impressively, a strategic partnership has been developed with Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
(BMGF) and Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and allied Trusts to enhance community capacity for accessing
health and nutrition services and establish effective linkages with agriculture and nutritionally
relevant food enterprises. The project has also developed a typology of 30 such initiatives, such as
those focusing on behavior change communication, community monitoring of CMHN activities,
capacity building of frontline workers and nutrition diversification. Typology helps to understand
various community lead and driven sanitation approaches in India to help learn, design and
implement similar approaches in community driven rural livelihood programs supported by State
Governments and the Bank and is the first attempt to put this information at one place. This
typology has been used by various programs being implemented by state governments and civil
society organizations to learn and draw lessons for design and implementation. These cases will also
be presented at a workshop on Community Driven approaches for achieving nutrition outcomes to
be organized later in 2014.



Mobilizing Communities to Address Nutrition and Promote Good Health in
Nepal (TF013868)
SAFANSI, through its SUNITA program, is
measuring the effectiveness of the Nepal
Sunaula Hazar Din Community Action for
Nutrition Project (SHD-CANP) and exploring
which mechanisms contribute to its success.
The baseline survey was completed in early
2014, as was the results framework along with
the delivery of subsequent coaches training to

23
over 290 people. The coaches were trained with specific instructions on how to perform the
coaching so that the impact evaluation design was followed.
Throughout the training many visual examples were used to promote good behaviors and prevent
bad ones. The illustrated images above and below promote the importance of frequent
breastfeeding, as well as reducing pregnant women’s exposure to smoke.




Community Based Behavior Change for Nutrition in Nepal (TF012285)
In another effort via the SUNITA funding mechanism, a project introduced a multi-sectoral, results-
based community mobilization approach in favor of improved nutrition, with the expectation that
the lessons learned would inform the government's Operational Manual for the best approach
identified to address improved nutrition. The operations manual for the Sunaula Hazar Din-
Community Action for Nutrition Project, which has
been prepared by the government, envisions a
multisectoral approach. Additionally, the effort aims
to sensitize communities and build the readiness to
engage in the program both at the local level and
Government level. The project completed piloting
the Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives (RRNIs)
in four communities during the 100-day pilot cycle.
Before the project, the team reported that many
women would hide their early-term pregnancies and
would be expected to eat “least and last” in their
households. Many men also would smoke and or
drink while their wives were pregnant. As a result of
this project team members say that women are now
open about their pregnancies and visit the health
post and female health volunteers earlier and more
regularly. Both women and men have had a
significant attitude change towards the diets of
pregnant women, ensuring that the women are able        A mother helping her young son eat his daily egg

24
to eat nutritiously and on time. In some households, husbands have even taken on a bigger share of
the physical labor that is usually assigned to women during their pregnancies. Additionally, more
households are now voluntarily spending more money on other sources of animal protein, such as
fish, meat or milk for pregnant mothers.
This project has facilitated the process of changing social norms and values. Now, instead of hiding
pregnancies, women are open about their condition and get better access to better food.
The RRN initiatives, which will now be rolled out in a phased manner in 15 districts under the
project, will enable individual Wards to undertake more than one 100-day plan, and thereby support
that community to address the malnutrition problem. The project has resulted in a massive scale-up
of these initiatives and now involves over 800 of new initiatives as of the beginning of June 2014.
As of the beginning of June 2014, 800 of these community-driven initiatives have started in 10
districts, the total value of which is approximately USD 1.2 million equivalent. The results of the
pilot program mentioned in the report were also endorsed by the team members, and a separate
impact evaluation study will further inform the project by doing an independent assessment of the
scale up of community-driven initiatives, which is ongoing.




25
Creating Tools for Practitioners
SAFANSI has taken a multi-sector approach to address food and nutrition security in South Asia
that includes the development of a robust tool that takes into consideration multiple, specific factors
in a particular location, and builds an appropriate solution that is targeted, and straightforward to
implement. As opposed to developing a solution that only addresses one issue in one sector, the
tools developed address what vector and behavioral changes are needed and provides a “roadmap”
to target specific solutions. This approach has yielded great success as it has been applied, and now
is being scaled and made available to other stakeholders. Several examples of these tools are below.

A Multi-sectoral Simulation Tool (MST) for Scaling Up Nutrition (TF098429)
SAFANSI’s Multisectoral Simulation Tool (MST) helps countries understand how different
types of interventions at varying scales are likely to affect the impact on nutritional outcomes and
the cost of reaching their goals. It can also be easily adapted to fit the particular circumstances
facing a country or district. It is based on the UNICEF framework that highlights the importance of
having adequate food, health and care.
Most documents and strategic documents written
about malnutrition problem highlight the difficulties
associated with malnutrition being a multisectoral             A web-based version of the MST
problem; however, they do not really offer any                 has allowed local planning
particular solution to the problem or any way to               officials and experts to offer
manage the inherent complexities.                              guidance on improving the design
                                                               and implementation of programs
The MST produces products, like high-level maps, that          and to identify critical activities,
allow one to “see the forest”. It showcases the                knowledge gaps, and the highest
relationship between health status and nutritional status      payoffs to filling those gaps.
and that the effect goes in both directions. It can also
show dependencies, such as the outcome of births on
the initial conditions associated with the drivers of nutritional and health status. The map also
identifies some specific interventions that, depending on their program effectiveness and scale,
would be expected to affect nutritional status directly or indirectly acting through health status.
The goal of this tool is get the information into the hands of government decision-makers to address
FNS. Each country, indeed each district, starts from different initial conditions and this, coupled
with the fact that nutrition is a multisectoral problem, makes the problem complex. The
multisectoral simulation tool represents an attempt to help countries manage that complexity.
The real innovation of this tool lies within the interactive features available. One can unfurl the
logic for a better understanding of lower level models, and can run simulations to capture the
behavior of models. Below is an example of the tool, showing the high-level map of the system,
using the same input-output outcome classification in work that is already used related to results.



26
Bangladesh was chosen as the initial country in which this work would be undertaken because of
the presence of the Bangladesh Nutrition Council and the initiation of the REACH initiative. The
work on the MST has complemented the efforts made by those two entities. The program’s
extension to other countries in South Asia should be considered.
The previous leadership of the Bangladesh National Nutrition Services program had expressed
interest in using the MST for its planning and monitoring of the country's nutrition program, but
over the last 6 months, there have been at least 3 changes in the leadership of the Unit. As a result,
the tool is yet to be operationalized. Going forward, the World Bank team is planning to engage the
new leadership to discuss how the tool can be operationalized during the second half of the project.

Using Political Economy Analysis to address Food and Nutrition Security
(TF010794)
The importance of the interaction of political and economic processes in a society is critical to build
a responsive, legitimate and resilient nation. 3 The relationships created between the state, market
forces and civil society are all important factors in this development process.
Over the last several years SAFANSI developed an applied political economy framework to better
understand and promote FNS programs and initiatives across the seven countries in the South Asian
region. This framework has provided a deeper understanding of the politics of FNS at various
stages of the policy cycle, including: agenda setting, policy design, policy adoption (e.g. informal
bargaining, legislation, etc.) and policy implementation.


3

http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/ourwork/democraticgovernance/oslo_governance_centre/analysis_and_learning/political_economy
analysis.html

27
SAFANSI is, in fact, a political economy approach to gradually enhancing the commitment of
governments and Development Partners to more effective FNS programs. Most of SAFANSI’s
activities are intended to either influence policymakers or the way in which they receive information
on the FNS issue, with the eventual aim of affecting the way in which these policy makers allocate
resources for FNS programs. Political economy engagements in the form of a consensual dialogue
with the governments, ministries and development partners in each South Asian country have
narrowed and enhanced the drive of the FNS policy agenda.
For example:
     •   Nutrition Assessment and Capacity Building in Bhutan
     •   Supporting Afghanistan’s High Level Task Force on Food and Nutrition Security
     •   Supporting Nepal’s High Level Task Force on Food and Nutrition Security (of National
         Planning Commission)
     •   Enhancing National Commitment for an Evidence-based and Gender-sensitive Multi-
         sectoral Response to the Food and Nutrition Security Challenge in Pakistan
     •   Revitalizing Bangladesh National Nutrition Council (BNNC)
     •   Raising the Profile of Nutrition as an Agenda for High Level Policy Makers in Sri Lanka
SAFANSI also published a report that was later published in the World Bank HNP Paper series,
which promotes the use of political economy analysis (PEA) in advancing more effective food and
nutrition policies. The paper reviews the field of applied political economy for the food and
nutrition sector, and offers practical guidance on how to conduct political economy analysis to
better navigate the policy reform process. It provides SAFANSI, as well as national governments
and development partners, to develop more politically feasible strategies for policy reform. The
paper proposes that investing in PEA and developing capacity to conduct such analyses can help
improve the effectiveness of the policy reform process and achieve better outcomes in the food and
nutrition sector in the South Asia region and beyond.
The paper offers 3 types of Political Economy Analysis:
            i.   In-depth PEA: The first type of political economy analysis is conducted primarily
                 for background or academic purposes, and does not necessarily lead to specific
                 actions or decisions. They are mainly conducted by researchers with knowledge of
                 the PE literature and training in associated methods.
           ii.   Stakeholder PEA: The second type of political economy analysis is more focused
                 and aims to assist in decision-making and negotiations on a specific policy. This type
                 of analysis may require some training in political economy analysis, but can generally
                 be conducted by a policy analyst with some additional guidance or instruction.
          iii.   Rapid Assessment PEA: The third type of political economy analysis provides a
                 rapid assessment that can be used to measure political commitment for FNS and
                 identify specific opportunities for policy reform. The rapid assessment method
                 proposed in Part III of this paper uses a questionnaire that covers key analytical
                 themes. This rapid analysis can be carried out by an informed policy analyst, without
                 special training.
28
SAFANSI has been able to leverage the “ease of use” of the Rapid Assessment Tool (RAT).
This approach is much more accessible to stakeholders; thus scalable. It is easier to collect
information from informed responders to capture the current level of commitment to food and
nutrition security. It is unique in that it combines stakeholder analysis with metrics of political
commitment and reform opportunity.
The RAT has three purposes:
     1. Assess the current level of political commitment;
     2. Assess opportunities to advance food and nutrition security; and
     3. Analysis to identify obstacles to achieving the desired goals.
The Rapid Assessment Tool can also be adapted to be carried out at the regional and sub-national
levels, and can be used with either a group interview session, or with an individual expert. The
strength in the tool lies in the ability to easily capture the level of priority given to the issue as well as
the political opportunities to advance food and nutrition related policies. Additionally, it can be
rapidly administered at specific intervals, generating a measure that can be used for comparisons
between countries/states, and over time.
For the PEA’s dissemination, a large video conference was held with policymakers and civil society
members in the region to launch the product. Attendees provided positive feedback and expressed
sincere interest in replicating the model. Several countries have already committed to using the tool
to undertake political economy assessments of FNS issues in their respective countries. The PEA is
available on the web and as a part of WB Health and Nutrition, Population paper series.




29
Agriculture and Food and Nutrition
Security
Food security is undoubtedly affected by agricultural intervention, as access to food and eventually
more nutritionally dense foods is one of the first steps to creating an environment for improved
health outcomes, increased food availability and ultimately caring and feeding patterns. SAFANSI
has been addressing FNS issues through targeted agricultural programs over the last four years.

Improving Agricultural Productivity through Farmer Field Schools in
Bangladesh (TF016677)
In Nepal, SAFANSI has been supporting the Integrated Agricultural Productivity Project (IAPP)
impact evaluation, which studies the effectiveness of the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach to
provide insight into how group members can improve agricultural productivity, ultimately leading to
improved food security and nutrition outcomes. It studies:
(1) To what extent does the FFS approach promoted by IAPP cause increased technology adoption,
increased income, and improved nutritional outcomes
(2) What level of adoption is driven from increased subsidies (demonstration farmers) versus
knowledge and learning (adoption farmers)
(3) What are the differential effects for male versus female group members
(4) Do the groups have spillover effects on other farmers who are not members and
(5) What are the long versus short run effects of IAPP? Do income effects allow continued adoption
of improved crops?
SAFANSI supported the IAPP evaluation through funding data collection and analysis of a mid-line
survey, as well as the production of an impact evaluation report detailing the effect of IAPP on key
nutrition and food security indicators.

Foodgrains Storage and Trade Policy in India (TF014636)
At the request of the Government of India’s Chief Economic Advisor, the World Bank assessed the
efficacy of grain storage and trade policies for wheat in India. The assessment focused on the central
issue of price stability for foodgrains and evaluating the implications of alternative policy options for
total welfare (broadly defined as the welfare of consumers, producers) and for fiscal costs.
The study finds that current policies have been very successful in stabilizing wheat prices, but that
the existing trade and storage policies have not been not well coordinated in India. Further, in the
absence of clearly defined rules for the release of grains, the storage policy frequently translates into
a buy-and-hold strategy, resulting in very large and costly stock build ups. The study developed a
sophisticated model to evaluate policy options for a large economy such as India, incorporating the

30
social preference for price stability as a policy objective, with a view to assess current policies and
identify more efficient and cost-effective alternatives.
An important implication of the findings is that they challenge the general assumption and policy
prescription, that free trade is unconditionally the optimal policy even when policy makers are
concerned about price volatility. Given a policy preference for relatively stable domestic prices, a
combination of trade and storage policy interventions seems preferable for an individual country,
even a large country like India. The second major finding is that significant cost reduction could be
achieved through a domestic storage policy that relies more on competitive storage principles than
the current costly public management structure. A paper has been written and is currently under
review for publication in a highly respected economic journal. There will be formal publication of
this work via the World Bank’s channels including but not limited to briefing notes, internet press
releases, formal publications, meetings and various events, and workshops.

Improving Food Security in Tribal Areas in India (TF012122)
SAFANSI has been studying the complex dimensions of food security and nutrition in tribal and
backward areas of India, in order to inform possible intervention strategies focusing on the
livelihoods of the tribal populations. The goal is to strengthen the capacity of governments and
communities to deliver effective FNS interventions in tribal and conflict-affected areas.
Additionally, this work is specifically aimed to support the Bank-supported National Rural Livelihoods
Mission.
Thus far, several pilot interventions have been designed and implemented to assessing
improvements in nutrition and food security in the tribal areas selected. For example, one of the
pilots has used entitlement cards (food rationing cards) to create pull pressure on Government services
related to food and nutrition in tribal communities. The project has also conducted a pilot study on
hand washing and clean water storage behavior change, as well as a study to support traditional
agriculture.

Strengthening         Agricultural      Education        and      Policy     Making       in    India
(TF014041)
In addition to the other agricultural initiatives that aim to better serve FNS objectives, SAFANSI has
been supporting a knowledge exchange to facilitate the reform of the Agricultural Education System
and options for the Food Grain Management/Trade systems.
The National Academy of Agricultural Sciences (NAAS) is planning to compile a proceedings book
to be forwarded to the Prime Minister, who has expressed strong support for agricultural research,
extension and education reforms. Strong follow up action was promised by the lead agencies
involved (State Agricultural Universities and ICAR) with follow up by NAAS. There is also a
proposal being prepared for a project to be submitted to the World Bank for consideration of
funding to help strengthen the Higher Agricultural Education System in India.




31
Agriculture and Food Security in Nepal (TF016678)
Nepal ranks in the top 20 of 197 countries in the latest Climate Change Vulnerability Index. With
growing male migration, the burden of dealing with the effects of climate change falls increasingly
on women farmers. At the Agriculture Research Centre in Jumla, women farmers are trained in
sustainable agricultural technologies that preserve the delicate ecological balance in the mountains of
Nepal.
Recently commenced, the SAFANSI’s
Agriculture and Food Security project
aims to study the effectiveness of
AFSP’s agricultural initiatives on yield,
income and nutritional practices as well
as the effect of Behavior Change
Communication (BCC) which is
designed to increase the demand for
nutritious food.      Additionally the
project will be studying program
variations in behavioral change
communication messaging. This allows
policymakers to understand which
delivery methods are more effective at      A group of women farmers harvest ginger in the mountains of Jumia,
improving crop productivity, livestock      Nepal.
productivity and feeding practices.

Agricultural Extension and Nutrition through ICT (TF014901)
SAFANSI has been working in the South Asia Region to develop an approach to incorporate a
nutrition dimension into the rural advisory (extension) services in India, specifically through
addressing nutrition curricula in selected State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). This has allowed
the project to explore opportunities for quick impact on the ground through instructional videos
which have been developed with nutritionists and local communities, and disseminated by local
organizations.
The reach and impact of these videos is promising. State Agriculture Universities in Tamil Nadu
and Andra Pradesh in India have done exceptionally well in developing nutritional curriculum. Of
those surveyed who are involved in the development process, there is high level of dichotomy
between the agricultural extension and the rural nutrition services offered by the social welfare
department.
The project has identified additional opportunities to link with the recently launched extension
system where farmers and women farmers could be given focused nutrition education. This will
require developing the capacity of the village extension workers through improved course content
that will involve better agriculture-nutrition linkages. A video production company, DigitalGreen,
has been engaged and has agreed to work with agreed with JEEVIKA, the World Bank-supported
Rural Livelihoods Project in Bihar, to facilitate the production of informational videos to show
32
communities how to be more efficient and increase yields. DigitalGreen has the architecture to
disseminate videos thorough smartphones and a YouTube channel; the Bank will also engage a
promotional campaign to compliment these promotional activities as is appropriate. Additionally,
JEEVIKA has developed a project MIS module, started generating MIS reports and is also
commissioning independent evaluation of this initiative. Results from this learning will be shared in
the coming year with all development partners including DFID India in a workshop.




33
Appendix 1: Update of Active SAFANSI Grants by Country:
Reporting Period 1 April 2013—31 March 2014

Afghanistan

SAFANSI            TF015365            Grant         Visualizing Stunting in Afghanistan: A Call for Concerted Action
Grant                                  Name

Grant Objective:

The Objective of this task will be to develop a visual advocacy tool—thought-provoking videos—to raise the awareness and commitment of
Afghanistan policy-makers and the entire population in order to help them shape the country’s response to the problem of chronic under-
nutrition.

Grant Start Date      08/15/2013               Grant Completion Date       11/30/2014

Activities Update:

Project has engaged the Public Nutrition Department in the Ministry of Public Health to develop the script for the video. The process for
contracting video production services has commenced.



Bangladesh

SAFANSI            TF016363            Grant         Nutrition and Food Security Implications of Rural Growth in Bangladesh



34
Grant                                     Name

Grant Objective:

Inform the food security and nutrition dimensions of the Government of Bangladesh’s agricultural and rural development strategy and the
relevant World Bank operations. Specifically, it will inform the implementation of the current and next Five Year Plans. The analysis will also
provide input into the food security components of the Five Year Plans and the ongoing National Food Policy Plan of Action 2008-2015.

Grant Start Date        1/12/2014                 Grant Completion Date          12/31/2014

Activities Update:

Studies on non-farm drivers of rural growth; agricultural productivity and diversity; linking farm and non-farm activities (value chain analysis); and
impacts of changing agricultural production on nutrition and future prospects for food security are underway. Data preparation on drivers of
agricultural productivity for econometric analysis have been prepared and the market surveys are being completed.




SAFANSI             TF016677              Grant           Impact Evaluation of Bangladesh Integrated Agricultural Productivity Project (IAPP)
Grant                                     Name

Grant Objective:

To study the effectiveness of the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach to provide insight into how group members can improve agricultural
productivity, leading to improved food security and nutrition outcomes.

Grant Start Date        2/14/2014                 Grant Completion Date          3/31/2015

Activities Update:




35
The grant started in February 2014, so no work had commenced by the end of the reporting period.




SAFANSI            TF099422              Grant          Impact Assessment of Bangladesh CCT Pilot through Local Governments
Grant                                    Name

Grant Objective:

To conduct an assessment of the Bangladesh conditional cash transfer pilot in order to improve the program’s design and implementation.

Grant Start Date       3/23/2011                 Grant Completion Date        6/30/2014

Activities Update:

The endline survey was completed and the impact evaluation report is being finalized. The team has also prepared a qualitative evaluation of the
projectt. Findings show little impact on education outcomes but significant impact on some nutrition indicators. Based on the preliminary
analysis, the Government of Bangladesh requested a roll-out of the pilot nationwide. The results from both evaluations have been instrumental in
the design of a new Conditional Cash Transfer operation (P146520) which will be approved this year and will scale up the pilot from 3 to 28
project locations. Lessons from the pilot, particularly on payment systems, are being used to inform other safety net payment systems in
Bangladesh, including the Bank-financed Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (P118701). Lessons from Bangladesh on the use of
electronic payments have been disseminated at the recent South-South Learning Forum (Designing and Delivering Social Protection and Labor
Systems) held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in March 2014.



India

SAFANSI            TF011993              Grant          Social Observatory for the NRLM: Food Security and Nutrition Focus
Grant                                    Name


36
Grant Objective:

To improve food and nutrition indicators in India, through the identification of integrated and gender-smart pathways to improved food and
nutrition security.

Grant Start Date        3/7/2012                   Grant Completion Date          3/31/2015

Activities Update:

All objectives have either been achieved, exceeded, or adapted to suit changing implementation contexts:
     •   4 rigorous impact evaluations of FNS focused interventions are ongoing (baseline complete);
     •   3 baselines have been completed and tested for FNS outcomes;
     •   7 of 12 guidance notes have been prepared and completed related to improved evidence and analysis on the most effective ways to
         achieve FNS outcomes;
     •   3 of 4 relevant workshops and advocacy events completed, related to improved awareness of FNS-related challenges, and advocacy for
         action, amongst relevant stakeholders;
     •   130 of 200 high-profile senior policy makers and opinion leaders sensitized/ “trained”;
     •   50 out of 100 planning and follow up meetings for the social observatory with high profile policy makers and academics have been held;
         and
     •   8 put of 12 high level project staff trained to independently carry out the activities of the Social Observatory.
In particular (i) 11 impact evaluations that examine how different elements of the UNICEF framework contribute to improved FNS outcomes
have been designed, and baseline surveys are complete for 5 impact evaluations; (ii) MIS systems are being set up for two FNS focused
interventions; (iii) the design qualitative evaluations is complete, and data collection is underway; (iv) 7 action research projects, that support the
capacity of projects to identify learning needs, define an appropriate case study or quick turn around survey, and then implement interventions
based on these have been supported.




37
SAFANSI            TF012081               Grant          Multi-sectoral Nutrition Actions in Bihar
Grant                                     Name

Grant Objective:

With the overall objective of effectively mainstreaming nutrition sensitive actions across multiple sectors and program platforms to enhance their
food and nutrition security impact, the PDO of this initiative is to demonstrate improved nutritional outcomes in a specified geographical area
through incorporation of nutrition actions in World Bank operations across several sectors.

Grant Start Date       4/9/2012                   Grant Completion Date         3/31/2015

Activities Update:

1. In the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP), a community level convergence model has been designed for implementation in areas that are
common to the BRLP and the Kosi Flood Recovery Project. The model promotes coordination between community groups and local
government service providers (nutrition, health and sanitation) for improved nutrition outcomes, in addition to promoting household level food
security and behavior change for adoption of appropriate feeding and caring practices, particularly for pregnant/nursing mothers and children
under two. Roll-out of the interventions, initially on a pilot scale, will begin soon.
2. The design of nutrition actions within the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project was finalized during project preparation. The project has just
been declared effective; and implementation will happen alongside project implementation.
3. With respect to the RWSS-LIS (which is proposed for 4 low income states, including Bihar), strong linkages with relevant nutrition and health
aspects have been incorporated in the initial design and are reflected in the PAD. The detailed design will be developed as the project preparation
proceeds further.




SAFANSI            TF012122               Grant          Improving Food Security in Tribal Areas
Grant                                     Name



38
Grant Objective:

To strengthen the capacity of government and/or communities to deliver effective food and nutrition security interventions in tribal and conflict-
affected areas.The PDO would be achieved by (1) developing the evidence base for and designing pilot interventions to improve food and
nutrition security in tribal areas; and (2) implementing the pilots and assessing improvements in nutrition and food security in the areas selected.

Grant Start Date        2/13/2012                  Grant Completion Date           6/30/2014

Activities Update:

Component 1: Analysis of Primary Data completed. Final Report including case studies in progress; Policy Briefs and Guidance Notes in
progress. Three notes are envisioned: (1) Study Overview packaged as a dissemination note; (2) Note on the Drivers of Food and Nutrition in
Tribal Areas; (3) Note on the Action Steps that NRLM can take to address FNS in Tribal Areas
Component 2: Pilot Implementation nearing completion. Field Action Report on Pilot Implementation is in progress and dissemination of
final report is being planned.
Piloting promising ideas that emerged from initial desk work, including: Pilot on Entitlement Cards to create pull pressure on government
services related to food and nutrition (PDS, ICDS, MDM) in tribal communities; pilot on hand washing and clean water storage behaviour
change; and a pilot to support traditional agriculture. As the work is in its final stage the endline results, once collected and compiled, will tell the
success stories.




SAFANSI             TF012676               Grant           Community Managed Food and Nutrition Security Initiatives in High Poverty States in
Grant                                      Name            India

Grant Objective:

To enhance institutional capacity of rural livelihood projects for effective planning, designing, implementation and monitoring of food security



39
and nutrition initiatives

Grant Start Date            6/29/2012              Grant Completion Date          12/31/2014

Activities Update:
     •   Four learning notes have been completed
     •   Pilots commenced for Community Managed Food Security and Health and Nutrition Initiatives in two states
     •   Completed 2 briefs on field innovations in the public and civil society sectors on food and nutrition security benefiting from multi-sector
         interventions




SAFANSI              TF014636              Grant           Foodgrains Storage and Trade Policy Options: Tradeoffs and Implications for Food
Grant                                      Name            Security in India A Knowledge Development Activity

Grant Objective:

To assess the efficacy of storage and trade policies, individually and in combination, to promote price stability for foodgrains, and to evaluate the
distributional implications on households’ welfare of the implied policy changes.

Grant Start Date            4/10/2013              Grant Completion Date          9/30/2014

Activities Update:

This grant developed model to evaluate policy options for large economy to assess current policies and identify cost-effective alternatives. A
Decision Meeting for the report, chaired by the Country Director for India, took place in April 24. A draft of the report is ready and is being
finalized. Preliminary findings and the model structure was presented for feedback at two major public events: (1) a gathering of the top policy
makers and researchers in India at the Indian Econometric Society Meeting in Mumbai in December 2013 where it was very well received; and (2)
an international conference organized by the Global Development Network, the IMF, and the OCP Policy Center at Rabat in February 2014.
This is new model to evaluate policy options for price stabilization in a large country. This is a contribution to the existing literature on the topic


40
as, to the best of our knowledge, such a model has not been used before.




SAFANSI            TF014901              Grant          Agricultural Extension and Nutrition through ICTs
Grant                                    Name

Grant Objective:

To develop an approach to incorporate a nutrition dimension into the rural advisory (extension) services in India, specifically through addressing
nutrition curricula in selected State Agricultural Universities (SAUs); and to explore opportunities for quick impact on the ground through
instructional videos developed with nutritionists and local communities developed and disseminated by local organizations.

Grant Start Date                                 Grant Completion Date         10/30/2014

Activities Update:

The target State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) have been selected—Tamil Nadu, Andra Pradesh, and Bihar. A village survey of extension staff
revealed a large dichotomy between the agricultural extension service and the rural nutrition services offered by the social welfare department.
There appears better scope for incorporating agricultural content in the home economics curriculum; however, there are opportunities with the
recently launched extension system where male and female farmers could be given focused nutrition education. This will require developing the
capacity of the village extension workers through improved course contents that will involve better agriculture-nutrition linkages.
The particiaptory video compont has identified Khijasarai block (in Gaya district) and Alauli (in Khagaria district) in the state of Bihar as the
project site and JEEViKA (in Bihar) as the collaborating national program. Digital Green has agreed with JEEVIKA (WB supported Rural
Livelihoods Project in Bihar) to collaborate on the particiaptory video production.




41
Nepal

SAFANSI            TF013868             Grant          Nepal Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project Impact Evaluation
Grant                                   Name

Grant Objective:

To measure the effectiveness of the Nepal Sunaula Hazar Din Community Action for Nutrition Project (SHD-CANP, P125359), and explore
which mechanisms contribute to its success.

Grant Start Date      12/15/2012                Grant Completion Date       3/31/2014

Activities Update:

Impact evaluation design has been finalized and the concept note has been approved by the Bank. The baseline survey for impact evaluation has
been completed.




SAFANSI            TF014834             Grant          Training of social mobilizers and coaches in a results-based community driven approach
Grant                                   Name           to reducing malnutrition.

Grant Objective:

The objective of this assignment is to provide technical assistance to the SHD - Community action for Nutrition Project by (i) preparing
training materials including facilitators’ manual for each goal laid out in the project appraisal document, (ii) preparing training work plan
outlining the timetable, methodology and resources required and train the social mobilizers and coaches to familiarize them with the rapid
results approach of Sunaula Hazar Din project, and (iii) providing backstopping to the social mobilizers and coaches during the period of the
project to successfully run nutrition initiatives in the communities supported by the project.



42
Grant Start Date                               Grant Completion Date        3/31/2014

Activities Update:
This task was delayed from what was originally planned due to several reasons, including a lack of budget release by the government in the
first year of the project. The consultant firm has now been on board for five months and has completed drafting training materials and
methodology of their training work plan; and is expected to complete the first round of training by March31, 2014. Because of the critical
nature of this activity and its link to the project, this would need to be supported under the proposed Nutrition Policy Dialogue III.




SAFANSI            TF015218            Grant          Small Area Estimation of food security and nutrition in Nepal
Grant                                  Name

Grant Objective:

The study provided small area estimates (prevalence, gap and severity) at the sub district level to contribute to programing targeting
assistance, and formulating evidence based policies, to the most food insecure and malnourished population. Specifically, the study aims to
generate small area estimates the following key indicators of food insecurity: undernourishment (measured by kilo calorie intake); and food
poverty (measured by the monetary value of consumption intake expressed in local prices).

Grant Start Date                               Grant Completion Date        3/31/2014

Activities Update:

The task was a joint effort undertaken by the WFP, World Bank and Central Bureau of Statistics, Nepal. The deliverables were achieved and
final report has been produced and is being finalized.




43
SAFANSI             TF015361              Grant         Gender Equality and Social Inclusion for Food and Nutrition Security in Nepal
Grant                                     Name

Grant Objective:

Support the development and incorporation of gender-aware and culturally appropriate behavioral change communications messages to improve
the effectiveness of food and nutrition security projects in Nepal.

Grant Start Date       7/8/2013                   Grant Completion Date       9/30/2014

Activities Update:

Over the last year, the program has been incorporating greater gender sensitivity in developing behavior change messages for nutrition and into
the Ministry of Agriculture’s policies and programming.
A consulting firm has been competitvely selected; the Situation Analysis and Desk Review are complete as is the Research Protocal. Another
consultant has been found to carry out the framework development.




 SAFANSI Grant                 TF016678                      Grant Name            IE of Nepal Agricultural and Food Security Project (AFSP)

 Grant Objective:

 To study (1) the effectiveness of AFSP’s agricultural initiatives on yield, income and nutritional practices; (2) the effect of Behavior Change
 Communication (BCC) which is designed to increase the demand for nutritious food; and (3) program variations in BCC messaging.

 Grant Start Date                  2/3/2014                             Grant Completion Date                      2/28/2015

 Activities Update:



44
 This grant was approved 2 months before the end of the reporting period. A consultant has been recruited to commence work.




SAFANSI            TF098873               Grant          Nepal South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFNSI) Program
Grant                                     Name

Grant Objective:

To build national commitment and capacity for planning and delivering an evidence-based multi-sectoral response to the challenge of food and
nutrition insecurity in Nepal, with a particular focus on inequities related to gender, social exclusion (caste, religion), poverty, and geographic
location.

Grant Start Date       1/10/2011                  Grant Completion Date         6/30/2014

Activities Update:

The original outputs were combined into a multi-sectoral action plan that includes plans from 5 ministries.The grant (i) established the
Secretariat at the National Planning Commission (NPC) to support the implementation of the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan, and direct support
financing three experts: a communications officer, a nutrition officer, and a monitoring and evaluation officer; (ii) completed an assessment of
capacity for multi-sectoral action for nutrition at the community and local level, done jointly with the Nepal UNICEF Country Office; (iii)
completed a strategic communication and advocacy plan, which the Secretariat is incorporating into the communications strategic framework it
is preparing; and (iv) completed two papers, one on targeting indicators for food insecure households and the other on targeting indicators for
households with malnourished children. Based on the initial papers, the expert review has recommended that it would be useful to do further
analysis using alternate indicators of food security, so the work is ongoing.




45
Pakistan

SAFANSI            TF011848               Grant           Child Nutritional Outcomes and Community Based Health Service Provision: Evidence
Grant                                     Name            from a Randomized Field Experiment in Rural Pakistan

Grant Objective:

To test whether greater involvement of women in community based health provision can improve child nutritional and health outcomes and to
understand the specific pathways through which such improvements are obtained.

Grant Start Date       2/13/2012                  Grant Completion Date          3/31/2015

Activities Update:

Grant closing date extended to March 2015. Midline data was analyzed, presented to PPAF, and discussed with regional colleagues during the
April 2014 msision. The detailed modules fielded at midline have paid off in the quality of diagnostic information available and in looking at the
impact of inclusion mandates on health outcomes and behaviors resulting purely from empowerment activities—i.e., before VDP funds have
been used to change infrastructure or household income. The overall diagnostic picture is disturbing. The scale of problem is significant and
alarming. More than two-thirds of water at source and three-fourths of water held in storage containers was significantly contaminated, but less
than 4% of households actually treated their water in any way. Also, 1 in 3 households has no toilet facility at all, so open defacation by children
and field defacation is common. Close to one-half of children and one-third of adults walk barefoot in the village. Over 80 percent of
households said they used soap, but only two-thirds had any soap in the home. Only one-third reported washing their hands after cleaning a
child's bottom and only 18 percent said they washed their hands before feeding children. The team is preparing a full report for discussion with
colleagues in the early fall and designing a set of interventions around these key problems. The impact of inclusion mandates on both health
outcomes and behaviors was weak; however, we see a strong impact on perceptions about women among the young, and young men in
particular. These could have knock-on effects on health—which we will assess at endline in December.




46
SAFANSI            TF014344             Grant          Long-run Economic Effects of Childhood Nutrition and Health Status in Pakistan
Grant                                   Name

Grant Objective:

To test whether poor nutrition in utero and in early childhood has adverse consequences for adult life labor outcomes and to understand the
determinants of childhood malnutrition and the intervening pathways through which effects of early malnutrition may persist through different
stages of childhood and adolescence into early adulthood.

Grant Start Date      2/15/2013                 Grant Completion Date        3/31/2015

Activities Update:

An agreement between 5 partner organizations [PPAF, PIDE, R&D Solutions, SSC, and NRSP] was made on the basis of working
collaboratively for more effective and integrated food security and nutrition actions.
The team now has a fully integrated panel on child nutrition, etc. from 1986 tp 2010. The team infomally presented findings in April; a more
formal presentation is planned for December 2014 in collboration with PPAF and PIDE.




Regional

SAFANSI            TF013549             Grant          Strengthening Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) Capacity in South Asia Region
Grant                                   Name

Grant Objective:

To enhance government and stakeholder capacity and commitment in the South Asia Region to strengthen policies and programs for Infant and
Young Child Feeding, particularly breastfeeding.



47
Grant Start Date          11/26/2012                   Grant Completion Date            1/31/2015

Activities Update:

The team has successfully engaged with governments and civil society in South Asian countries on Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF)
issues. The World Breastfeeding Conference 2012 was organized successfully in December 2012 with more than 700 participants representing 83
countries. Following the conference a South Asia Workshop was organized involving 40 participants from 8 South Asian countries, which
resulted in the development of draft country action plans to strengthen IYCF practices and programs. The recipient also developed and launched
a South Asia Report Card as an advocacy tools for use by SAR countries and organized advocacy meetings in three South Asian countries –
Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Nepal. Other project activities are ongoing and are due to be successfully completed soon. Specifically over the last
year:
     •   The project successfully developed an Analytical Report on Infant and Young Child Feeding titled, “Are We Doing Enough for Our Babies?
         Trend analysis in infant and young child feeding policies, programmes and practices in South Asia”, which was used as an effective tool for mobilizing a
         number of advocacy and media events in four countries – India, Bangladesh, Nepal and Afghanistan.
     •   This report was followed by the launch of a costing study on scaling up breastfeeding/infant and young child feeding interventions titled
         “The Need to Invest in Babies: A Global Drive for Financial Investment in Children’s Health and Development through universalizing interventions for
         optimal breastfeeding” on December 10, 2013 by the Deputy Chairperson, Planning Commission, Government of India, along with the
         Member, Planning Commission, responsible for Nutrition and the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government
         of India.
     •   Building on the momentum gained through these reports and with the objective of supporting governments operationalize their
         commitment on the issue, the project initiated the process of strengthening a 4-in-1 training program on IYCF for building capacities of
         health and nutrition workers on IYCF. Once developed it will be used to train trainers of government and civil society programs.




48
SAFANSI            TF013556               Grant           Supervision of Grant to Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India
Grant                                     Name

Grant Objective:

To finance supervision of the recipient-executed SAFANSI grant entitled "Strengthening Infant and Young Child Feeding Capacity in SAR" to
be implemented by the Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India (BPNI).

Grant Start Date       11/9/2012                  Grant Completion Date          3/31/2015

Activities Update:

Grant used for administrative support and supervision of TF013549.




SAFANSI Grant               TF014546                         Grant Name            Towards understanding the effects of food price policies on
                                                                                   food and nutritional security in South Asia

Grant Objective:

To generate empirical evidence on effects of food price stabilization policies on food and nutritional security, to examine the extent to which
markets for food commodities are integrated (regionally and also within countries) and its effects on availability of food, and to use the empirical
evidence to draw recommendations for a regional food price stabilization agenda for improved food and nutritional security


Grant Start Date                  4/8/2013                              Grant Completion Date                       12/31/2014

Activities Update:



49
The team found that data was not readily available and spent considerable time working with National Statistics Offices and other government
departments to assemble the data. This process helped build some capacity for monitoring as the compiled data was then shared with
collaborating departments to encourage them to continue building up data in future years. The time series econometric models for measuring
market integration are underway and seem to be working well. The GTAP trade models for analyzing regional dimensions of national food
policies (component 3) are giving reliable results. Analyses and write-ups are underway.




SAFANSI            TF015348              Grant          Enhancing Knowledge and awareness of critical factors that promote Food and
Grant                                    Name           Nutrition Security in SAR through women's network groups

Grant Objective:

To enhance knowledge and awareness of critical factors that promote food and nutrition security among women’s groups in the Business,
Enterprise, and Employment Support for Women in South Asia network (aka, BEES), through a network system of learning and capacity
outreach.

Grant Start Date       8/4/2013                  Grant Completion Date        3/31/2015

Activities Update:

All three network partners have undertaken the first set of activities (Gap Analysis and localized nutritional studies). The localized nutrition
studies were used to further develop the Gap Analysis reports and rolled into a single comprehensive study by each member. In November 2013,
implementing partners shared the preliminary findings of the studies at a regional BEES conference in Lahore, Pakistan. The reports were
finalized in February 2014.
Each organization has mapped out potential partners for further collaboration and identifed critical areas within their interventions where
additional support through knowledge exchanges can be made to strengthen their systems. In March 2014, Manusher Jonno Foundation (MJF)

50
visited Tarayana Foundation in Bhutan to understand their community managed food banks and child nutrition centers. MJF is now adding pilot
child care centers to their activities. Viluthu identified war widows as a critical group for FNS interventions. They have introduced training in
how to prepare healthy meals, and they have started a social enterprise called Sanjeevi, which sells one-dish meals that are nutritionally balanced
and draw on local farm produce for poor households.
MJF is developing guidelines, toolkits, and manuals for different stakeholders incorporating replicable lessons from the exposure visit. A detailed
proposal for this set of activities was submitted to the Bank in April. Taryanna Foundation has developed communication posters, videos, and
manuals for its improved nutrition campaign. Viluthu in Sri Lanka have submitted a plan for grassroots community behavioral change and
mobilization, stakeholder workshop and knowledge exchange.
In February 2014, this group (including the Rudi Multi-trading Co. run by SEWA) was selected to present that the IFPRI international workshop
on Resilience and Nutrition (scheduled for May 2014). The presentations were well received, and there are plans for a SAFANSI dissemination
event to coincide with World Food Day in New Delhi in October. Following the IFPRI conference, Viluthu was asked to present their activities
to the 5 ministries in Sri Lanka with responsibility for food and nutrition security.



Sri Lanka

SAFANSI Grant               TF015520                        Grant Name            Sri Lanka: Integrating Nutrition Promotion and Rural
                                                                                  Development (INPARD)

Grant Objective:

To investigate whether a multi-sectoral rural development programme can be utilized to deliver nutrition promotion intervention within rural Sri
Lanka and whether this is effective in improving nutrition outcomes.


Grant Start Date                  9/10/2013                            Grant Completion Date                       3/31/2015

Activities Update:




51
The Nutritional Impact Assessment and Evaluation (measuring individual, household, and area level data) has been completed. The initial plan
was to develop training manuals and training workshops for community resource persons of the Re-awakening project, public health officers,
agricultural officers and teachers on nutrition promotion and start them in February 2014, but several stakeholders starting with workshops to
bring these local partners together and train them on how to work collaboratively to promote intersectoral actions, before educating them about
nutrition. They expressed the need to build trust among these individuals by organising workshops to get to know each other and discuss the
importance of intersectoral actions to promote nutrition at village level. A workshop was organised in February 2014 to develop a multi-sectoral
training curriculum. The curriculum outline has been developed and circulated among stakeholders for their inputs, with the first session
scheduled for June.
Nutrition promotion training manuals for rural development sector staff, teachers, journalists, and others is scheduled for October 2014.
Planning meetings have identified multiple stakeholders to strengthen the capacity. They are: rural development staff including the community
resource persons (CRPs), school teachers, agricultural officers, government development officers, media reporters and primary healthcare
workers. Awareness and training is provided for all these people. Towards the end, a model project will be drafted with these people so that they
could implement it satisfactorily.
The study is still under implementation but the study activities will achieve it's goal, since the Ministry of Finance and Planning is closely
associated.




52
Appendix 2: SAFANSI-funded Activities

                                                                                          Child Trust    Closing       Task Team
       Window       Country                   Grant Title                  Grant Amount                                                 Sector
                                                                                            Fund          Date           Leader

PIPELINE GRANTS
     SAFANSI Bank   Regional          Coordination, Partnership              100,000                    3/31/2015        Albertus       SASHN
       Executed                  Development and Results Monitoring                                                     Voetberg
                                    for FNS in South Asia Region

SAFANSI Recipient   Pakistan    Leveraging Civil Society for Improving       700,000                    3/31/2015      Imtiaz Alvi      SASDL
    Executed                         Nutrition at the Local Level


     SAFANSI Bank    Bhutan      Enhancing Community Nutrition and           248,500                    3/31/2015    Winston Dawes      SASDL
       Executed                    Food Security Through Livelihood
                                             Approach

     SAFANSI Bank   Sri Lanka      Nutritional Security from Pro-Poor        180,842                    3/31/2015       Randall          AES
       Executed                     Reservoir Fisheries in Sri Lanka                                                   Brummett


ACTIVE GRANTS
     SAFANSI Bank   Regional         Promoting SAR FNS Activities:            49,450      TF017273      6/25/2014    Melissa Williams   SASDA
       Executed                 International outreach of SAFANSI and
                                            BEES program

     SAFANSI Bank   Regional    The effectiveness of food price policies     250,000      TF014546      12/31/2014   Elliot Mghenyi     SASDA
       Executed                   on food and nutritional security in
                                              South Asia

SAFANSI Recipient   Regional    Strengthening Infant and Young Child         754,230      TF013549      1/31/2015       Ashi Kohli      SASHN
    Executed                             Feeding IYCF in SAR                                                            Kathuria




53
     SAFANSI Bank    Regional      Supervision of Grant to Breastfeeding     69,100    TF013556   3/31/2015       Ashi Kohli      SASHN
       Executed                        Promotion Network of India                                                 Kathuria


     SAFANSI Bank    Regional      Scaling up food and nutrition security    270,500   TF015348   3/31/2015    Pushina Kunda      SASDL
       Executed                      initiatives in SAR through women’s                                          Ng’andwe
                                                     groups

     SAFANSI Bank    Regional       Strategic Knowledge Management           295,500   TF017500   3/31/2015    Melissa Williams   SASDA
       Executed                      and Communications for SAFANSI


     SAFANSI Bank   Afghanistan   “Visualizing Stunting in Afghanistan”: A   100,000   TF015365   11/30/2014    Nkosi Mbuya       SASHN
       Executed                         Call for Concerted Action


     SAFANSI Bank   Bangladesh     Assessment of Bangladesh CCT Pilot        200,000   TF099422   6/30/2014       Aneeka          SASSP
       Executed                        through Local Governments                                                  Rahman


     SAFANSI Bank   Bangladesh    Nutrition and Food Security Implications   518,650   TF016363   12/31/2014      Madhur          SASDA
       Executed                        of Rural Growth in Bangladesh                                              Gautam


     SAFANSI Bank      India       Improving Food Security in Tribal and     343,200   TF012122   6/30/2014     Varun Singh       SASDS
       Executed                          Conflict Affected Areas


     SAFANSI Bank      India      Foodgrains Storage and Trade Policy        139,756   TF014636   9/30/2014       Madhur          SASDA
       Executed                   Options: Tradeoffs and Implications for                                         Gautam
                                   Food Security in India A Knowledge
                                          Development Activity


     SAFANSI Bank      India          Introducing nutrition in tertiary      205,117   TF014901   10/30/2014      Eiju Pehu        AES
       Executed                      education curricula and through
                                        agricultural extension using
                                        participatory ICT methods




54
     SAFANSI Bank     India        Community Managed Food and                300,000     TF012676   12/31/2014   Parmesh Shah     SASDL
       Executed                    Nutrition Security Initiatives in High
                                          Poverty States in India

     SAFANSI Bank     India      Multi-sectoral Partnership for Nutrition:   160,600     TF012081   3/31/2015      Ashi Kohli     SASHN
       Executed                           a pilot in Bihar, India                                                  Kathuria


     SAFANSI Bank     India      Social Observatory for Rural Food and       2,300,000   TF011993   3/31/2015    Vijayendra Rao   DECPI
       Executed                  Nutrition Security in the National Rural
                                            Livelihoods Mission

     SAFANSI Bank     Nepal       Supporting High Level Task Force on        430,000     TF098873   6/30/2014    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
       Executed                   Food and Nutrition Security -National
                                         Planning Commission

     SAFANSI Bank     Nepal       Gender Equality and Social Inclusion       219,000     TF015361   9/30/2014      Luiza Nora     SASDS
       Executed                  for Food and Nutrition Security in Nepal


        SUNITA        Nepal      Nepal Sunaula Hazar Din - Community         450,000     TF013868   3/31/2014     Daniel Stein    DECIE
                                  Action for Nutrition Project Impact
                                              Evaluation

        SUNITA        Nepal         Training of social mobilizers and        450,000     TF014834   3/31/2014    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
                                 coaches in a results-based community
                                     driven approach to reducing
                                              malnutrition
        SUNITA        Nepal      Small Area Estimation of Food Security       45,000     TF015218   3/31/2014    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
                                         and Nutrition in Nepal

     SAFANSI Bank     Nepal/      Impact Evaluation of the Agricultural      273,830     TF016677   3/31/2015     Daniel Stein    DECIE
       Executed     Bangladesh    and Food Security Project (AFSP) and                     and
                                 the Integrated Agricultural Productivity                TF016678
                                              Project (IAPP)


     SAFANSI Bank    Pakistan        Long-run Economic Effects of            381,982     TF014344   3/31/2015       Ghazala       PRMPR
       Executed                  Childhood Nutrition and Health Status                                              Mansuri
                                              in Pakistan




55
     SAFANSI Bank    Pakistan         Child Nutritional Outcomes and       451,690   TF011848   3/31/2015       Ghazala         PRMPR
       Executed                      Community Based Health Service                                             Mansuri
                                  Provision: Evidence from a Randomized
                                     Field Experiment in Rural Pakistan

     SAFANSI Bank    Sri Lanka     Integrating Nutrition Promotion And     713,500   TF015520   3/31/2015     Seenithamby       SASDL
       Executed                   Rural Development (INPARD) Sri Lanka                                        Manoharan


CLOSED GRANTS

     SAFANSI Bank    Regional     South Asia Development Marketplace       436,733   TF097620   6/30/2012      Phoebe M.        SASHN
       Executed                                on Nutrition                                                      Folger

SAFANSI Recipient    Regional        International Policy Consultation     200,000   TF098748   6/30/2012    Melissa Williams   SASDA
    Executed

     SAFANSI Bank    Regional     Learning from Success: Cross-sectoral    49,878    TF099039   3/31/2012    Melissa Williams   SASDA
       Executed                     Approaches in Other Regions &
                                       Applicability to South Asia

     SAFANSI Bank    Regional       Global Conference on Women in          25,653    TF011910   8/31/2012    Melissa Williams   SASDA
       Executed                           Agriculture (GCWA)

     SAFANSI Bank    Regional        South Asia Gender and Nutrition       160,192   TF010381   10/31/2013       Jennifer       SASDS
       Executed                                 Mapping                                                         Solotaroff


     SAFANSI Bank    Regional     Linking Measures of Food Security with   111,386   TF011469   10/31/2013    Sailesh Tiwari    PRMPR
       Executed                     Nutritional Outcomes in South Asia


     SAFANSI Bank   Afghanistan    Supporting Afghanistan’s High Level     252,196   TF099874    2/1/2014      Abeyah Al-       SASHN
       Executed                     Task Force on Food and Nutrition                                             Omair
                                                Security

     SAFANSI Bank   Bangladesh/      Linking Nutritional Outcomes to       133,615   TF099707   9/30/2013    John Newman        SASEP
       Executed        India       Adequacy of Food, Health and Care




56
     SAFANSI Bank   Bangladesh   Multisectoral Simulation Tool for Scaling   186,924   TF098429   8/31/2013    John Newman      SASEP
       Executed                             Up Nutrition (SUN)


     SAFANSI Bank   Bangladesh   Assessment of the relationship between      214,936   TF011841   3/31/2014    Rokeya Ahmed     TWISA
       Executed                       mortality and morbidity due to
                                     diarrheal diseases and sanitation
                                                 coverage
     SAFANSI Bank   Bangladesh   Strengthening Awareness and                 212,342   TF014744   3/31/2014    Ousmane Seck     SASDL
       Executed                  Advocacy of the Potential of Fisheries
                                 to Improve Food and Nutrition Security
                                 in Bangladesh


     SAFANSI Bank     Bhutan     Nutrition Assessment and Capacity           118,997   TF012082   2/28/2014    Somil Nagpal     SASHN
       Executed                  Building in Bhutan


     SAFANSI Bank     India       Strengthening Agricultural Education       33,231    TF014041   6/30/2013      Madhur         SASDA
       Executed                      and Policy Making for Food and                                              Gautum
                                       Nutritional Security in India

     SAFANSI Bank     India       Developing a Framework for Applied         89,781    TF010794   4/30/2012      Ramesh         SASHN
       Executed                   Political Economy Analysis of Food &                                          Govindaraj
                                  Nutrition Security Issues in South Asia

     SAFANSI Bank     Nepal       Evaluating the Nutritional impacts of      34,356    TF012123   5/31/2013      Jasmine        SASSP
       Executed                   food security and nutrition programs                                         Rajbhandary


        SUNITA        Nepal       Food and Nutrition Security Thematic       101,671   TF010274   5/30/2013    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
                                            Report (NLSS)

        SUNITA        Nepal       Community Based Behavior Change            61,235    TF012285   10/31/2013   Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
                                            for Nutrition

        SUNITA        Nepal             Review of IYCF Program               28,977    TF012286   2/28/2014    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
        SUNITA        Nepal      District Profiles of Determinants of Food   40,131    TF013189   2/28/2014    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
                                  Insecurity and Malnutrition in Nepal




57
        SUNITA       Nepal      Short Term Consultancy supporting the    19,747   TF013934   2/28/2014    Preeti Kudesia   SASHN
                                  management of nutrition related
                                          analytical activities

     SAFANSI Bank   Pakistan     Mainstreaming Food and Nutrition        3,233    TF099154   6/30/2011       Bekzod        SASDA
       Executed                  Security in Agriculture and Water                                          Shamsiev
                                Management Development Dialogue

     SAFANSI Bank   Pakistan    Enhancing High Level Commitment for      60,243   TF012245   2/28/2014     Inaam Haq       SASHN
       Executed                             FNS Actions


     SAFANSI Bank   Sri Lanka    Visualizing the invisible epidemic of   64,685   TF011712   12/31/2013   Nkosi Mbuya      SASHN
       Executed                      under-nutrition in Sri Lanka




58
Pipeline/Work Program
The SAFANSI program funds are nearly fully committed for grants currently underway and
additional proposals received and tasks to be initiated. The current program may invite a last round
of just-in-time proposals for tasks that either contribute to ongoing activities or provide
opportunities for knowledge generation and dissemination. There remains significant demand for
financing work across the Bank’s South Asia Region and while some of it is being met by the current
SAFANSI program, some proposals are being accepted with an understanding that a phased
approach could be adopted where partial work may be financed by current SAFANSI program and
the remaining work may resume under the second phase of SAFANSI program (SAFANSI-II).
In addition, the last year of current SAFANSI program will remained focused on knowledge
management including communication and dissemination of results from the tasks completed and
nearing completion with deliverables and outputs now coming in. The objective is to initiate internal
and external knowledge stream amongst various Bank sector teams and partners on the analytical
and innovative work financed through SAFANSI. The knowledge management task will create
derivative products summarizing key messages and highlighting trends in findings across products,
materials like newsletters and a website to make findings publicly available and push findings to
critical audiences in the regional stakeholders community, and events to disseminate findings and to
stimulate discussion of food and nutrition security issues across South Asia.
The SAFANSI team is also engaged in preparation of the second phase of program which will be
financed by UK’s DfID and European Commission. The program details have been discussed over
the course of last year. The second phase of SAFANSI is intended to contribute towards a larger
program within the Bank on Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement Program (FNSEP). The
Bank management endorsed the concept of FNSEP in December 2013. Under the new structure in
the Bank after the Change Management process, the FNSEP is mapped as part of the South Asia
Vice President’s portfolio to ensure multi-sectoral collaboration between the various Global
Practices.




59
SAFANSI Dashboard

                                  Tasks by Country (%)
                                                          Afghanistan
                                                              4%        Bangladesh
                        SAR
                                                                           13%
                        24%
                                                                                        Bhutan
                                                                                          4%




     Sri Lanka
         6%                                                                                 India
                                                                                             17%

        Pakistan
          9%



                                                      Nepal
                                                       23%




                   Funds allocation by country (US$)

                                             $3,571,685
                                                                                        $3,180,067



                                                      $1,880,117
                                                                $1,597,148
                     $1,332,852
                                                                             $959,027

          $352,196                $367,497




60
                                          Grant Status



                                                                                            Active, 8
                                                        Active, 2




                                            Active, 6
                                                        Closed, 9
                      Active, 2
                                                                    Active, 3               Closed, 7
                                                                                Active, 2
                      Closed, 3
          Active, 2               Active, 2 Closed, 2               Closed, 2
                                                                                Closed, 1
          Closed, 0               Closed, 0




                        Grants by Sectoral Distribution
                                                                                 19




                                           10


                                                    6

                                    3                         3
      2         2                                                       2                   2
                          1                                                                         1


     AES     DECIE     DECPI PRMPR SASDA SASDL SASDS                 SASEP SASHN SASSP           TWISA




61
Results Framework
    Results Indicator                                                                           Mar-10         Mar-11          Mar-12          Mar-13                 Mar-14 4

    Project Development Objective
    Increased commitment of governments and development partners in SAR for more effective and integrated food security & nutrition actions



       1. No. of national-level planning or policy documents emphasizing an
                                                                                                        0               2               2             12              23      (12)
    integrated and coordinated (cross sector) approach to FNS


    Previous Reporting Years (2010-2013): (i) Nutrition Framework for Afghanistan; (ii) Multisectoral Plan of Action for Nepal; (iii) TF012245 Punjab Nutrition Policy Guidance
    Note; (iv) TF012245 Balochistan Nutrition Policy Guidance Notes; (v) TF012245 Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Nutrition Policy Guidance Note; (vi) TF012245 Sindh Nutrition Policy
    Guidance Notes; (vii) TF012082 Nutrition in Bhutan: Situational Analysis and Policy Recommendations; (viii) TF013549 World Breastfeeding Trends Initiative: South Asia
    Report Card 2012; (ix) TF014041 Indian Council for Agricultural Research: IX Agricultural Sciences Congress “the Roadmap Forward”; (x) TF010274 Nepal Thematic
    Report on Food Security and Nutrition 2013; (xi) TF012676 Innovations in Development: Community-Run Centers Improve Nutrition for Women and Children, Andhra
    Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project; (xii) TF012123 Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and Nutrition A Review of Existing Policies
    and Data on RCIW, RAIDP and RSDP


    2013-2014 Reporting Year: (xiii) TF013769 Nepal Inception Report of Small Area Estimate of Food Security and Nutrition in Nepal; (xiv) TF012285 Inception report of small
    area estimation of food security and nutrition; (xv) TF010381 Gender and Nutrition in South Asia Report (xvi) TF010381 Gender Nutrition Policy Note 1: Mapping Report;
    (xvii) TF010381 Gender Nutrition in SAR Policy Note 2: International Experiences in Gender and Nutrition; (xviii) TF015361; (xviii-xxi) TF011993 Social Observatory (3) policy
    briefs; (xxii) TF014744: In March 2014, 25 copies of policy papers distributed to 4 regional country partners (Cambodia, India, Myanmar and Nepal); (xxiii) TF012123-
    design and implementation of a randomized evaluation of the pilot community challenge fund completed May 2013




4
 Numbers in the “Mar—‘14” column in parenthesis ( ) indicate the target value the project attempted to achieve over the last reporting year. The
number in the same “Mar—‘14” column to the right of this figure in bold, indicates the actual value achieved.


62
  2. No. of development partners’ country strategies with an integrated, cross
                                                                                                      0               3               4              17              28      (17)
sector approach to FNS


Previous Reporting Years (2010-2013): (i) the UNICEF Maternal and Child Nutrition Security Project; (ii) the International Food Policy Research Institute 2020 Vision; (iii) the
World Food Programme; (iv) the Renewed Efforts Against Child Hunger and Under-nutrition (REACH) Initiative; (v) TF013549 World Breastfeeding Trends Initiative (WBTi);
(vi) TF014041 Indian Council for Agricultural Sciences: FAO Global Forum on Agricultural Research post-conference involvement; (vii) TF014041 Indian Council for
Agricultural Research; (viii) TF012245 D-10 Development Partner Nutrition Working Group in Pakistan[1]


2013 – 2014 Reporting Year: (xviii -xxviii) TF011993 Social Observatory (10) country strategy documents




     3.   No. of integrated FNS country programs / operations in place                                0               3               8              16            26        (18)


Previous Reporting Years (2010-2013): (i) Bangladesh Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT); (ii) Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project (NAFSP); (iii) 1000 Days Nepal;
(iv) Pakistan Enhanced Nutrition for Mothers and Children project(P115889); (v) Pakistan Health System Strengthening in 6 districts of Khyber and Pakhtunkhwa with
strong focus on nutrition; (vi) Pakistan Health System Strengthening in the province of Punjab with strong focus on nutrition; (vii) Afghanistan Enhancing Health System;
(viii) Afghanistan: Female Youth Employment Initiative (adds nutrition dimension); (ix) Punjab Agricultural Competitiveness Project (PCN stage 06/16/2012); (x) Sindh
Agricultural Growth Project (P128307); (xi) India: ICDS Systems Strengthening & Nutrition Improvement Program (P121731); (xii) TF012123 Rural Community Infrastructure
Works program, (xiii) TF012123 Rural Accessibility Improvement and Decentralization Project; (xiv) TF012123 Road Sector Development Project; (xv) TF011993 Social
Observatory Clients: NRLP (National Rural Livelihoods Program), North Eastern Rural Livelihoods Project (NERLP), Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP), MPDPIP-2 (xvi)
TF012122 Improving Food Security and Nutrition Status in the State of Jharkand and Odisha: Pilot Intervention Design Workshop Report.


Reporting Year 2013 - 2014: (xvii-xx) TF014744: 3 country action plans on fisheries and nutrition linkages approaches developed and distributed to 4 regional country
partners (Cambodia, India, Myanmar and Nepal); (xxi-xxvi) TF014344 MOU among partner institutions including PPAF, PIDE, NRSP, Research and Development Solutions,
and Social Collective, plus others)




Pillar I: Analysis
Improved Evidence and Analysis on the most effective ways to achieve FNS outcomes in South Asia




63
  1. No. of FNS-related case studies documented and disseminated using sex
                                                                                                        0                2               6              13                 21   (13)
and other disaggregated data (at least 30% include gender-related issues)

Previous Reporting Years (2010-2013): (i) Multi-Sectoral Approaches to Promote Nutrition: Past Experiences and Future Course of Action – involves seven
program/country level case studies, although reported only as one product here; (ii) India Health Beat: Nutrition in India; (iii) SAFANSI Modifiable Adequacy analysis
video case study on Bangladesh and India; (iv) Evaluation of the effectiveness of cell phone technology as community based intervention to improve exclusive
breastfeeding; (v) SAFANSI: Winners of the 2009 Development Marketplace – potentially 20 case studies, of which 5 in detail; (vi) Bangladesh report: “Review of the
Institutional Environment For Nutrition in the Planning Process in Bangladesh” (March 2012 ) (vii) TF010381 Gender Aware Nutrition Activities in South Asia - A Mapping
Exercise has identified 82 government, multilateral, and civil society activities in the region that address gender aspects of nutrition; (viii) TF010794 Developing a
Framework for Applied Political Economy Analysis of Food and Nutrition Security Issues in South Asia; (ix) TF011469 Linking Food Security and Nutrition: Bangladesh; (x)
TF011469 Linking Food Security and Nutrition: Nepal; (xi) TF012245 ‘Engaging Development Partners in Efforts to Reverse Malnutrition Trends in Pakistan’; (xii) TF010381
Gender-Inclusive Nutrition Activities in South Asia, Volume II: Lessons From Global Experiences; (xiii) TF012676 Innovations in Development: COMMUNITY-RUN CENTERS
IMPROVE NUTRITION for WOMEN AND CHILDREN Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project.



2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xiv) TF099422: Endline Survey Report on Bangladesh CCT Pilot; (xv) TF012676: Field innovation in public sector and civil society sector on FNS
briefing benefiting from multi-sector interventions; (xvi-xviii) TF012081 Multisectoral Nutritional Actions in Bihar; (xix - xxi) TF014744 (3) policy briefs delivered to over 1,000
GoB partners and staff;


  2. No. of FNS-related Policy and Issues Briefs published and circulated by
                                                                                                        0                4               8              16                 32   (18)
SAFANSI (at least 30% include gender-related issues)

Previous Reporting Years (2010-2013): (i) Report of Proceedings: Roundtable Discussion on Agriculture and Water in Pakistan; (ii) India Health Beat: Nutrition in India; (iii)
Five Advances Making It Easier to Work on Results in Development: An Operational Perspective with South Asia Nutrition Examples; (iv) Developing a Framework for
Applied Political Economy Analysis of Food and Nutrition Security Issues in South Asia[3]; (v) Reshaping Agriculture for Nutrition and Health; (vi) Thailand: A brief on multi-
sectoral nutrition program which experienced significant reduction of malnutrition over the past three decades through multi-sectoral collaboration; (vii) Pakistan
Nutrition Issue Brief: outlines the impact of malnutrition on the country’s growth and development and the cost-effectiveness of nutrition intervention; (viii) Malaysia: A
SAFANSI brief on multi-sectoral nutrition program which experienced significant reduction of malnutrition over the past three decades through multi-sectoral
collaboration (ix) TF012123 Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and Nutrition; (x) TF010274 Nepal Thematic Report on Food Security and
Nutrition; (xi) TF014041 Reducing Malnutrition in South Asia: The Role of Agricultural Research, Education & Extension; (xii) TF013549 WBTI South Asia report Card 2012; (xiii)
TF012082 Nutrition in Bhutan: Situational Analysis and Policy Recommendations; (xiv) TF012676 Innovations in Development: COMMUNITY-RUN CENTERS IMPROVE
NUTRITION for WOMEN AND CHILDREN Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project; (xv) TF011469 Linking Food Security and Nutrition: Bangladesh; (xvi) TF011469
Linking Food Security and Nutrition: Nepal




64
2013 – 2014 Reporting Year: (xvii) TF010274: Review of IYCF Practice, costed strategic communications plan, Capacity building to strengthen local government and
community participation; (xviii) TF010381: Gender and Nutrition in SAR Dissemination Presentation in SAR; (xix) TF011841 Policy Brief on relation between mortality and
morbidity due to diarrheal diseases and sanitation coverage, December 2013; (xx) TF015348 Gap analysis reports completed and finalized in February 2014; (xxi) 6
localized nutritional studies completed as intermediate inputs to the Gap analysis reports submitted in February 2014; (xxii) TF099422 Conducted evaluation of the
various processes involved in implementation of the pilot, covering targeting of beneficiaries, providing information sessions and making payments December 2013;
(xxiii) TF099873: (2) Papers on targeting households which are food insecure and have malnourished children; (xxiv) TF012082: Comprehensive Nutrition Assessment and
Gap Analysis and 2 policy briefs published (February 2014); (xxvii) TF015520 Nutritional Impact Assessment and Evaluation (December 2013); (xxviii) TF014636 Technical
Paper for Foodgrains Storage and Trade Policy Options: Tradeoffs and Implications for Food Security in India; (xxix) TF011469 Linking Food Security and Nutrition: Nepal;
(xxx-xxxi) TF014744 Strengthening Awareness and Advocacy of the Potential of FIsheries to Improve Food and Nutrition Security in Bangladesh (2) policy briefs on pond
aquaculture and wetlands management (March 2014); (xxxii) TF011848 Workshops to disseminate early results framework reached 150 attendees.




  3. No. of major public programs tested/evaluated for impact on FNS
                                                                                                  0               0              0              12                18 (13)
outcomes.

Previous Reporting Years (2010-2013): (i) TF012123 Nepal Rural Community Infrastructure Works program, (ii) TF012123 Nepal Rural Accessibility Improvement and
Decentralization Project; (iii) TF012123 Nepal Road Sector Development Project; (iv) TF011993 Social Observatory Impact Evaluation of core SHG Intervention: Bihar
(Prospective) (Retrospective); (v) TF011993 Social Observatory Impact Evaluation of Food Security intervention: Bihar; (vi) TF011993 Social Observatory Impact
Evaluation of core SHG Intervention: Odisha; (vii) TF011993 Social Observatory Impact Evaluation of core SHG Intervention: Rajasthan; (viii) TF011993 Social Observatory
Impact Evaluation of core SHG Intervention: Tamil Nadu (retrospective and prospective); (ix) TF011993 Social Observatory: TA to the North Eastern Rural Livelihoods
Project (NERLP) Sikkim, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura; (x) TF011993 Social Observatory: Tamil Nadu Impact Evaluation: Community-based health card intervention
targeted at women’s health indicators, including anemia; (xi) TF011993 Social Observatory: Chattisgarh and Maharashtra Resource Block Study; (xii) TF011993 Social
Observatory: Technical Assistance to MPDPIP-2 to systematically track beneficiaries of the skills intervention in Madhya Pradesh.



2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xiii) TF012081 Multisectoral Nutritional Actions in Bihar: SIEF-funded impact evaluation; (xiv - xviii) TF011993 Social Observatory (1) impact
evaluation; (3) baselines have been complete for FNS interventions.



   4. No. of programming guidance notes prepared (all addressing gender
                                                                                                  0               5              5              15                  31 (16)
issues)[4]




65
Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) Report of Proceedings: Roundtable Discussion on Agriculture and Water in Pakistan; (ii) Five Advances Making It Easier to Work
on Results in Development: An Operational Perspective with South Asia Nutrition Examples; (iii) Nepal’s Nutrition National Plan of Action; (iv) Afghanistan’s National
Nutrition Framework; (v) Addressing Nutrition Through Multisectoral Approaches – World Bank Draft ESW; (vi) TF010794 Developing a Framework for Applied Political
Economy Analysis of Food and Nutrition Security Issues in South Asia; (vii) TF012082 Nutrition in Bhutan: Situational Analysis and Policy Recommendations; (viii) TF012676
Innovations in Development: Community-Run Centers Improve Nutrition for Women and Children, Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project; (ix) TF012123
Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and Nutrition A Review of Existing Policies and Data on RCIW, RAIDP and RSDP; (x) TF011469 Linking
Food Security and Nutrition: Bangladesh; (xi) TF011469 Linking Food Security and Nutrition: Nepal; (xii) TF012122 Improving Food Security and Nutrition Status in the State
of Jharkand and Odisha: Pilot Intervention Design Workshop Report; (xiii) TF012122 EVIDENCE FROM NATIONAL SAMPLE SURVEY ON HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURE; (xiv) TF014041 Reducing Malnutrition in South Asia: The Role of Agricultural Research, Education & Extension; (xv) TF014041 ICAR’s XI Agricultural Science
Congress: Roadmap on Reforming Agricultural Education; (xvi) TF014636 Inputs into the Economic Survey of India



2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xvii) TF010794: Delivery of India PEA Case Study 4/30/2013; (xviii) TF013189 District Nutrition Profile Tool; (xix - xxii) TF012676: 4 learning notes
created including a typology of 30 CMHN initiatives across the country. These are (i) Bringing Nutritional Security to Rural Households: Strategies and Program Design,
(ii) Lessons for India from Mexico and Brazil, (iii) Mobile applications for Nutrition and (iv) Typology of 30 CMHN initiatives in India; (xxiii-xxiv) TF012081 Multisectoral
Nutritional Actions in Bihar guidance notes; (xxv-xxxi) TF011993 Social Observatory (7) programming guidance notes produced




Pillar II: Advocacy

Improved Awareness of FNS-related challenges, and advocacy for action, amongst relevant stakeholders



  1. No. of high-profile senior policy makers and opinion leaders
                                                                                                        0              50               75             110               264 (120)
sensitized/“trained”




66
Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) The SAFANSI co-sponsorship of the IFPRI conference on Leveraging Agriculture for Improving Nutrition and Health brought
together quite a few leading international figures and policy makers, who were sensitized to the cross-sectoral nature of the related Agriculture, Nutrition and Health
problems. Approximately 1000 people were in attendance; many of them being very senior figures in various governments and organizations, most notably including
H.E. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister, Republic of India; (ii) the Pakistan Roundtable Discussion on Agriculture and Water: Introducing Food and Nutrition Security to
Government Planning trained/sensitize approximately 100 senior national and provincial-level officials; (iii) SAFANSI Task Supporting Afghanistan’s High Level Task Force
on Food and Nutrition Security, sensitized the Ministers of Finance, Health, Agriculture, Education, Rural Rehabilitation and Development; (iv) 2011 World Bank
Innovation Day: Business Unusual: Tackling Malnutrition in South Asia; (v) World Bank-IMF Annual Meetings: Ensuring Nutrition and Food Security for Results in South Asia;
(vi) SAFANSI Technical Advisory Committee; (vii) Knowledge, Tools and Lessons for Informing the Design and Implementation of Food Security Strategies in Asia
Conference in Nepal; (viii) London Conference on Measuring the Effects of Integrated Agriculture-Health Interventions; (ix) The Global Conference on Women in
Agriculture; (x) World Bank Workshop on Food Security and Nutrition: From Measurement to Results; (xi) FAO International Scientific Symposium on Food and Nutrition
Security Information; approximately 30 individuals representing international organization, research outfits and independent researchers engaged in the field of food
security and nutrition; (xii) SAR Development Marketplace on Nutrition dissemination events have also trained several key state/local governing officials and other high
ranking Development practitioners; (xiii) SAFANSI Panel Discussion at IFPRI Conference: Building a Platform for Improving Food and Nutrition Security. It is estimated that
over 100 people were in attendance at this event and as of March 28, 2012 there were 355 recorded hits on the video of the session; (xiv)Pakistan: Two-day National
Workshop on Regulatory Systems for Food Fortification; (xv) TF097620 South Asia Regional Knowledge Forum on Improving Infant and Young Child Nutrition, June 2012
(xvi) TF014041 ICAR IX ACS Conference on Reforming Agricultural Education; (xvii) TF098394 How Can Agriculture Help to Solve the Nutrition Crisis? SDN Forum Event on
What We Know and What We Need to Know: Wednesday 27 February; (xviii) TF012676 Innovations in Development: COMMUNITY-RUN CENTERS IMPROVE NUTRITION for
WOMEN AND CHILDREN Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project; (xix) TF012123 Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and
Nutrition A Review of Existing Policies and Data on RCIW, RAIDP and RSDP; (xx) TF011993 Social Observatory: National workshop on using data for action: included
developing a framework for tracking food security involving project staff from 12 states participated, including 4 Project Directors of State Livelihood Missions; (xxi)
TF012122 Improving Food Security and Nutrition Status in the State of Jharkand and Odisha: Pilot Intervention Design Workshop Report; (xxii) TF012676 SDN Forum -
Improving Nutrition through Community Driven Approach: Thinking beyond Agriculture, Food Security and Rural Development - 4:00 PM - 5:30 PM, 8th March, 2013.




2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xxiii) February 2014 event to disseminate information before commencing assessment (well over 40 senior policy-makers joined
discussions); (xiv) TF012676: Training of Trainers workshop executed (spearhead teams of 40 people); (cxc-ccxl) TF011993 Social Observatory 130 of 200 trained as of
December 2013; (ccxli-ccxliii) TF014901 Agricultural Extension and Nutrition through ICTs (3) sr. policymakers trained as of 3/31/14; (CCXLIV - CCLIII) TF014744 (10
policymakers trained March 2014; (CCLIV - CCLXIV) TF014344 senior persons trained by April 2014.




  2. No. of regional, national and other prominent consultations and workshops
                                                                                                   2               6              9              16                35 (17)
organized (addressing gender where appropriate)




67
Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) Pakistan Roundtable Discussion on Agriculture and Water: Introducing Food and Nutrition Security to Government Planning; (ii)
Multiple SAFANSI Consultations for Supporting Afghanistan’s High Level Task Force on Food and Nutrition Security including a mid-point national workshop for the
preparation of the multi-sectoral plan of action for FNS; (iii) SAFANSI Technical Advisory Committee; (iv) Knowledge, Tools and Lessons for Informing the Design and
Implementation of Food Security Strategies in Asia Conference in Nepal; (v) London Conference on Measuring the Effects of Integrated Agriculture-Health
Interventions; (vi) World Bank Workshop on Food Security and Nutrition: From Measurement to Results; (vii) FAO International Scientific Symposium on Food and Nutrition
Security Information; (viii) Multiple SAFANSI Consultations for Supporting Nepal’s High Level Task Force on Food and Nutrition Security; (ix) D-10 Working Group on
Nutrition in Pakistan; (x) Pakistan national workshop on the regulatory systems for food fortification; (xi) TF014041 ICAR IX ACS Conference on Reforming Agricultural
Education; (xii) TF098394 How Can Agriculture Help to Solve the Nutrition Crisis? SDN Forum Event on What We Know and What We Need to Know: Wednesday 27
February; (xiii) TF012123 Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and Nutrition A Review of Existing Policies and Data on RCIW, RAIDP and
RSDP; (xiv) TF011993 Social Observatory: National workshop on using data for action: included developing a framework for tracking food security involving project staff
from 12 states participated, including 4 Project Directors of State Livelihood Missions; (xv) TF012122 Improving Food Security and Nutrition Status in the State of Jharkand
and Odisha: Pilot Intervention Design Workshop Report; (xvi) TF012676 SDN Forum - Improving Nutrition through Community Driven Approach: Thinking beyond
Agriculture, Food Security and Rural Development - 4:00 PM - 5:30 PM, 8th March, 2013.



2013 – 2014 Reporting Year: (xvii) TF013189: Consultation on District nutrition profile; (xviii) TF012082 Held a national level workshop in February 2014 to disseminate and
discuss the comprehensive draft report; (xix-xxi) TF012081 Multisectoral Nutritional Actions in Bihar: 3 workshops; (xxii - xxiii) TF011993 Social Observatory (2) workshops
conducted as of December 2013; (xxiv - xxxiv) TF014744 (11) regional workshop meetings arranged March 2014; (xxxv) TF011848) questionnaire and data submitted and
distributed via workshop December 2013.



     3.   No. of advocacy events (e.g. awareness raising campaigns) carried out                    0               6             12              19                42 (20)

Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) IFPRI conference on Leveraging Agriculture for Improving Nutrition and Health; (ii) 2011 World Bank Innovation Day: Business
Unusual: Tackling Malnutrition in South Asia; (iii) World Bank-IMF Annual Meetings: Ensuring Nutrition and Food Security for Results in South Asia; (iv) The Global
Conference on Women in Agriculture; (v) World Bank Workshop on Food Security and Nutrition: From Measurement to Results; (vi) FAO International Scientific
Symposium on Food and Nutrition Security Information; (vii) mHealth Summit; (viii) SAR Development Marketplace Mid-term Workshop; (ix) SAR Development
Marketplace India Grantees Workshop; (x) Dr. Reddy’s Foundation Workshop; (xi) SAFANSI Panel Discussion at IFPRI Conference: Building a Platform for Improving Food
and Nutrition Security. It is estimated that over 100 people were in attendance at this event and as of March 28, 2012 there were 355 recorded hits on the video of the
session; (xii) Pakistan Nutrition Partners’ Group (D-10) meetings since Feb 2012; (xiii) TF097620 SAR Regional Knowledge Sharing Forum; (xiv) TF014041 ICAR IX ACS
Conference on Reforming Agricultural Education; (xv) TF098394 How Can Agriculture Help to Solve the Nutrition Crisis? SDN Forum Event on What We Know and What
We Need to Know: Wednesday 27 February; (xvi) TF012123 Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and Nutrition A Review of Existing Policies
and Data on RCIW, RAIDP and RSDP November 7, 2012; (xvii) TF011993 Social Observatory: National workshop on using data for action: included developing a
framework for tracking food security involving project staff from 12 states participated, including 4 Project Directors of State Livelihood Missions; (xviii) TF012122
Improving Food Security and Nutrition Status in the State of Jharkand and Odisha: Pilot Intervention Design Workshop Report; (xix) TF012676 SDN Forum - Improving
Nutrition through Community Driven Approach: Thinking beyond Agriculture, Food Security and Rural Development - 4:00 PM - 5:30 PM, 8th March, 2013.




68
2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xx) TF010381: Gender and Nutrition Presentation September 25,2013; (xxi) TF015348: One knowledge exchange conducted in March 2014;
(xxii-xxiii) TF012676: Community Managed Food Security and Health and Nutrition Initiatves pilots in 2 states (June 2013); xxiv - xxv) TF011993 Social Observatory (2)
advocacy events carried out; (xxvi - XLI) TF014744 (16) regional, national and other prominent consultations and workshops arranged March 2014; (XLII) TF014344:
workshop completed April 2014.



     4.   No. of changes relating to FNS agenda/policies enabled/supported                          0               4               7             12                   13 (14)


Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project; (ii) Afghanistan Action Framework; (iii) Nepal Nutrition Plan of Action; (iv) Pakistan
Roundtable Discussion on Agriculture and Water: Introducing Food and Nutrition Security to Government Planning; (v) Nutrition Assessment and Capacity Building in
Bhutan; (vi) Nepal's 1000 Days Initiative for Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project; (vii) A White Paper on Scaling Up Nutrition in Pakistan which
identified key steps (e.g. provincial and federal institutional structures) that are leading to a more coherent approach to addressing malnutrition in Pakistan; (viii)
TF012245 Four Pakistan Provincial Policy Notes; (ix) TF012123 Women and Civil Works Programs: Empowerment, Gender Equality and Nutrition A Review of Existing
Policies and Data on RCIW, RAIDP and RSDP November 7, 2012; (xi) TF011993 Social Observatory; (xii) TF012122 Improving Food Security and Nutrition Status in the State
of Jharkand and Odisha.


2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xiii) TF010794: Delivery of Political Economy Analysis Framework, 4/30/2013



Pillar III: Capacity Building
Strengthened regional and in-country policy and programming capacity in relevant areas to achieve FNS outcomes.


  1. No. of country or regional policy networks/ forums/ platforms supported (or
                                                                                                    0               3               4               6                  20 (7)
formed) to advance the FNS agenda

Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) Afghanistan Action Framework; (ii) Nepal Nutrition Plan of Action (iii) Pakistan Roundtable Discussion on Agriculture and Water:
Introducing Food and Nutrition Security to Government Planning; (iv) Pakistan Nutrition Partners’ Group (D-10) meetings since Feb 2012; (v) TF014041 ICAR IX ACS
Conference on Reforming Agricultural Education; (vi) TF011993 Social Observatory;


2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (vii) TF010274 Support to High Level Food Securty and Nutrition Steering Committee Secretariat, Community Behavior Change Rapid Results
Initiatives Pilot, STC supporting nutrition related AAA; (viii) TF0122455: Published article in IDS Bulletin (May 2013) about the process to prepare province-specific
secondary analysis of the National Nutrition Survey 2011; workshops in all four provinces; National inter-provincial workshop and dissemination workshops and events in
each province; (ix) TF014834 Trainng of Coaches on Rapid Results Approach for Sunaula Hazar Sin Nutrition Project; (x - xx) TF014744 (11) regional workshop/sub-
national meetings arranged March 2014




69
  2. No. of South-South training/capacity building visits to re-orient and improve
                                                                                                     0               4               6             10                  14 (11)
FNS programs (ensuring a good balance of men and women)


Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) SAR DM Mid-term Workshop event; (ii) SAR DM Workshop for India Grantees; (iii) Dr. Reddy’s Foundation Dissemination Event in
Hyderabad; (iv) SAFANSI arranged for two mobilized community leaders of a SAR DM sponsored project to present their models at IFPRI’s international conference on
Leveraging Agriculture for Improving Nutrition and Health; (v) Tanzania - Introduction of Multi-sectoral simulation tool for SUN initiative to the REACH partners (vi)
Kenya -Application of SAFANSI Modified Adequacy technique (data visualization technique) for epidemiological analysis on child stunting in Kenya; (vii) TF097620 SAR
Regional Knowledge Sharing Forum; (viii) TF014041 ICAR IX ACS Conference on Reforming Agricultural Education; (ix) TF098394 How Can Agriculture Help to Solve the
Nutrition Crisis? SDN Forum Event on What We Know and What We Need to Know: Wednesday 27 February; (x) TF011993 Social Observatory: National workshop on
using data for action: included developing a framework for tracking food security involving project staff from 12 states participated, including 4 Project Directors of
State Livelihood Missions;


2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (xi) TF010794: Workshop for the Dissemination of Political Economy Analysis (4/30/2013); (xii - xiv) TF012081 Multisectoral Nutritional Actions in
Bihar capacity building visits to 3 sectoral projects; (xv) TF014744 field trip arranged March 2014




     3.   No. of service delivery mechanisms analyzed and identified for up-scaling                  0               2               9             11                  13 (13)


Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) Three service delivery mechanisms from 6 rounds of surveillance were analyzed. These relate to water and sanitation; national
nutrition service; and institutional arrangements for multi-sectoral simulation; (ii) Five innovative designs identified by the Development Marketplace as worthy scaling
up; (iii) Bangladesh Conditional Cash Transfer; (iv) TF012123 Rural Community Infrastructure Works (RCIW) program, (v) TF012123 Rural Accessibility Improvement and
Decentralization Project (RAIDP); (vi) TF012123 Road Sector Development Project (RSDP); (vii) TF011993 Social Observatory: National workshop on using data for action:
included developing a framework for tracking food security involving project staff from 12 states participated, including 4 Project Directors of State Livelihood Missions;



2013 - 2014 Reporting Year: (viii) TF014041 National Agricultural Education Project proposal submitted to WB for support to reform the Agricultural Education System; (ix-
x) TF011993 Social Observatory (2) mechanisms anaylzed for scaling-up; (xi-xii) TF014901 Agricultural Extension and Nutrition through ICTs (2) extensionists surveyed in 2
locations; (xiii) TF012123 Evaluating the Nutritional Impacst of FNS in Nepal- completed evaluation May 2013




70
     4.   No. of community-level alliances for promoting FNS outcomes supported                    0               6             14              20                31 (30)


Previous Reporting Years (2010-2012): (i) 14 Grantees of the SAR Development Marketplace on Nutrition; (ii) Development Partner nutrition working group (D-10) in
Pakistan; (iii) TF012676 Society of the Elimination of Rural Poverty – Andhra Pradesh; (iv) TF011469 Pakistan Institute for Development Economics; (v) TF098874/TF097620
Care for Afghan Families; (vi) TF099422 Impact Assessment of Bangladesh CCT Pilot through Local Governments; (vii) TF098429 Multisectoral Simulation Tool for Scaling
Up Nutrition.


2013-2014 Reporting Year: (xx-xxii) TF012081 Multisectoral Nutritional Actions in Bihar; (xxiii-xxx) TF011993 Social Observatory (8) trainings via alliances completed as of
December 2013; (xxxi) TF014344 created alliance with community organizations April 2014.




[1] The D-10 members include: ACF International, AusAID, CIDA, DFID, the EU, FAO, GAIN, MERLIN, the Micronutrient Initiative, Save the Children, UKAID, UNFPA, UNICEF,
USAID, WFP, WHO, and the World Bank.

[2] Included in the report, Multi-Sectoral Approaches to Promote Nutrition: Past Experiences and Future Course of Action, there are 7 program/country level case
studies and multiple other project level analyses, however this is only counted as 1 in this results framework.

[3] Part II is in progress and will soon be completed.

[4] e.g. On adopting cross-sectoral approach, improving gender equity or social inclusion, better targeting and so on.




71
72
