                                                    93256




              A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS
    IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS




August 15, 2014
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission
to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of
the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422,
e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                         ii
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                                                              Table of Contents

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................................... v

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ vii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................ 1

1.     INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................................... 4

2.     SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY...................................................................................................... 5

3.     REVIEW OF GLOBAL TRENDS .................................................................................................... 6

4      INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY ISSUES.................................................................................... 11

5      FINANCING AND GOVERNMENT SUPPORT .......................................................................... 15

6      RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER WORK ...................................................................... 19

ANNEX: SUMMARY PROJECT INFORMATION ............................................................................ 24
 Kenyatta University Hostel Accommodation Project ............................................................................. 24
 Palestine Solid Waste Management Project............................................................................................ 26
 Lesotho Health Care Waste Management Project .................................................................................. 28
 Cape Nature (De Hoop) Tourism Project ............................................................................................... 31
 Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Area (PURA)............................................................................ 33
 Gandhinagar Rooftop Solar Project ........................................................................................................ 36
 Bhubaneswar Street-lighting Project ...................................................................................................... 38
 Punjab Grain Silo Project........................................................................................................................ 40
 Berhampur Solid Waste Project .............................................................................................................. 42
 Health Diagnostics Project ...................................................................................................................... 44

RESOURCES ............................................................................................................................................ 46




                                                                                                                                                      iii
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Figures
Figure 1: Small-scale PPP Projects by Region, Global................................................................................. 7
Figure 2: VGF Projects by Size: Number and Total Project Cost (TPC), India, March 2014 ...................... 8
Figure 3: Approved Projects by Size, Andhra Pradesh, India....................................................................... 9
Figure 4: UK PFI Projects by Size, March 2012 .......................................................................................... 9
Figure 5: PPP Projects in Australia by Size .................................................................................................. 9

Tables
Table 1: Basic Characteristics of Small Projects in Various Sectors .......................................................... 10
Table 2: Caps in Subsidies for Environmental PPPs .................................................................................. 18




                                                                                                                                             iv
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                            Abbreviations and Acronyms


BEE                            Bureau of Energy Efficiency
BOO                            Build Operate Own
BOOT                           Build Own Operate Transfer
BOT                            Build Operate Transfer
DBFOT                          Design Build Finance Operate Transfer
DevCo                          Development and Cooperation – EuropeAid
DFID                           Department for International Development
DRDA                           District Rural Development Agency
EoI                            Expression of Interest
ESCO                           Energy Savings Company
FCI                            Food Corporation of India
GoK                            Government of Kenya
GP                             Gram Panchayat
GPOBA                          Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
HM Treasury                    Her Majesty’s Treasury
IBAM                           Brazilian Institute of Municipal Administration
ICMBio                         Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation
ICT                            Information and Communications Technology
IDB                            Inter-American Development Bank
IFC                            International Finance Corporation
IIPDF                          India Infrastructure Project Development Facility
JV                             Joint venture
KU                             Kenya University
MCC                            Millennium Challenge Corporation
MIF                            Multilateral Investment Fund
MoH                            Ministry of Health
MoRD                           Ministry of Rural Development
MP                             Madhya Pradesh
MPWLC                          Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and Logistics Corporation
O&M                            Operations and maintenance
OUIDF                          Odisha Urban Infrastructure Development Fund
PPI&SS                         Private Participation in Infrastructure & Social Sectors
PDF                            Project Development Fund
PfCS                           Partnerships for Church of England Schools
PFI                            Private Finance Initiative
PPA                            Power Purchase Agreement
PPI                            Private Participation in Infrastructure
PPP                            Public-Private Partnerships


                                                                                          v
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS



PURA                           Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas
RFP                            Request for Proposal
RFQ                            Request for Qualification
RoI                            Return on investment
SANParks                       South Africa National Parks
SIF                            Social Innovation Fund
SPV                            Special Purpose Vehicle
UK                             United Kingdom
USAID                          United States Agency for International Development
VfM                            Value for Money
VGF                            Viability Gap Funding
WBG                            World Bank Group




                                                                                    vi
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                                          Acknowledgments

This paper has been co-authored by Aijaz Ahmad from the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice
and Shyamala Shukla from the Public-Private Partnerships Group of the World Bank.

The authors would like to thank the following IFC and World Bank staff for their valuable contributions:
Aditya Dhar, Andri Wibisono, Bhanu Mehrotra, Carla M.N. Faustino Coelho, Evans Kamau, Iain
Menzies, Ibrahim Dajani, Isabel Chatterton, Neeraj Gupta, Pankaj Mishra, and Ricardo Arias.

The authors are grateful to Jeffrey Delmon, John Speakman, and Richard Cabello for their peer review
comments and valuable contributions towards improving the draft. The authors are indebted to the
following public and private sector practitioners in client countries: Arvind Mayaram, Finance Secretary,
Government of India; James Aiello and Xola Ngamlana, Government Technical Advisory Center
(GTAC), South Africa; J.S. Oberoi, Associate Director, LT Foods Limited, India; Sheo Shekhar Shukla,
Ex-MD, Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and Logistics Corporation Limited (MPWLC), Government of
Madhya Pradesh, India; and all the officials of the PPP Unit and the Ministry of Education PPP Node in
Kenya.

The authors wish to thank Mohammad Shouman, Consultant, Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice
for meticulously going through the draft and preparing it for publication.

Funding for this output was provided by the World Bank Group’s former Investment Climate Global
Practice “Private Participation in Infrastructure and Social Sectors” (PPI&SS).




                                                                                                      vii
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                                           Executive Summary


Introduction

Governments have focused on large national level public-private partnership (PPP) projects in key
economic sectors like transport over the last two decades. However, in recent years, governments in
developing countries have increasingly been looking at leveraging private financing and efficiencies
through PPP in non-transport social infrastructure sectors. While water and small energy projects have
been around for some time, sub-national governments at provincial and local levels have turned to PPP
projects, which are relatively smaller in size, for the provision of other essential services like solid waste
management, energy-efficient street-lighting, primary healthcare and diagnostic services, municipal
parking, development and maintenance of municipal parks, accommodation to students, and grain storage.
These services, if delivered well, can have a transformative effect on the lives of citizens. While the
benefits of private participation in the delivery of these services are undeniable, few projects have been
undertaken relative to the substantial requirement. In addition, relatively little is known about the ones
that have been, or are in the process of being, developed or implemented.

Objective

The objective of this paper is to understand what small-scale PPP projects look like; to examine at a
preliminary level if there are overarching problems and constraints in undertaking these projects; and to
use the preliminary observations and findings to inform further work in this area.

Scope and methodology

This paper looks specifically at 10 projects of value at or below $50 million in the South Asia, Middle
East and Africa regions across a few identified parameters, summarizes the findings, and identifies
overarching concerns—including issues and constraints related to policy and institutions, financing, and
capacity, which might act as impediments to quick scaling up or replication of these projects as well as
project-specific issues that could offer important lessons for future structuring of similar projects.
However, this review is only preliminary and does not seek to examine detailed technical aspects of these
projects or their contract documents in-depth. The paper also looks at some of the related initiatives in
small-scale PPP projects in some additional key countries that were recommended during discussions by
practitioners working on such projects within PPP units in client countries, and WBG and IFC staff
involved in providing financing or transaction advisory services to such projects.

Key issues

Lack of strategy and standardized documents
A key observation from the review is that small-scale projects are associated with sectors that are
relatively new or less analyzed sectors in the PPP space. While there is substantial experience in private
provisioning in more traditional sectors, there is little information and/or standardized practices available
in these sectors. This has made replication difficult even within those countries where small-scale projects
are being implemented. Sector strategy either does not exist, as in the case of small-scale municipal
projects in solid waste, parking, or accommodation; or the strategy is adopted from large projects, as in
the case of small road and bridge projects. There are few standard contracts in these sectors, an exception
being the grain storage sector in India where a standard contract is currently being reviewed for approval
by the Planning Commission and some amount of upstream work has been undertaken as well during the
last few years. The lack of standard documentation has frequently meant reinventing the wheel for each


                                                                                                            1
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


new small-scale project, requiring time, funding, and effort for the public as well as the private entities
involved, which is disproportionately high in comparison to the capital investment involved.

Cumbersome institutional structures
The second major issue observed is related to the institutional structure for processing these projects from
conception through development, appraisal, approval, and procurement stages. In most of the projects
examined, there are no separate institutional structures or differentiation in hierarchical levels of
government used for approvals—in practice there are, in fact, additional levels of approvals added due to
the subnational nature of these projects. Where the institutional structure does discriminate based on size
or other attributes, either the cap used for defining small projects is too low as in the case of tourism
projects in South Africa or as in the case of the national government in India, which does discriminate
between projects based on total value, the policy is not fully relevant to projects at subnational levels
where such discrimination is less frequently seen.

Financing constraints
A third major issue is that, while there is a large market for commercial financing of small PPP projects
below $50 million in some sectors, there are key structuring and credit enhancement requirements, as well
as related sector policy and institutional deficiencies that may deter banks from financing these projects
on a larger scale. For example, energy efficient street-lighting and other projects have few commercial
banks that carry specific lending products and thus little financing is forthcoming. Therefore, the scale of
such projects has perforce remained small as these are currently fully equity financed. While there are
scattered efforts to enable credit enhancement of PPP projects through guarantees and other instruments,
these are either not well developed enough, not widely available, or not accessible to specific sectors or
specifically to small projects per se due to associated rules and guidance that are customized for larger
projects. In addition, banks often have smaller limits on debt or also require collateral from smaller
investors to the tune of almost 100-150% of the debt, creating an impediment to the development of the
market for project finance for small-scale PPP projects in developing countries.

Low capacity in local institutions in the public and private sectors
There is a need for capacity building in almost all the entities involved in small PPP transactions in order
to enable them to carry out their specific roles in PPP development, financing, and implementation. This
includes PPP development, procurement and contract management training to local bodies engaged in
doing PPP; communication strategies in local bodies with a viable pipeline to enhance the understanding
of PPP in small local level investors; and in local banks. Capacity building—which is in the nature of
“just-in-time” training designed based on project pipeline requirements and keeping in mind the roles of
different entities in these project—is not always available, leading to situations where routine project
related activities take a longer time to accomplish.

Recommendations

The conclusions derived from specific experience in the projects examined in conjunction with their
associated environments point to two potential levels of further work for the client countries and multi-
lateral development institutions like the World Bank:

    •   Immediate work focused specifically on small-scale projects that will get quick wins
    •   Slower but more embedded work focused on the larger environment for small PPPs

The latter can be undertaken as part of the general work on strengthening the environment for PPPs over
the medium and longer term.



                                                                                                          2
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Some specific areas where there could be more immediate results with relatively lower levels of
investment are discussed below.

    •   Upstream institutional structures and processes: This includes examining current procedures
        and processes, identifying gaps, and streamlining the different phases in the implementation of
        small-scale projects from conception through development, appraisal, approval, and procurement.
        It entails examining a separate framework including simpler institutional structures for processing
        projects as well as the creation of standard procurement and contract documents and templates to
        reduce the time and costs involved.

    •   Sector policy and regulation: This consists of country-level work exploring identified emerging
        sectors with regard to the current status of sector regulations, appropriateness or adequacy of the
        regulations for small-scale projects, identification of gaps, outlining/drafting modifications or
        new regulations, sector guidance and tariff policy,.

    •   Support for financing of PPP: This includes an examination of available government support
        mechanisms for small-scale PPP projects, designing modifications to available mechanisms and
        instruments, and exploring and outlining possible new mechanisms and instruments customized
        to small projects and to sectors where such projects are more common. Focused work on the
        creation of funding and credit enhancement facilities customized to small-scale urban and rural
        projects can help expand the pipeline in a very short space of time.

    •   Focused capacity building: Focused capacity building at subnational levels with all entities
        involved in the PPP process, with particular focus on project development, implementation and
        contract management skills of subnational staff, small project appraisal skills of local commercial
        bankers and targeted workshops/communication campaigns focused on increasing knowledge of
        PPP among potential private investors would help enhance the quality of projects entering the
        pipeline and improve project processes.

Reforms to financial regulations and the strengthening of capital markets are among the longer term
measures that need to be undertaken as a part of general strengthening of infrastructure finance; these
exercises need to retain a deliberate focus on the small-scale project segment. In addition, the institutional
and financial strengthening of subnational bodies—already a part of the work of several World Bank
Group units—could be taken up with special focus on those countries and entities that present scope for
PPP implementation.




                                                                                                            3
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                                                      1. Introduction

1.1   While global attention has been on large nationally important transport PPP projects,
      subnational governments at the provincial and local levels have increasingly turned to PPPs for
      the provision of essential services. These include PPP projects in sectors like solid waste
      management, community/public toilets, water supply, energy-efficient street-lighting, primary health
      care, municipal parking, municipal parks and empty spaces, accommodation to students, and grain
      storage. These services, if delivered well, can have a transformative effect on the lives of citizens.
      Potable water, sanitation, and waste disposal projects improve local health conditions, increase life
      expectancy and quality of life, and reduce the duration of sickness and recovery. Rural
      farm-to-market roads, bridges, warehouses, cold storage, silos, and pedestrian overbridges can
      transform villages and towns once cut-off from mainstream economic infrastructure. These projects
      can also have direct implications for the local economy in terms of improving competitiveness by
      reducing health costs and raising labor productivity, among other things.

1.2   The positive impacts of small projects in various sectors could be substantial given the large
      numbers of people affected by the lack of access to basic infrastructure and services. In 2012,
      about 2.5 billion people globally did not have access to sanitation. 1 Lack of sanitary landfills and
      unscientific design of landfills are considered to be responsible for leachate contamination of water
      sources of towns and cities 2 having major impacts on the health of the population. In terms of post-
      harvest food grain losses, the estimated losses across countries are between 10–30% of total
      production. A 2007 study estimated up to $4 billion in post-harvest losses in Sub-Saharan Africa
      alone; this is equivalent to the annual calorific requirements of 48 million people. 3 Small PPPs are
      more attractive and available for small investors, in particular local companies, providing new
      opportunities for local jobs and investment. Small PPPs are more available for local financiers, in
      particular banks, giving rise to opportunities for the local financial sector with no foreign exchange
      risk with foreign debt for the project. In addition, small PPPs, being local in nature, are also closer to
      the end users, and therefore may be better designed to deliver on their needs,

1.3   These projects may, however, present some intricate and difficult challenges unique to them as
      compared to larger projects of a similar nature. While the benefits of these projects are
      undeniable, few have been undertaken relative to the substantial requirement. The reasons for these
      being less common could include issues relating to government processes and procedures,
      impediments in sector policy and regulation, high transaction costs, lack of public and private sector
      capacity, or constraints in financing due to the risk profile of projects as well as the credit profile of
      the subnational entities sponsoring these projects. Small-scale PPP projects may show variations
      based on a host of variables and, therefore, may not be fully amenable to standardization in costs or
      structure beyond a certain point. On preliminary examination, though, there seem to be common
      constraints in structuring such projects that would need to be looked at more closely with the
      objective of finding ways to support their growth and sustainability.

1.4   The Investment Climate Unit of the World Bank Group (WBG) has undertaken a quick
      overview of global experiences in small-scale PPP projects in order to identify broad patterns
      that can help inform the direction of further work in the area. The PPI database and some larger
      databases from countries with substantive PPP programs have been examined broadly for trends
 1
   World Health Organization. Millennium Development Goal Fact Sheet 7.
 http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/Goal_7_fs.pdf
 2
   World Health Organization.
 3
   Morgan, Nancy; Larson, Gunnar. 2011. Missing Food: The Case of Postharvest Grain Losses in Sub-Saharan Africa.
 Agricultural and Rural Development Joint Note No. 56. Washington, DC: World Bank.
 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/05/15283304/missing-food-case-postharvest-grain-losses-sub-saharan-africa

                                                                                                                            4
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      associated with small-scale PPP projects. Ten projects have been examined in some more detail in
      terms of project characteristics and issues of interest. In addition, the preliminary review has been
      informed by discussions with practitioners familiar with small projects inside and outside the WBG.

                                          2. Scope and Methodology

2.1   The scope of this review is limited and relies on a high level non-statistical methodology. The
      review is based on desk research and consultations with practitioners in client countries and staff
      involved in the provision of financing or transaction advisory services to small-scale PPP projects.
      The review does not rely on the selection of a scientific sample, given the low level of information
      available on small projects in non-traditional sectors as well as the limited objective of the review,
      which is to come to preliminary conclusions on small-scale projects solely with the purpose of
      informing further detailed work in this area

2.2   Small projects are not easy to define. Usually a rigid cap or ceiling for what can be considered a
      small-scale PPP may not be practical. In addition, several small projects when bundled together could
      be perceived as a large project and no longer fit into a definition based on size/value, but the larger
      project could still continue to retain several of the characteristics of its constituent projects. In
      addition, the definition of “small” is relative and could differ depending on the size of country,
      density of population and other factors. However, given the need to have a structure and better focus
      for the review, a limited sub-set of PPP projects was considered. Based on discussions with several
      practitioners familiar with the PPP landscape, only projects $50 million or below in terms of total
      project value have been included. The examination of the PPI and other databases has relied on this
      definition of size.

2.3    Water and energy sector projects are not the focus of this review. The existing literature on
      small-scale PPP projects was examined in some depth with the finding that studies on projects in the
      water and energy sectors abound over the last two decades However, there have been relatively fewer
      studies in other sectors associated with small-scale projects. Given this position, the review excluded
      energy and water projects, with the exception of solar PPP projects that are just beginning to take root
      and have some interesting lessons to offer, and energy efficient street lighting projects that do not
      strictly fall into the energy sector.

2.4   Small projects from traditional sectors have not been included in the review. It was observed in
      the preliminary literature search and the analysis of project databases that several conventional
      projects appeared to be relatively small in small states, including island states, due to their small
      populations and geographic size. However, these projects differ from most small projects in non-
      traditional sectors elsewhere in terms of project profiles and characteristics and, as such, have not
      been included in this review.

2.5   Ten projects have been selected and examined for the purpose of this review. The tenprojects
      were selected from the landscape of small projects that remained globally after application of the
      exclusions described above. These projects have been selected based on the ease of availability of
      information rather than through the use of any scientific methodology. The number of non-water,
      non-energy small projects was found to be larger and growing quite rapidly in the South Asia region,
      specifically India; therefore, we have a selection of six projects from India. In addition, there is one
      project each from Kenya, Lesotho, South Africa, and West Bank and Gaza

2.6   Information on a few areas of focus has been collected from each project and a limited number
      of countries. While not all the information on every project was convenient to find or forthcoming,

                                                                                                            5
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      the following key questions formed the basis of information collection and are broadly covered in the
      rest of this paper:

      Global trends in project size
      • PPI aggregate database: Which countries, regions, and sectors are good examples for small
         projects?
      • What do country level databases say on project size and sectors?

      Institutional and policy frameworks
      • Are small projects defined in countries in any way?
      • Are there separate institutional and policy frameworks for small projects? What are the processes
          for approvals and procurement? Have simplified and “fast-track” approaches been adopted? Are
          standard documents available?
      • Has bundling of projects been used as an option? How are multi-jurisdictional issues being
          treated in bundled projects?

      Financing and structuring issues
      • What kind of PPP modes are being used for small PPPs (BOT, BOO, management/ performance
         contracts)?
      • What is the profile of the investors who have been participating in the bids (local versus foreign;
         small versus large)?
      • What are the major issues in financing? Has there been an attempt to use wholesale platforms to
         take groups of similar projects to market? Are there any regulatory impediments in financing
         these projects?
      • Have these projects often needed to be supported by government? How well have instruments of
         support been defined? Are there mechanisms in the country for pooling the risk of sub-national
         projects, or are credit enhancement techniques available?

      Capacity: public and private
      • What are the specific capacity issues—for public as well as private entities—that would need to
         be taken care of in order to have more and better structured projects?

                                          3. Review of Global Trends

      PPI Database

3.1   An examination of the PPI database of the World Bank Group and the PPP databases of some key
      countries reveals that while there is a preponderance of larger PPPs, several small-scale PPPs have
      also been undertaken, especially at sub-national levels of government and by autonomous bodies
      affiliated to governments.

3.2   The PPI database focuses only on four key sectors. Therefore, a large proportion of small-scale
      projects are from the water and sanitation sectors that are outside the area of our concern.
      Approximately 40% of all projects are of values less than $50 million, and approximately 25% of all
      projects are less than $25 million (1). The PPI database misses out on projects in other emerging
      sectors at the sub-national level. While non-traditional sectors are captured to an extent in country and
      sub-national databases, few of these databases are readily available in the public domain.




                                                                                                             6
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


        Country PPP Databases

 3.3 Country-level databases are more helpful as they include all sectors. However, some of these
     databases, such as India’s, are also a reflection of the institutional structure for approval of projects—
     which may mean that many small-scale PPP projects get excluded from these databases. The PPP
     databases of India, the UK, Australia, British Columbia, and others were examined where available
     and the following points give a brief summary of the trends.

 Figure 1: Small-scale PPP Projects by Region, Global
      1800
      1600
      1400
      1200
      1000                                                                                      Total # of Projects
      800                                                                                       Projects < $50 m

      600                                                                                       Projects < $25 m

      400
      200
        0
               EAP          ECA          LAC         MENA          SAR          SSA

 Source: PPI Database, World Bank

3.4     India has fewer small-scale projects at the national level given that national projects are mostly
        concentrated in national highways, major sea ports and airports and the energy sector. Some of the
        few national level small-scale projects in India are in the tourism, housing, and office space sectors.
        However, an examination of the Viability Gap Funding (VGF) database (see Figure 2) shows a larger
        number of small state and local level projects. A large number of small projects under the VGF4 relate
        to state highways and other smaller road projects, with 23 out of 178 projects being school and silo
        projects, developed and procured by sub-national agencies within the last couple of years. An
        examination of state and local body databases reveals that there are several small PPP projects, with
        the key sectors being solid waste, hospital diagnostics, rooftop solar, information and
        communications technology (ICT), small bridges, roads, tourism, and school education. Andhra
        Pradesh, a key PPP state in India has several such projects (Figure 3) with sectors as wide ranging as
        tourism (food courts, beach resorts, budget hotels, and water and sports facilities), urban amenities
        (shopping complexes, pay and use toilets, health care centers, service centers, multi-level parking,
        and abattoirs, i.e., slaughterhouses), and ICT projects. While state governments and municipalities in
        India have used a wide variety of PPP-like modalities to provide services in the past, in recent years
        there has been a more organized attempt to scale up these experiences and provide central
        government support to them.




 4
   The Scheme for Support to PPPs in Infrastructure also called the VGF Scheme was established in 2005 and has supported
 several projects, especially at sub-national levels. There are no total project cost caps or thresholds for VGF support in India,
 unlike in Indonesia where projects below $100 million are viewed to be not viable for support given high transaction costs.

                                                                                                                                     7
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


3.5      The UK PFI database shows several projects below £30 million and £15 million (Figure 4) in sectors
         such as education, waste management, street lighting and so on, including a large number of local
         body projects.

3.6      11 out of 58 projects in Kenya’s pipeline of projects for which total project cost data is available and
         that have received first stage approval 5 of the PPP Committee are $50 million or below in total
         project cost. These projects are in a surprising variety of sectors: health (oxygen plant, ICT services at
         the Kenyatta National Hospital, and a 300-bed private wing at Kenyatta National Hospital); university
         students’ accommodation at Kenyatta and Moi Universities; parking (multi-level car parking in
         Mombasa); small transport (ferry services, ferry terminal, and O&M of road); and airport services
         (food court, in-flight catering kitchen). Only one of these projects is now in procurement. This
         particular project is dealt with in more detail in the next section and in the annex.

3.7      South Africa has small hospital and tourism PPP projects along with other very small municipal PPPs
         that lapsed some years ago. Several landfill, wastewater reuse, solid waste management, resort
         development, composting, fresh produce market, mixed-use property development, electricity
         distribution management, housing and shopping mall development PPP assessments are currently
         being conducted for municipalities all over the country. These have not reached closure yet.

3.8      The Australia PPP database 6 shows that 30% of all projects are $50 million or lower in total project
         cost (Figure 5), with the sectors being quite diverse: construction and maintenance of government
         buildings, water and waste water, industrial recycling, prisons, hospitals, and student accommodation
         among others.

 Figure 2: VGF Projects by Size: Number and Total Project Cost (TPC), India, March 2014
                      20,000.00                                                                                                  200
                      18,000.00                                                                                                  180
                      16,000.00                                                                                                  160
                      14,000.00                                                                                                  140
                      12,000.00                                                                                                  120
                      10,000.00                                                                                                  100
         $ million
                       8,000.00                                                                                                  80
                       6,000.00                                                                                                  60
                       4,000.00                                                                                                  40
                       2,000.00                                                                                                  20
                           0.00                                                                                                  0
                                          All projects                 Projects at or <$50 m             Projects at or <$25 m
                     # of projects            178                                99                                51
                     TPC                  17,412.04                          2296.59                            566.83

 Source: Department of Economic Affairs, Government of India




 5
      There are three stages of approval followed in Kenya, the first approval being at concept stage.
 6
      All PPPs are by definition sub-national entities.

                                                                                                                                 8
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Figure 3: Approved Projects by Size, Andhra Pradesh, India
                 12000.00                                                                            160
                                                                                                     140
                 10000.00
                                                                                                     120
                  8000.00
                                                                                                     100
   $ million      6000.00                                                                            80
                                                                                                     60
                  4000.00
                                                                                                     40
                  2000.00
                                                                                                     20
                     0.00                                                                            0
                                All projects         projects < 50 m          projects < 25 m
          Number                    147                    116                      109
          Investment ($m)        10602.68                807.42                   603.13

Source: Ministry of Finance, Government of Andhra Pradesh

Figure 4: UK PFI Projects by Size, March 2012
                   60000.00                                                                          800
                                                                                                     700
                   50000.00
                                                                                                     600
                   40000.00
                                                                                                     500
                   30000.00                                                                          400
  £ million
                                                                                                     300
                   20000.00
                                                                                                     200
                   10000.00
                                                                                                     100
                       0.00                                                                          0
                                  Al Projects      Projects < £30 million   Projects < £15 million
          # of Projects               716                   311                      146
          Total Capital Costs      54712.09               4855.63                  1202.46

Source: HM Treasury PFI Database

Figure 5: PPP Projects in Australia by Size
                     70000                                                                           140

                     60000                                                                           120

                     50000                                                                           100

                     40000                                                                           80
   A $ million
                     30000                                                                           60

                     20000                                                                           40

                     10000                                                                           20

                            0                                                                        0
                                  All Projects      Projects < A $ 50 m      Projects < A $ 25 m
          # of Projects               129                    28                       11
          Total Capital Costs      65303.5                  850                      214

Source: PPP Database, Australia

                                                                                                     9
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS



3.9   To get a better sense of how small projects are being structured, what institutional and policy
      issues characterize these small projects, and the constraints in financing and capacity, ten
      small-scale projects were examined. Of these, three projects are from Africa (Kenya, Lesotho, and
      South Africa); one is from the Middle East and North Africa region (West Bank and Gaza), and six
      are from India, which seems to have a high prevalence of small-scale projects. Key information on
      these projects has been captured in the Annex. Some broad features seen in these projects are
      summarized in Table 1 below. Similar to PPPs in general, there are essentially three overlapping
      types of small PPP projects:
      • Projects based on availability payments that require more credit enhancement mechanisms to
          overcome the poor creditworthiness of local governments and the lack of capacity in local banks
          to assess such projects;
      • Projects based on revenues from user charges, property development, etc., which require complex
          structuring;
      • Projects based on donor support (in particular funding towards capital contributions, and
          upstream and mid-stream preparatory work) that overlap with the first two categories of projects.

      The next few sections contain a more detailed analysis of the institutional and policy issues, and
      financing and capacity constraints observed in the projects examined.

 Table 1:   Basic Characteristics of Small Projects in Various Sectors
 Project            Sector             PPP Type        Value       User Charges/    Financi   Local/     Distinct
                                                                   Government       ng        Foreign    Approval
                                                                   Support                    Investor   Process
 Kenyatta           Accommodation      DBFOT           Estimated   User charges,    Debt      Local      No
 University                                            at $50      80%              and
 Students Hostel                                       million     occupancy        equity
                                                                   guarantee by
                                                                   authority
 Palestine Solid    Solid Waste        Operation and   -           Local body       Debt      Foreign    No
 Waste Project      Management         maintenance                 payment          and
                                       contract                    supported by     equity
                                                                   GPOBA
 PURA               Rural Integrated   BOT/ BOO        $25         User charges     Debt      Local      Yes
                    Infrastructure     combination     million     on certain       and
                                       based on                    services,        equity
                                       activity                    government
                                                                   subsidy of up
                                                                   to 30%
 Gandhinagar        Non-               BOO             $9          Private          Debt      Local      No
 Rooftop Solar      conventional                       million     Distribution     and
                    Energy                                         Company buys     equity
                                                                   entire power;
                                                                   government
                                                                   provides part
                                                                   of rooftop
                                                                   space
 Street Lighting    Urban              Performance     $4.8        Local body       Equity    Local      No
 Bhubaneswar        Amenities          based O&M       million     pays fee from
                                       contract                    energy savings
 Punjab Grain       Agricultural       BOO             $7          Fixed charges    Debt      Local      No
 Silo               Storage                            million     paid on          and
                                                                   guaranteed       equity
                                                                   storage




                                                                                                                10
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


 Project               Sector             PPP Type        Value       User Charges/     Financi   Local/      Distinct
                                                                      Government        ng        Foreign     Approval
                                                                      Support                     Investor    Process
 Berhampur Solid       Solid Waste       BOT              $10.3       Output based      Debt      Local       No
 Waste                 Management                         million     payment by        and
                                                                      local body,       equity
                                                                      grant and loan
                                                                      from OUIDF
 Upgrading             Health            BOOT             $7          Government        Debt      Local       No
 Radiology                                                million     pays for          and
 Services                                                             referral          equity
                                                                      patients, user
                                                                      charges for
                                                                      private non-
                                                                      referral
                                                                      patients
 Lesotho Health        Health/           Management       -           Government        Debt      Local and   No
 Care Waste            Environment       contract                     pays; lump        and       foreign
 Management                                                           sum fixed by      equity
                                                                      bid
 Cape Nature (De       Tourism           Concession       $4          Concessionaire    Equity    Local       No
 Hoop) Tourism                                            million     pays lump sum
 Project, South                                                       to government,
 Africa                                                               variable fee on
                                                                      top if demand
                                                                      exceeds a pre-
                                                                      agreed level



                                            4    Institutional and Policy Issues

         Definition of Small Projects

4.1      Small projects have not been specifically defined in countries in terms of value, technical
         complexity, or population served, or by other characteristics. However, institutional frameworks
         and processes in countries do help to define the thinking on what a small project is in several
         countries. For example, in India the approval process may vary based on the project sponsor; i.e.,
         whether it is a national or subnational entity, what the project size is, or whether it is a special project
         under separate guidelines. South Africa has a distinct framework for municipal projects, many of
         which are likely to be smaller in size. In Indonesia, the government has a threshold of $100 million
         for projects to enter the zone of consideration for viability gap funding support from the Ministry of
         Finance; 7 anything below this level is not considered feasible for VGF given the high transaction
         costs. However, the general approval process for all PPP projects remains the same and is not
         distinguished based on project value, sector, or other characteristics in Indonesia. These differences in
         institutional structure for different categories of projects could help define small projects to an extent;
         i.e., small projects are more likely to be subnational projects and in non-traditional sectors. In the UK,
         HM Treasury guidance suggests careful scrutiny over value for money for smaller projects with the
         suggested threshold being £20 million.

         Institutional Structures and Processes

4.2      While there may not be much available in terms of separate institutional or policy frameworks
         for small-scale projects in general, for subnational projects there appears to be a different

 7
      Ministerial Decree No. 223/2012 (PMK 223/2012) on Viability Gap Fund, Government of Indonesia.

                                                                                                                     11
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      structure in countries with strong subnational entities. In India, a strong federal structure means
      that there is a clear bifurcation between national level, and state and local level projects with a
      completely distinct approval process for these. In addition, national level small projects have a fast
      track process for approvals at lower levels of government based on project size. Smaller projects are
      approved by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC)Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) or by
      circulation in an inter-ministerial committee. Subnational projects do not need the approval of the
      Public-Private Partnerships Appraisal Committee (PPPAC), which is constituted at the national level.
      Each state in India has its own institutional framework with projects up to a certain fixed size being
      approved by a committee usually headed by the Chief Secretary of the state. In addition, India has a
      special framework for the processing and approval of rural multi-sectoral PPP projects where the
      Gram Panchayat 8 is the contracting agency. Apart from distinct guidance for structuring these
      projects, there is also a completely separate inter-ministerial committee constituted within the
      Ministry of Rural Development that appraises and approves these projects without recourse to the
      PPPAC, with the relevant state governments and local bodies also involved in the process.

4.3   In South Africa all approval processes are undertaken at the municipal level for tourism
      projects with an estimated capital value of up to R10 million9 while the normal PPP processes
      apply to projects greater than R10 million. Since these guidelines were adopted in 2005, the cap
      has been found to be too low, especially considering that only one project has been approved using
      the small cap process. In addition, guidelines have been developed for South African National Parks
      (SANParks) for the development of Community-Public Partnership arrangements to allow
      communities adjacent to the National Parks to contract for economic developmental activities within
      or adjacent to the parks. Normal open tender procurement processes as provided under National
      Treasury Regulation 16 need not be followed for these small projects.

4.4   However, several countries have the same approval process for all PPP projects irrespective of
      size or type of project. In Indonesia, several small water projects are being undertaken by municipal
      bodies. While these are outside the scope of this review, one of the major lessons in Indonesia is the
      long processing time for even small projects, given that all PPP projects have to go through an
      elaborate approval process regardless of size. While projects below $100 million are considered
      unviable for processing under VGF due to high transaction costs, no alternate arrangement seems to
      have been made for the appraisal and approval process of these projects. Kenya is another country
      where all projects are subject to a uniform approval process. Currently, the Government of Kenya is
      considering placing a threshold for entry of projects into the three-stage approval process.

4.5   Small projects face lengthy procurement processes, complex legal and technical documentation
      and due diligence requirements similar to those for large projects in most jurisdictions. HM
      Treasury carried out an assessment of small capital value projects under £20 million in 2003 using a
      sample of 35 projects. While the performance of the small projects was found to be as good and in
      many cases better than large projects, average procurement time was around 2–2.5 years, which was
      similar to that of large projects. Moreover, small projects had transaction and bid costs that were
      similar to those of large projects for bidders as well as the authority due to the same complicated legal
      and technical documentation and due diligence as required for large projects. 10

4.6   Increasingly, countries appear to be realizing the need to build new models and structures for
      small PPPs where smaller investors or community groups are likely to have a greater stake.

 8
   Elected body at village level.
 9
   Approximately $1 million.
 10
    HM Treasury. 2003. PFI: Meeting the Investment Challenge. London, United Kingdom: HM Treasury.
 http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130129110402/http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/media/F/7/PFI_604a.pdf

                                                                                                                 12
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


         Similar to the South African model for SANParks, Brazil has recently initiated work on
         environmental PPPs. The Multilateral Investment Fund (MIF), the Chico Mendes Institute for
         Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), and the Brazilian Institute of Municipal Administration
         (IBAM) have collaborated to build innovative PPP models for the protection of environmental assets
         in federally owned Conservation Units. However, so far PPP models in Brazil, as in other countries,
         have catered mostly to large projects with models that facilitate the participation of larger firms in
         financing and operations. 11

         Standardized Documents

4.7      Separate standardized documents for processing small projects are not common. Smaller PPPs
         are more frequently found in the solid waste, street lighting, small energy, water, storage, and
         multiple other sectors as seen in the earlier section on global trends. The general trend has been to use
         the documents developed for the first project as standard documents for subsequent projects.

4.8      Standardized documents seem to be prevalent in countries like India, in sectors where
         geographic and specific local factors influence contract structure to a lesser extent. India has a
         few examples of standardized contract documents for small projects. The Planning Commission of
         India is working on finalizing the standardized contractual document for grain silos. Ten grain silo
         complexes have recently been bid out by the Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and Logistics
         Corporation (MPWLC). Similarly, the Food Corporation of India (FCI) has created a standard
         contract based on which it is carrying out the procurement of grain silo complexes under the DBFOT
         model at 36 locations in several states across India. The PURA PPPs in India also have their own
         standard concession contract in three parts and the standard state support agreement, which are being
         replicated in all projects with some modifications. The PURA standard concession document has a
         distinctive feature given the low level of capacity in the contracting agency, the Gram Panchayat. The
         concession contract is divided into three parts with the first part dealing with the specific project
         features and the other parts being generic legal clauses and schedules. Part II of the Concession
         Agreement is negotiated by the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) given the low level of legal
         capacity of Gram Panchayats, while the Gram Panchayat is involved in discussions on specific project
         features, performance indicators and targets that are included in Part I of the Concession Agreement.
         The existence of the standard contract has enabled the government to invite bids in groups of several
         projects under Phases I and II of PURA.

4.9      South Africa has detailed guidelines for processing municipal projects. These guidelines,
         however, are uniform to all projects and do not discriminate between large and small projects,
         although municipal projects, except in metro areas, tend to be smaller in size. South Africa’s
         municipal guidance has not reduced complexities associated with the approval process as these
         projects still need to comply with National Treasury Regulation 16.

         Bundling and Multi-jurisdictional Issues

4.10 An area highlighted by practitioners was the bundling of smaller projects into larger ones in
     order to improve scale and viability, make these more attractive to larger players in
     infrastructure and to enable better financing options. For example, states in India are looking at
     bundling smaller solid waste, street lighting and health diagnostic projects in order to improve scale
     and viability. Among the nine projects examined as part of this review, there is bundling in five
     projects: the Gujarat rooftop solar projects, the PURA projects, the Lesotho Health Care Waste
     Management project, the Palestine Solid Waste Management project and the Andhra Pradesh Health

  11
       Multilateral Investment Fund.

                                                                                                               13
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


         Diagnostics project. In all of the aforementioned projects except the Palestine Solid Waste
         Management project, bundling was not associated with multiple jurisdictions. In the case of the
         Palestine Solid Waste Management a Joint Services Council was formed, which became the public
         authority that signed the agreement with the private party. In a recent solid waste project jointly
         undertaken by the cities of Bhubaneswar and Cuttack in the state of Odisha in India, the two local
         bodies went ahead with a single aggregated bid process. While one bidder was selected, separate
         contracts were signed with each municipal body.

4.11 An example of aggressive bundling is the program designed by the Pennsylvania Department of
     Transportation aggregating the construction and maintenance of a few hundred of small
     bridges into a single PPP project under its old bridges rehabilitation program. The average cost
     of the individual bridges is as low as approximately $2 million, which would not make for a viable
     single P3 project. In this case too, multiple jurisdictions were not involved.

4.12 The Tamil Nadu Road Development Company in India is also engaged in bundling of road
     maintenance projects to improve scale and attractiveness of relatively smaller roads to the
     private sector. These are projects where the government has already completed construction but is
     looking for a partner for operation and maintenance of the project.

4.13 In the United Kingdom, Partnerships for Church of England Schools (PfCS) was created to
     bundle several small schools with a new built capital cost of around £2 million into
     “geographically coherent” groups in order to facilitate the procurement of the private partner.
     At around the same time, the United Kingdom had also created the concept of “batched acute
     hospitals” where major acute hospital projects were bundled together for the purpose of procurement
     but with separate contracts being signed, given different risk allocation needs. 12

4.14 The Philippines PPP for School Infrastructure Program (PSIP) involved the bundling of a few
     thousands of sub-projects consisting of the construction of classrooms and toilets, and supply of
     furniture and fixtures at various school sites into PPP packages for being bid out on Build Lease
     Transfer (BLT) basis.

4.15 Bundling across jurisdictions may result in problematic jurisdictional issues and may require a
     high level of harmonization and standardization. Several states in India have failed to achieve
     success in structuring single multijurisdictional projects due to a failure to satisfactorily sort out tariff
     and risk issues.

4.16 Bundling for procurement with separate contracts could streamline procurement and reduce
     costs for the bidder as well as the authority. According to a case cited in the UK, bid costs as a
     proportion of capital value of a project could be as much as 33% lower for a £50 million project as
     compared to a £20 million project. 13 On the public sector side, aggregating projects for project
     development and procurement results in decreasing costs given that the same standard procedure is
     followed and the same draft documentation is used for all projects in aggregate, rather than repeating
     the process for each project separately. It also lowers the time taken to procure projects.




  12
       HM Treasury, supra at note 13.
  13
       Id.

                                                                                                               14
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                                  5   Financing and Government Support

      PPP Type

5.1   In general, there is no specific PPP type that characterizes all small projects. Small projects were
      found to be on the entire spectrum of PPP modes, ranging from management contracts all the way to
      concessions, with BOT and BOO PPP projects being common. The payment mechanisms are what
      distinguish many of the smaller projects from the larger ones. The payment mechanism usually
      depends upon the sector characteristics. In sectors like solid waste management and rural multi-
      sectoral infrastructure (e.g., PURA), projects are mostly net cost projects, with the government
      paying the private party to provide the services to the public. In PURA projects, for example, the
      standard contract allows for the levy of tariff for the services; however not all project contracts have
      followed this levy. In solid waste management projects, some local bodies levy trash collection or
      other charges on the population of the city that are, however, rarely cost covering. In solar rooftop
      energy projects and silo storage projects in India, the government buys the service or product fully. In
      accommodation projects for students, there is some amount of government subsidy but a larger
      proportion is acquired through rental income paid by the users.

      Investor Profiles

5.2   Investors in all the projects examined except the Palestine Solid Waste Management project were
      local investors, mostly small to medium sized, with a relatively lower level of previous experience in
      PPPs. In addition, the net worth of some of these investors was relatively low, thus limiting their
      ability to simultaneously take on several projects in an area. However, where governments have bid
      out projects simultaneously giving the option to bidders to bid for multiple projects, as in the case of
      silo projects in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, which structured and bid out 10 silo projects
      simultaneously, and the case of the Food Corporation of India (FCI), which is bidding out silo
      projects at 36 locations, several large firms with higher financial capacity as well as greater
      experience in the sector and in implementing PPP projects have entered the market. In the case of the
      MP silos project, Adani Enterprise, a part of the Adani group of companies with investments in
      various infrastructure sectors as well as storage and logistics, has been the winning bidder in 7 out of
      10 projects that were bid out. The observations are similar in the case of multiple PURA projects
      being bid out by the Government of India. Governments are trying to bundle other projects such as
      street-lighting projects across different cities in order to attract bigger and more substantial investors
      as well as to attract debt financing from financiers. It is observed from examining the evaluation
      criteria for firms in the case of the MP silos project that the authority has adopted a balanced
      approach in procurement with sector expertise as well as PPP expertise being considered for selection
      of firms. In the case of the West Bank and Gaza Solid Waste Management Project, a foreign firm
      with expertise in the area of waste management has been selected; there were no domestic firms that
      had any substantial experience in this area.

      Financing Constraints

5.3   Smaller projects appear to have a host of financing and structuring issues. The public entity in
      almost all the projects examined had to play a proactive role in facilitating financing. The projects
      also needed substantial government support in order to become bankable.

5.4   Local bodies undertaking small-scale PPP projects are frequently characterized by inadequate
      fiscal resources. Most projects out of the sample of ten small-scale PPP projects examined were net
      cost projects for government; i.e., the government needs to pay a substantial proportion of the costs
      through availability or output based payments. In some of the cases examined, the local body did not

                                                                                                             15
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      have the financial capacity to make the payments on its own and needed help from sources external to
      its routine budget, such as from the GPOBA and VGF.

5.5   Issues of credit-worthiness also plague local bodies. The lack of credit-worthiness of the local
      body affects the availability of finance for PPP projects sponsored by it. The guarantee of a local
      body or even termination payment provisions in contracts where the local body is the contracting
      authority does not amount to much if its fiscal position is doubtful. In the late 1990s the Government
      of India had, with assistance from a USAID project, worked on an exercise of developing a credit
      rating methodology for municipal bodies, and an initiative for rating these institutions was undertaken
      by the Ministry of Urban Development. The exercise helped several local bodies adopt better
      financial management systems and to issue bonds for infrastructure.

5.6   There is a shortage/ non-existence of financing from local debt markets for small-scale projects.
      While bond financing is somewhat forthcoming in recent times for some of the larger PPP projects of
      national importance, commercial bank financing is frequently the only source of financing for small-
      scale projects. In addition, there is no true project finance in countries, with the investors having to
      produce collateral that may be equal to or higher than the debt issued.

5.7   Bankers do not understand small-scale projects due to a lack of experience with similar
      projects, and a lack of frameworks or standard documents that are well known to them. With
      each small project coming with its own distinct and different contract and risk characteristics, and
      with there being a lack of sufficient numbers of projects, bankers are also averse to building appraisal
      and due diligence skills for such projects. Often, bankers may not have a lending product for a sector
      or particular type of small-scale project. For example, in the case of small-scale energy efficiency
      projects in India such as street-lighting projects, only one financier with the required lending product
      exists; this entity has equity participation by IFC. 14 The Government of India is now trying to create a
      project financing market for such projects through the use of a Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE)
      partial risk guarantee instrument, which takes the first loss in the case of default.

5.8   Single and group borrower limits have created constraints in financing projects, large and
      small alike, but often smaller projects are affected more as the investors are small or medium
      net worth firms with smaller borrowing limits. In most cases, private developers need to approach
      a number of banks in order to get financing even for a small project. In some cases, this has led to full
      equity financing for projects, such as in the case of the Bhubaneswar street lighting project and small
      water projects in Indonesia.

5.9   While lease financing can help in bringing finance and implementation together by leveraging
      the different capacities and skills available in the market, there could be impediments to the use
      of such platforms in some countries. Lease financing is widely used in Mexico and other countries
      in the Latin America region. Lease financing can enable the long-term financing and implementation
      of several smaller projects more easily and at lower cost than traditional commercial bank lending.
      Countries like India face regulatory constraints in the use of lease financing and rely mostly on a trust
      fund structure. Practitioners have cited the existence of a large untapped potential market for lease
      financing in India that can be encouraged by easing some of the associated regulatory constraints.

5.10 The costs involved in retaining transaction advisors to assist in the preparation of projects at
     subnational levels are relatively high and sometimes unaffordable. This is especially so in the

 14
   Tata Cleantech Capital Limited (TCCL) is a JV of the Tata Capital Limited and the IFC. It provides financing products for
 energy efficiency projects in India.

                                                                                                                               16
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      case of municipal entities since these are already constrained financially in most cases. In the projects
      examined where IFC acted as transaction advisor, it was observed that several projects obtained
      initial project development funding from DevCo or from bilateral or other funding agencies. India has
      the India Infrastructure Project Development Facility (IIPDF) implemented by the Department of
      Economic Affairs in the Government of India, which is a fund designed to help in financing
      transaction advisory costs and can be utilized by national as well as subnational levels of government.
      Similar is the case with Pakistan where the Project Development Facility (PDF) and VGF can be used
      by projects irrespective of the total value of the project. South Africa has a PDF to assist in project
      development and that has been usable by municipalities since 2006 to defray the costs of project
      development and feasibility studies. Prior to the PDF in South Africa a similar function to assist
      municipalities was being performed by the Municipal Infrastructure Investment Unit (MIIU).

5.11 While it is essential to make project development funding accessible, it is important to note that
     often small projects also have proportionately higher development and procurement costs that
     may reduce value for money of these projects. In the United Kingdom, £20 million have been
     identified as the floor below which authorities intending to bid out projects are required to ensure that
     the VfM exercise considers appropriately the proportionately higher costs of development and
     procurement of these projects in terms of time as well as money.

5.12 Small projects are likely to show a proportionately larger viability gap due to the higher costs
     of technical and financial documentation needed as well as the higher risk profile of projects.
     As observed in earlier paragraphs, the cost of bidding and preparation of technical, legal, and
     financial documentation for small projects is often cumbersome and time consuming leading to
     proportionately higher costs for small projects, further leading to a larger viability gap in proportion
     to the total capital cost of the project. The nature of services related to most small projects is such that
     it is not feasible for governments, politically as well as from the point of view of affordability, to
     increase tariffs sufficiently to cover the viability gap. In addition, investors also add a premium for
     their higher risk perception.

5.13 Government support mechanisms exist in several countries for providing viability gap and
     other forms of support, but these are not specifically designed to cater to small projects. In
     Indonesia, for example, the VGF has a threshold of $100 million for any project to be considered for
     assistance. In India, while the VGF caters to projects irrespective of size, it has a cap of 20%, which
     is often not sufficient for smaller projects in some sectors such as solid waste and water. Urban
     Infrastructure Development Funds are an increasingly common phenomenon in countries with some
     of these providing various instruments of support including credit enhancement as well as senior and
     subordinate debt at lower than commercial rates of interest. Among the projects examined, the
     Berhampur Solid Waste Management Project is financed partly by a loan from the Orissa Urban
     Infrastructure Development Fund (OUIDF). GPOBA has partially financed the Palestine Solid Waste
     Management Project.

5.14 The Government of Korea has included clauses in its legislation to enable small and medium
     enterprises (SMEs) to participate in the PPP process. The PPP Act of Korea promotes SME
     participation in projects at local government level through Article 11, which mandates the sponsoring
     authority to give proper consideration to small and medium enterprises during the process of
     selection, and also through Article 34, which mandates that SMEs with weak security capacities shall
     be given priority in the provision of credit guarantees from the Infrastructure Credit Guarantee Fund.
     Where projects are local government sponsored projects, the PPP Basic Plan Article 124 (3) allows
     the adoption of preferential measures in evaluating project plans with regard to the ratio of
     investment by business firms in the local area, the number of investors and the ratio of local small


                                                                                                              17
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      and medium business firms participating in the project at the stage of construction. In addition, the
      government also has specific caps based on the type of facility for provision of subsidy to PPPs in the
      environmental sector, which are in Table 2 below. Variations in subsidy amounts incorporated into
      the policy based on project subcategory help in creating the required support for such projects. While
      environment PPP projects are not specifically small PPPs, many of these tend to be below $50
      million. Currently, there are 307 local projects with a total cost of $14 billion, suggesting an average
      cost of below $50 million.

      Table 2: Caps in Subsidies for Environmental PPPs
      Resource Recovery Facility                                           Subsidy rate (% of total project costs)
      Incineration facility                                                30–50%
      Incineration heat recovery facility                                  30–50%
      RDF manufacturing facility                                           30–50%
      Landfill gas utilization facility                                    Fixed amount
      Organic waste resource bio-gasification facility
      Food waste bio-gasification facility                                 30%
      Food waste leachate bio-gasification facility                        30%
      Food waste, live-stock excreta and other wastes bio-gasification     70%
      facility
      Resource recovery facility center (including broadband facilities)   30%
      Source: Korea Development Institute

5.15 A specific constraint associated with several small projects is the high credit risk perception by
     commercial banks as well as investors and developers. Revenue recoveries in small projects are
     associated with a high level of risk due to affordability as well as political economy issues. In most of
     the projects examined, the payment mechanism consists of availability payments or includes a
     minimum demand and price guarantee, which should normally take care of this risk perception;
     however, it is observed that availability based payment mechanisms that take care of the revenue risk
     do not adequately cover the credit risk (for banks) and payment risk (for the PPP SPV) due to the
     weak financial position of municipalities. For example, in South Africa, many municipalities spend
     85-90% of their revenues on staff salaries. To give a live example of the problems associated with the
     risk perception of investors: the governments of the provinces of Sindh and Punjab in Pakistan
     floated tenders for silo projects a couple of years ago with some enthusiasm shown by the investors at
     pre-qualification stage. None of the pre-qualified bidders, however, submitted proposals. The reason
     cited for not doing so: the cost of the silo project was too high and the firms feared that the
     governments involved would not be able to pay the estimated availability payments. Such perceptions
     of high payment risk could affect the financial feasibility of the project as the case of the Pakistani
     silo projects shows. In some of the small projects examined, escrow mechanisms have been used to
     cover the credit and payment risks with at least 3-4 months’ worth of reserves being maintained in the
     accounts, and automatic release followed at designated times; in addition comfort letters from the
     government have been utilized. However, there are costs to escrow mechanisms—especially
     opportunity cost issues to keeping money in advance in escrow accounts apart from the fact that the
     escrow arrangement itself might not be fulfilled in the case of a weak public entity.

5.16 In order to increase the impact of development financing, several bilateral and multilateral
     entities seem to be increasingly inclined to invest in projects not singly but through funds that
     invest in individual projects. For example, KfW invests in urban infrastructure funds among others,
     one example in our review of ten small-scale projects being the OUIDF. This holding fund model has
     been used in energy efficiency financing in Europe widely and holds the key to successfully scaling




                                                                                                                     18
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


       up financing focused towards specific types of sustainable development. 15 Another interesting
       example of the wholesale approach is the Social Innovation Fund (SIF) on which the IDB is working.
       The concept involves the IDB, bilateral and/or multilateral organizations pooling together funding to
       invest in country specific SIFs that could further bring in financing from private sources for investing
       in social impact public private partnership projects through reimbursable and non-reimbursable
       financing instruments such as grants, loans, and guarantees. 16 While these examples are promising,
       the requirement for such funds is largely unfulfilled in the countries examined for the purpose of this
       review.

5.17 Practitioners also highlighted the need for building specific structures for contract management
     as well as for management of fiscal commitments and contingent liabilities arising out of small
     projects. Small projects on the face of it seem relatively less likely to cause large fiscal commitments
     and contingent liabilities to governments because of lower values; however, if seen in aggregate and
     given the higher risk profile of the public entity as well as the private partner, these projects could
     result in higher than obvious contingent liabilities; given this, the probability that they will fail could
     be higher than for the typical large transport and energy projects. There were frameworks for contract
     management embedded in the contracts of the projects examined; there were no frameworks for
     monitoring or managing the fiscal commitments and contingent liabilities.

                                      6    Recommendations for Further Work

6.1    Small PPPs are more common in non-traditional sectors. These sectors, as found in the earlier
       sections, are characterized by the lack of creation and dissemination of new knowledge, simple
       institutional structures and procedures, and standardization. This has made replication of these
       projects slow and painful, and it has also increased the time and cost of processing and has resulted in
       the lack of proper sequencing of activities. Another area with some scope of improvement is that of
       specific sector strategies for small municipal projects. Rather than being tackled project-by-project
       wherever the need arises, it may make sense to prepare specific sector strategies where these do not
       exist, for sectors like solid waste, parking, or accommodation; in the case of small road and bridge
       projects, strategy customized to smaller projects to help build a small-scale project pipeline. There is
       little upstream work available in countries, and there are few standard contracts in these sectors
       except in India in the grain storage sector where upstream policy has evolved over time and a
       standard contract is currently being reviewed as well for approval by the Planning Commission. There
       is also some work done in the solid waste sector across many countries, although rapid scaling up of
       projects has not been seen due to a plethora of associated reasons. The successes in some of these
       sectors are probably good for emulation in sectors with scope for quick scaling up.

6.2    The institutional structure for processing PPP projects from conception through development,
       appraisal, approval, and procurement stages is not suitable for small projects. Small projects
       with much lower capital costs require the same amount of time and similar complicated processes as
       for larger projects. In fact, given that most of the small projects tend to be subnational projects;
       several layers of additional approvals pertaining to line Ministry, local body and provincial
       government are required. Where the institutional structure for processing and approvals does


  15
     JESSICA and JEREMIE represent these models and are an initiative of the European Commission in partnership with the
  European Investment Bank and the Council of Europe Development Bank.
  16
     Guaipatín, Carlos. 2013. How to Promote High-Impact Innovations through Social Innovation Funds: A Call for Public-
  Private Partnerships. Discussion Paper No. IDB-DP-319. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
  http://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/6396/CTI%20DP%20How%20To%20Promote%20High-
  Impact%20Innovations%20through%20SIF.pdf


                                                                                                                           19
  A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      discriminate based on size or other attributes, as in the case of India or South Africa, it is still not
      fully customized to the needs of small projects.

6.3   In terms of financing, there is a large market for commercial financing of small PPP projects
      below $50 million in some sectors, but most projects examined presented key structuring and
      credit enhancement requirements as well as related sector policy and institutional deficiencies
      that have the potential to deter financing of similar small projects on a larger scale. Small
      projects in some sectors are currently fully equity-financed due to there being no suitable lending
      products or due to a lack of capacity and information in banks to carry out due diligence. Current
      credit enhancement instruments are scattered or inaccessible to all sectors.

6.4   The capacity to carry out their specific roles in PPP development, financing, and
      implementation is sorely deficient in almost all the entities involved in small-scale PPP
      transactions. There is a preponderance of “just-in-case” training, but more focused process and
      activity related “just-in-time” training is largely unavailable.

6.5   There is a need for further work on two levels: immediate work focused specifically on small
      projects that will help in quick wins; and slower, and more embedded work in countries focused
      on the larger environment for small-scale PPP projects. The latter can most preferably be
      undertaken as part of the general work on strengthening the environment for PPP over the medium to
      the longer term in countries and therefore, is outside the scope of this review. Reforms to financial
      regulations and the strengthening of capital markets are among the longer term measures that need to
      be undertaken as a part of the general strengthening of infrastructure finance, with the requirements of
      small projects being kept in mind. In addition, institutional and financial strengthening of sub-national
      bodies—already a part of the work of several World Bank Group units—could be taken up with
      special focus on those countries and entities that present a scope for PPP implementation.

6.6   Areas where there could be quick results forthcoming with minor investments in effort and
      money can be initiated early. These areas are listed below:

      Institutional and policy work targeting small projects: This includes upstream institutional and
      process level work to smooth out the different phases of small project implementation from
      conception through development, appraisal, approval, procurement, and contract management. This
      entails examining a separate framework for small-scale PPP projects and the creation of standard
      procurement and contract documents, and templates for other intermediate processes. This could be
      done through the preparation of separate regulations for small-scale PPP projects including these
      various components. In addition, it would be useful to look at having a repository of all small scale
      knowledge and capacity such as within the PPP unit in a Small PPP Cell or Sub-Unit. There are
      several such different mechanisms that can be explored. However, the break-up of the components
      that are recommended for development as a complete tool or standardized guidance for small projects
      is as follows:

          •   Fast track development and approvals process: This will include the development of
              simple institutional structures for developing, processing, approval and procurement of small-
              scale projects at sub-national levels.
          •   Fast track payments process: This entails looking in-depth at the processes in current small-
              scale PPP projects for making payments (availability, construction grant, other) and providing
              a streamlined process with minimum lags.
          •   Development of standard procurement and contract documentation: This will consist of
              the development of the following standard documents for key identified sectors: conception

                                                                                                            20
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


            report / business case for first approval, detailed project appraisal documentation, contract
            documents, EoI/RFQ, RFP, performance reports, etc., based on lessons learned from initial
            cases to facilitate scaling up.
        •   Measuring and managing fiscal and contingent liabilities at municipal and aggregate
            levels: While many countries do not have a framework even for larger PPP projects, it would
            make sense to develop these procedures for managing risk of the small-scale PPP projects
            including standard frameworks, operating manuals and step-by-step how-to-do-it case studies
            to assist practitioners.
        •   Harmonizing upstream policy, differing policy regimes and tariff processes prevalent in
            different sub-national entities, especially in smaller local bodies where projects might have
            viability issues due to scale.
        •   Monitoring & Evaluation and contract management processes.

Sector analysis and reform targeted at sectors that feature small projects frequently: This would include
country-level work exploring specifically identified emerging small sectors with regard to the current
status of sector regulations, appropriateness or adequacy of the regulations for small PPP, identification of
gaps, outlining / drafting modifications or new regulations, sector strategy, sector guidance and tariff
policy, among other things. While these sectors would differ based on country and region, some
frequently seen sectors are listed below. There is existing sector work in some of the sectors, as well as
tacit knowledge that would need to be externalized and consolidated. Some sector prioritization may,
however, be needed for sector analysis related work as PPPs are expanding to many sectors. There could
be a focus on urban or semi-urban infrastructure services that could be more easily replicated when
combined with a solution to credit worthiness issues.
         • Urban amenities: multi-level parking, solid waste, medical waste, road, streetlight installation
             and maintenance, parks development and maintenance, health and education.
         • Small roads within provinces
         • Urban/ city roads
         • Small bridges
         • Abattoirs
         • Tourism
         • Accommodation
         • Using urban spaces / rooftops for solar energy generation

Support for financing small-scale projects: This would include an examination of available government
support mechanisms, the efficiency or otherwise of available frameworks and instruments to cater to
small PPP projects, identification of gaps, designing modifications to available mechanisms and
instruments, and exploring and outlining possible new mechanisms and instruments; including the
examination of roles that multilateral development banks like the WBG can play in these. Some specific
areas of work are listed below:

    •   Focused work on enabling more commercial bank financing of small projects: Given that
        small projects may not be amenable to project-by-project bond financing, and commercial bank
        financing may continue to be a key source of financing for small projects in the short to the
        medium term, it is clear that debt funding by banks needs to be increased and streamlined
        substantially over the immediate future. This can be done through innovative contract clauses to
        reduce credit risk, funds for support including credit enhancement (see below) and building
        capacity within commercial banks to understand small projects and their risk profiles.

    •   Exploring Bank Group guarantee instruments for small PPP projects: The norm has been for
        the Bank to provide guarantees in the case of larger more complex projects. However, small

                                                                                                          21
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      projects have largely remained out of this program. It may help to carry out a preliminary
      exploration of the pros and cons of Bank Group guarantees for smaller projects to see if this could
      be a feasible option for credit enhancement for small projects.

  •   Funding vehicle aimed at small sub-national projects: Rather than specific project level
      investments, the World Bank Group could initiate greater thinking around wholesale investing
      such as through urban infra funds or support vehicles with grant and non-grant products such as
      loans, guarantees, etc.; IFC or the World Bank can look at contributing to these funding vehicles
      within a practical and flexible framework in order to leverage private financing. The IDB concept
      on country specific SIFs could be one way to approach this. Another way to do this is through
      country specific guarantee / support facilities established exclusively for small-scale subnational
      PPP projects: the guarantee window can be backed by the client country / state government and
      IFC, with both together taking the first loss up to 50% or less (the proportion could be 15% client
      country and 35% IFC), with the client country portion backed up by a Partial Credit Guarantee
      (PCG) instrument of the World Bank. Further detailed design work is recommended to place the
      general design in context. However, apart from the guarantee instrument, windows for project
      development funding and other support instruments would be required. A multi-product small-
      scale PPP facility is a good option that may work for a variety of projects. A general schematic
      approach is suggested in Figure 6 below. However, this would need to be supplemented by both
      upstream sector and institutional work as suggested earlier in order to structure and bring good
      projects into the pipeline. In addition, it would help to look at funding innovative small projects
      through a “challenge fund” window in order to encourage promising new project structures that
      meet key benchmark criteria.

  •   Focused capital markets reforms: Analyzing markets for legal and regulatory constraints to
      financing of small-scale projects is another essential area that could help in creating further
      sources of long term financing for small projects. Specifically, impediments to lease financing
      and regulatory constraints to investments by institutional investors such as pension funds and
      insurance funds can be examined in depth in order to suggest focused limited reforms that can
      give quick results.




                                                                                                      22
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


     Figure 6: Schematic for a Multi-Product Financing Facility for Small-Scale PPP projects




Capacity enhancement: PPP processes are knowledge intensive activities and would need to be supported
by smaller initiatives aimed at providing focused capacity enhancement related to specific projects being
undertaken by the relevant entity and could include the following:
        • Building skills in public entities to develop and appraise projects, initiate and manage the PPP
            procurement process, to monitor and evaluate and manage contracts; enhancing sector
            specific knowledge and skills
        • Improving local private investors’ understanding of PPP and sector issues
        • Improving bankers’ understanding of relevant sectors in small project and enhance small
            project related appraisal skills
        • Building a knowledge base of case studies of successful small PPP projects with special focus
            on successful cases of bundling and how institutional, jurisdictional, and financing issues
            related to bundled projects have been successfully managed.




                                                                                                       23
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                             ANNEX: SUMMARY PROJECT INFORMATION 17

Kenyatta University Hostel Accommodation Project
Country: Kenya
Sector: Education/ accommodation
Name of Project: Kenyatta University (KU) Hostel Accommodation Project
Contracting agency: KU
Agency type: Autonomous Institution. The University has its own Act, can raise resources and enter into
agreements
Type of PPP: DBFOT
Contract term: 30 years
Construction period: 2 years
Bid Parameter: Technical qualification; Financial: Lowest present value of rental income
Total cost of project: Estimated $50 million (first bid received was for $37 million, although it had to be
cancelled subsequently and is under re-bid)
Total Population served: minimum 10000
Per unit cost: $5000
Basic specifications: Basic specifications were set by KU to prevent over engineering, and ensure that
the infrastructure provided is basic and sufficient (the benchmark level used is the current accommodation
provided by KU)
Stage of project: Retendering - RFP. The first tender had to be cancelled after bids were received and the
preferred bidder identified due to conflict of interest issues: the CEO of the lead firm in the consortium
was appointed the Chancellor of the Kenyatta University. The new proposals were expected to be
received on 9th May 2014
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 18 months
Local or foreign investor: Consortia led by local investors, but each consortium has a foreign partner.
Applicable legislation: PPP Act of Kenya 2013
Approving authority: PPP Steering Committee, National Treasury, Kenya; there is three-stage approval
process with the first approval at concept stage, the second approval at feasibility analysis stage prior to
procurement and the third approval post-bid
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Yes
Role of Private Party: Design, finance, construct, operate and maintain project
Role of Public Authority: Monitor contract according to performance standards, collect rentals on behalf
of the private party at a fee.
Financing: Remains to be seen after bid is finalized the second time around
Payment Mechanism: Rentals are collected periodically by the KU, 2% service fee is retained and 98%
is paid to the private party
Tariff: Tariff cap is set by the KU during procurement in the RFP; however, the tariff is set by the private
party with provision for reset at five year intervals;
Comparison to existing rates: The tariff cap has been set at an average of Ksh.6000 (different rates for
undergraduate and post graduate accommodation); this is comparable to rental rates charged by private
hostels near the University. Government sponsored students pay a lower rate of about Ksh3700.
Government Support: Land for the project has been provided by KU free of cost; 80% occupancy
guarantee has been given by KU.

17
  The cases draw heavily from discussions with IFC staff Evans Kamau, Carla M.N. Faustino Coelho, Neeraj Gupta, Isabel
Chatterton, Aditya Dhar, Pankaj Mishra, and Bhanu Mehrotra; IFC Success Stories publications; discussions with Ricardo Arias
of GPOBA, the World Bank and Ibrahim Dajani of the World Bank West Bank and Gaza office; Arvind Mayaram, Secretary of
DEA, GoI; J.S. Oberoi of LT Food Limited, India; Sheo Shekhar Shukla of Government of Madhya Pradesh; Ministry of
Education PPP Node of Kenya; Kenya National PPP Unit; and the authors’ own experience of working on small projects in
different countries.

                                                                                                                          24
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Advantages as compared to current services availed by students: The contract has performance
standards and will be regulated by the KU unlike private accommodation, which tends to be unregulated;
while the average rental cap for the PPP accommodation is higher at 6000 KS as compared to the cost of
service provided by KU at 3700 KS, it is lower than the cost of service provided by fully private providers
outside KU, which tends to be between 8000-10000 KS; in addition, the commute will be removed for
students who will shift to the PPP accommodation and result in additional savings; in addition, living on
campus will be safer than living in private accommodation outside, and students will also have access to
University facilities at all hours of the day e.g., Libraries, health and recreation facilities.
Contingent liabilities created: Contingent liabilities are created for government (Education
Department); if KU is unable to ensure 80% occupancy and needs to pay up and cannot do so from own
budget/ existing budgetary provisions by government to KU, government may need to pay up.
Risks: Private rental market around KU may reduce rates drastically and students may prefer to stay in
private accommodation in such an eventuality
Level of risk: Perceived to be low due to other advantages of staying on campus enumerated above, and
since the current demand at 70000 units far outstrips the 10000 units being constructed under this project
Key risk mitigating features: Cost, security, performance standards superior to off campus
accommodation available to students; surrounding off-campus area popularly perceived to be poor in
safety and security.
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: The project
was structured with 10000 accommodation units unlike other hostel accommodation projects that tend to
be smaller; this was done in order to bring down the per unit costs and the rental (a) closer to current KU
rentals and (b) lower than private rentals for similar accommodation
Lessons learned:
    • Where local investors are involved, there could be conflict of interest issues on several grounds.
         In the RFP documents it is important to highlight that bidders should not have relationships with
         clients that would jeopardize their chance of accepting an award if they are successful. On
         learning of any issues of conflict consult with relevant parties and authorities to ensure the right
         decisions are made. Vet the bidding firms and their management to ensure high integrity will be
         maintained since knowledge of good practices might be low at local level.
    • From the onset it is important that the client sets up a working committee dedicated to the project
         and where possible the committee should have relevant knowledge and expertise in project
         related disciplines e.g., in the current project Architects and Quantity Surveyors had a major role
         to play in evaluating construction designs and technology in use and the client had in house
         professionals qualified in both fields and who were on the project committee
    • Projects can be made viable with appropriate increase in number of consumers served as in this
         case




                                                                                                          25
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


West Bank and Gaza Solid Waste Management Project
Country: West Bank and Gaza
Sector: Solid Waste Management
Name of Project: Palestine Solid Waste Management Project
Contracting agency: The Joint Services Council for Hebron and Bethlehem
Agency type: Sub-national
Type of PPP: Operation and maintenance contract
Contract term: A total of 7 years, with an initial 5 year contract with a provision for extension of another
2 years
Construction period: The landfill site improvement was funded prior to the PPP project structuring by
the World Bank through the Gaza Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management Project of 2009, which
is scheduled to close in 2014
Bid Parameter: Technical evaluation and the lowest level of tariff per ton
Total cost of project: -
Total Population served: Approximately 1 million
Per unit cost: -
Basic specifications: Output based performance indicators and targets under the contract
Stage of project: The project is operational. The agreement was signed in September 2013
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: --
Local or foreign investor: Greek investor, W.A.T.T.S.A.-MESOGEOS S.A. and EPEMS.A, which has
also invested in the waste business in other countries
Applicable legislation:
Approving authority: The Joint Services Council for Hebron and Bethlehem
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: This is the first PPP project in the area
Role of Private Party: Operation and maintenance of the landfill at Al-Minya and two transfer stations at
Hebron and Tarqoumiya as well as transportation of waste form the transfer stations to the landfill,
financing of operational costs
Role of Public Authority: Setting standards and specifications, monitoring and verification of
performance and contract management
Financing: World Bank financing to construct the project, private financing for operation and
maintenance
Payment Mechanism: Payment made by the public entity on per ton basis (output based)
Tariff: Set through bid, paid by government
Comparison to existing rates: NA
Government Support: Construction of landfill site and transfer stations through a specific investment
loan of the World Bank, GPOBA grant funding support of $8.25 million over four years upon fulfillment
of pre-defined OBA targets by participating municipalities and village councils
Other advantages : Reduction of GHG emissions by 13400 tons during contract period
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments are created but overall there are net benefits as
compared to the situation prior to the project in terms of savings in emissions and better maintenance of
landfill
Risks: Demand risk, performance risk, political risk
Level of risk: Moderate
Key risk mitigating features:
     • A minimum guarantee was provided by the JSC for supply of 500 tons of waste every day taking
         care of demand risk; also historical user fee collection data was provided to lend comfort to the
         private party.
     • A contract cancellation payment of $500,000 is to be made by the authority taking care of
         termination risk; private party may demand payment for the minimum amount of waste

                                                                                                         26
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


        guaranteed, in addition providing further protection.
    •   JSC-H&B is required to pay an extra per kilometer charge for waste delivered in the event that
        Israeli roadblocks elongate the route protecting against political risk/ force majeure risk.
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: A number of
municipalities and villages were brought together to make the cost of service sufficiently affordable and
the project feasible.
Lessons learned:
    • It is important to bring in key changes in the sector before initiating a PPP project. There was a
        long period of about 4-5 years preceding the PPP where the World Bank through a specific
        investment loan worked on bringing in a change process in the way waste was being perceived
        and disposed. The objective of the World Bank project was to improve solid waste disposal
        services for the communities and businesses of Palestinian municipalities and joint services
        councils in the Bethlehem and Hebron governorates through provision of an efficient socially
        acceptable and environmentally friendly mechanism, including (i) strengthening the joint services
        council administrative and technical capabilities for a cost-effective management of waste
        disposal services; (ii) improving the waste disposal services through provision of a sanitary
        landfill facility and related infrastructure; and (iii) carrying out a public awareness campaign for
        promoting waste minimization, resource recovery and cost recovery for financial viability.
    • The JSC was established with security deposit from municipalities to counter their default risks
    • The Joint Services Council did not have the financial capacity to undertake the improvement and
        had to rely on multilateral and bilateral partners such as the World Bank, IFC, GPOBA and others
        to find a solution to the problem of waste.
    • The Joint Services Council also did not have the knowledge or the capacity to handle the PPP
        process and the project became possible only due to the intervention and long period of work by
        international organizations
    • The project targets were set based on discussions and consultations with the participating
        municipalities and villages to ensure achievability, which is important when new projects are
        taken up at local level and the services are of an essentially new nature
    • There were no local investors and all the investors who participated in the bid were from other
        countries; i.e., Spain, Greece and Egypt.
    • An important lesson is that if the project is appropriately structured and government support is
        forthcoming, international firms are willing to work in less politically secure/ stable regions
    • Political risks were borne by JSC-H&B.
    • Smaller municipalities can be brought together as in this case through the joint services council to
        form a service area that is large enough and feasible for cost effective waste management and also
        attractive enough for larger investors to come in
    • Partnership between the Bank, IFC and GPOBA enabled the provision of the full range of
        technical assistance in this case, including subsidy support, and enabled policy and project
        development and implementation from upstream to downstream




                                                                                                         27
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Lesotho Health Care Waste Management Project
Country: Lesotho
Sector: Medical Waste Management, Urban/ Health
Name of Project: Health Care Waste Management Project
Contracting agency: Ministry of Health
Agency type: National government
Type of PPP: Management Contract
Contract term: Initial contract was for 1 year; renewable for a further 12 months. This has been recently
renewed for another 8 months after completion of the first one year.
Construction period: There was no construction involved in this specific contract. The refurbishment of
incinerators and other associated construction work was done as part of a larger program of refurbishment
of 150 hospitals and Primary Health Care facilities in Lesotho undertaken by the Millennium Challenge
Corporation.
Bid Parameter: Lowest lump sum annual payment (payments made monthly)
Total cost of project: -
Total Population served: The project caters to 2 hospitals and 15 Primary Health Care facilities in the
three districts of Berea, Leribe, and Maseru.
Basic specifications: Licensing, accreditation requirements per contract/ relevant rules/ regulations
Stage of project: The contract was signed in October 2012 and the project is operational
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: This was a different type of
project and the time taken for processing was very short. IFC was retained as transaction advisor in
February 2012, the RFP was issued in June 2012 and the contract was signed in October 2012. So, only a
very brief period of 10 months was taken to process the project. However, it is relevant to understand that
the processing was quick due to the following reasons:
(a) This project was part of a larger hospital refurbishment project of the Millennium Challenge
Corporation (MCC)
(b) A lot of upstream work on the legislation, policy, regulations and standards was completed by the
MCC by the time the project came to IFC for transaction related work
(c) In addition, the MCC had also funded the feasibility studies for the project and most of the due
diligence work required had already been undertaken
(d) The government had already decided that this project was to be a PPP management contract and
accordingly no time was lost in discussing these aspects
(e) The government was keen on doing this early as they wanted this to be a pilot project that was to be
used for collection of data on volumes of waste and other routine and day to day data and statistics; data
from this would in turn feed into a larger PPP envisaged for collection of waste from all the 150
refurbished hospitals and Health Care Facilities.
Local or foreign investor: Consortium consisting of local and foreign investor; Mediwaste with equity
participation by Ditau Health Solutions and Matsete Investments
Applicable legislation: HCWM Bill of 2008; HCWM Policy, HCWM Regulations, Environmental Act
2008, Water Act 2008; National Standards on Health Care Waste Management.
Approving authority: Government of Lesotho
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Yes
Role of Private Party: Collection, transportation, treatment, incineration and disposal of health care
waste, operation of incinerators; routine maintenance of the new vehicles and fuel for the vehicles were to
be the responsibility of the private party; the private party also needed to inform the government within
the given time frame in case of break down or other repair and maintenance requirement for the
incinerators.
Role of Public Authority: Setting standards and specifications, monitoring and verification of
performance and contract management, making payments. In addition, in this case, a slightly different
system was followed in terms of the purchase of disposables, as well as some of the operational and repair

                                                                                                        28
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


costs. For example, the government is responsible for supply of bags for waste collection. This was done
as the MCC had already supplied bags and some other material required for the project in advance to the
government. In addition, while one incinerator in one of the District hospitals was in good condition as it
had been recently refurbished, the second one was not in new condition. Given this, the private sector was
not keen to take the responsibility for the costs of parts and repair. So, the repair and maintenance is the
responsibility of the government.

This had potential for problems. When the bags supplied by the MCC, which were with the MoH, were
fully consumed, the MoH had to buy new bags and procurement of these took some time and there were
associated delays.

The vehicles for carrying waste were already supplied by the MCC.
Financing:, Equity and debt by private provider; there was no capital investment by the private sector
Payment Mechanism: Payments made by the Department of Health in equal monthly installments based
on an annual lump sum fixed by bid
Tariff: There are no tariffs associated with this. While there are private hospitals/ health care facilities in
Lesotho, with about a 50:50 ratio of government and private facilities, most of the private facilities are
owned by faith based organizations that are subsidized by government. These establishments run mostly
on no profit basis and, therefore, may find tariffs for health care waste disposal unaffordable. The
government, therefore, decided that while waste from these facilities would be taken to the designated
district incinerator for disposal, they would not be charged for it.
Comparison to existing rates: Not applicable
Government Support: The Millennium Challenge Corporation has been working with the Government
of Lesotho in the area of medical waste for the last many years and has helped in the development of
upstream policy, regulations and standards and a state-of-the-art plan for safe disposal of hazardous
waste, apart from refurbishment of the hospitals and health care facilities; this management contract is
currently fully paid by government.
Other advantages: The data generated from the project is likely to set the tone for the program of health
care waste management in the country
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments are created as government has undertaken to make
monthly payments through contract period. However, it is learnt that there are budgetary issues and
government is likely to find it difficult to either continue the program or apply this pilot to the rest of the
health care facilities as envisaged earlier.
Risks: Payment risk, performance risk
Level of risk: Moderate payment risk
Key risk mitigating features: Demand risk is fully borne by government through fixed payment
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: The project
was taken as pilot to inform the next phase of work in this area involving all health care facilities.
Lessons learned:
     • The project reduced disposal of medical waste on general landfill sites, introduced segregation
          and proper handling of waste in the 2 hospitals and 15 health care facilities included
     • Upstream work on legislation, policy and standards can considerably reduce time taken to process
          projects from conception to signing of contract
     • Capital investment by government in facilities appears to be the only solution where a
          commercial market/ demand for medical waste disposal services on payment basis does not exist
     • Bifurcating the supply of disposable material and equipment; and the repair and maintenance
          work from the management contract might affect private provider performance given that it will
          be impacted by any delays on the part of the government authority responsible; it has the potential
          to reduce the efficiencies associated with such contracts
     • The fiscal capacity of government to stick to the payment commitments is of immense

                                                                                                            29
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      importance in such projects and where adequate fiscal space is not available it may not be
      possible to apply the results of the pilot to the sector
  •   Also capital investments might go waste if there are few funding options for continuing work of
      operations and maintenance




                                                                                                    30
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Cape Nature (De Hoop) Tourism Project
Country: South Africa
Sector: Tourism
Name of Project: Cape Nature (De Hoop) Tourism project
Contracting agency: Public Entity (Cape Nature)
Agency type: Provincial Public Entity
Type of PPP: Concession
Contract term: 30 years (renewable after 30 years subject to conditions)
Construction period: Approximately 24 months
Bid Parameter: Lowest lump sum annual payment (payments made monthly)
Total cost of project: Capital Expenditure = R40 million (approximately $4 million)
Total Population served: Western Cape Province population and beyond (Tourism project)
Basic specifications: Licensing, accreditation requirements per contract/ relevant rules/ regulations
Stage of project: Signed in 2008 and is operational
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: The project started around
2002 and finalized in 2008.
Local or foreign investor: Local investors called Madikwe. Although this private entity also acted as
investment facilitators since it was going to sell some shares to foreign investors who did not want at the
beginning to be involved in all PPP processes. Foreign were to be minor shareholders at the time.
Applicable legislation: Public Finance Management Act 1999, Treasury Regulation 16, Environmental
legislation, heritage act and many others
Approving authority: Republic of South Africa through its National Treasury (PPP Unit)
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Yes
Role of Private Party: Design, refurbish, build, finance and operate tourism facilities
Role of Public Authority: What was expected of the Authority was to manage the park. Ensure that the
necessary infrastructure (such as roads, electricity) in the park is maintained.
Financing:, Since it was a small project the equity was provided by the private sector provider
Payment Mechanism: User charges (tourists pay for enjoying the facilities during their stay)
Tariff: The tariff is set by the private party. The private party pays the authority a fixed fee plus a
variable fee if a certain turnover is exceeded. The fixed fee is set through bid.
Comparison to existing rates: Charge market rates
Government Support: It is not expected that Private operator would maintain roads in the park. This is
done by the government. It is only expected to ensure that its facilities are maintained.
Other advantages: The government reduced the subsidies it used to pay the parks as result of its revenue
generating activities
Contingent liabilities created: These would arise as a result of termination. Termination payments may
result from private party default, force majeure, corrupt activities, etc.
Risks: Demand risk
Level of risk: Moderate to high, as tourists have many choices
Key risk mitigating features: Demand risk is the biggest risk for the private sector since it is expected to
pay irrespective of whether business is good or not. However since Cape Nature is also involved in this
business in other facilities it does share the information to other stakeholders for the benefit of the private
party and itself.
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: The tourism
project is a very risky project. Lenders themselves are not that keen to fund it and so it is therefore likely
that the project itself will be smaller in nature
Lessons learned:
     • At first the government was stubborn when the private operator demanded a long concession
         period. However, they realized that the period cannot be too short for a project where the private


                                                                                                            31
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      party has design, build, finance and operate functions to carry out and is, at the same time,
      expected to pay concession fees.
  •   Infrastructure in the parks must be up to standard and be maintained. This cannot be expected
      from the small investors of the parks who are competing with others (bear in mind that they are
      not land owners so the land cannot be used as security for financing)
  •   Need to look at government contribution but the State has other competing needs
  •   Approval processes need not be stringent. Establish toolkit designed for these kinds of projects
      and not treat the same as other big projects. Note that this project took a long time to bring to
      agreement signing stage.
  •   Ensure that contract management meetings take place so that issues can be solved and the red
      flags are identified earlier
  •   Government should not just say the private sector knows its business and decide not to support
      them. The government needs to support them and also ensure that other government entities can
      use the services in order to help overcome the demand risks




                                                                                                      32
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Area (PURA)
Country: India
Sector: Multi-sectoral Infrastructure Services
Name of Project: Thirurangadi Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA) Project
Contracting agency: Thirurangadi Gram Panchayat
Agency type: Sub-national entity – gram panchayat (village council)
Type of PPP: Concession, BOT
Contract term: 13 years including construction period of 3 years
Construction period: 3 years
Bid Parameter: Technical proposal, lowest PURA grant required
Total cost of project: $25.6 million
Total Population served: The project serves an area of 17.73 sq. km with a population of 59612 and
8525 households
Per unit cost: NA
Basic specifications: The works are undertaken based on technical parameters set by government under
the PURA and the other associated MoRD and non-MoRD schemes undertaken under each individual
PURA project
Stage of project: The agreement was signed on February 22, 2012. The project is operational
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 22 months
Local or foreign investor: Local investors, the SPV for the project—which constitutes the
Concessionaire consists of the Lead Member, Infrastructure Kerala (INKEL) Limited with 51% equity
and Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation (KINFRA) with 49%.
Applicable legislation: PURA, A PPP Scheme – Guidelines issued by MoRD
Approving authority: Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, Inter-Ministerial
Empowered Committee
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: PURA projects have a special approval process;
they do not need to go through the PPPAC process used for other national PPP projects or the PPP
approval process for state government projects; however, since PURA is composed of several existing
small infrastructure development schemes of various ministries as well as some central schemes executed
by the state government, based on the schemes included in the particular project various kinds of
associated approvals of the specific scheme are required at central Ministries as well as state government.
In addition, a resolution of the Gram Panchayat concerned is required.
Brief Description of Project:
This project is a multi-sectoral infrastructure project consisting of the following sub-projects:
MoRD schemes
(i)New road construction of 1.3 km length with full drainage
(ii) Increase in water supply coverage to all households, and embankment protection and desilting of 6
common ponds
(iii) Establishment of 7 solid waste collection centers.
(iv) Establishment of a Skill Development Center with courses such as mobile technology, catering,
tailoring, etc.
Non-MoRD schemes
(v)Coverage of 23 km roads with street lighting
(vi) Setting up of a rural BPO
(vii) Strengthening of Marketing Infrastructure
(viii) Provision of a meat processing and cold storage facility
(ix) Treatment plant for Solid Waste
(x) Establishment of an Emergency Care Center at the Taluk Hospital
(xi) Establishment of a Coconut Processing Unit
(xii) Establishment of an Export Promotion Rural Apparel Park providing infrastructure facilities for the

                                                                                                        33
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


apparel industry
Income-generating activities
 (xiii) Development of Boating Club
(xiv) Development of Bus Terminal cum Commercial Complex
Role of Private Party: The Concessionaire’s role is to design, engineer, finance, procure, construct,
operate and maintain facilities under the MoRD and non-MoRD schemes, and the Add-on Economic
Facilities under the project.
Role of Public Authority: Various public authorities are intimately involved in the PURA process. The
Gram Panchayat is responsible for providing access to land, for MoRD and non-MoRD activities, and
help in obtaining permits, clearances and approvals. The District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)
sets up a dedicated bank account for the flow of various government grants to the Concessionaire as
provided. The MoRD undertakes procurement and ensures timely release of PURA grant as well as grants
under the MoRD schemes into the dedicated account as provided in the agreement. The State Government
pays its share of grants for MoRD and non-MoRD schemes into the dedicated account. Setting standards
and specifications, performance and contract management are other activities jointly performed by the
Gram Panchayat and the MoRD.
Financing: Upfront PURA grant, equity and debt by the Concessionaire for income generating activities,
government funding from various ministries. Financing of Thirurangadi PURA project is given in the
table below:
  Component             Total         MoRD        Non-MoRD       State       GP          Concessionaire
  MoRD                  11.14         4.66                       4.5         0.08        1.94
  Non-MoRD              3.83                      2.39           0.14                    1.3
  Add-ons               2.37                                                             2.37
  PURA Grant            8.30          8.30
  Total                 25.64         12.96       2.4            4.6         0.08        5.6
  Percentage            100           50.54       9.36           17.95       0.31        21.84
Payment Mechanism: All government installment payments are made into an account opened by the
District Rural Development Agency. The DRDA routes the payments to the concessionaire on receipt of
the report of the independent engineer. All payments are made during the first three years of the contract
during the construction period.
Tariff: There is provision for user charges under PURA. However, this specific project has no user
charges. If user charges are to be levied these would have to be fixed by the Gram Panchayat following
the normal applicable rules for tariff setting.
Comparison to existing rates: NA
Government Support: The program is fully supported by government through the PURA grant and
capital investments by the concerned ministries. The PURA grant covers the present value of the 10-year
O& M expenditure on the MoRD and Non-MoRD projects, RoI annuitized at 15% on the
Concessionaire’s investment in the MoRD and non-MoRD projects, management fee at 1% of the capital
expenditure on MoRD, non-MoRD and add-on activities and the payments made to the independent
engineer for his services; and is capped at 35% of the capital expenditure on the project, which is itself
capped at Rs. 120 crore (approximately $25 million).
Other advantages: The program brings together several existing schemes of the government for
integrated implementation in a small geographic area. Upgrading multiple types of infrastructure
simultaneously has positive economic benefits. In addition, under the existing schemes there was no
provision for continuing maintenance and operational costs; the PURA grant makes provisions for this
over a period of 13 years.
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments are created as the grants are paid in installments
during construction in the first three years of the contract
Risks: project non-viability, payment risk, performance risk
Level of risk: Low

                                                                                                       34
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Key risk mitigating features:
   • Payments are made six months in advance of the date of the installment payment as agreed under
       the contract into the DRDA account at district level.
   • The interest on the moneys deposited into the DRDA account is used for the purpose of
       establishing a risk fund to honor any contingent commitments that might arise.
   • The risk of non-viability is basically limited to the income generating activities that the private
       party is expected to invest in.
   • To reduce this risk, the concessionaire has the choice to suggest the project site or Gram
       Panchayat where the project will be implemented. The location of this specific project has been
       chosen by the concessionaire based on a market study of viability of the specific activities
       undertaken, which reduces the risk of non-viability considerably.
   • Performance risk could be high in a project where all moneys are essentially paid up front; i.e.,
       during construction. However, this risk is covered through project life by requiring pre-agreed
       levels of performance guarantees from the concessionaire through project life.
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project:
   • The government has fixed a cap of Rs. 120 crore (approximately $25 million) for the capital
       investment in the project that will be considered for payment of subsidies.
Lessons learned:
   • There was a 13 month slippage in the first two projects in which contracts were executed. In all
       other 7 projects that were put to tender, there is no information to date. Government has now
       gone on to the second phase of the PURA where they have advertised many more projects with
       slight changes in the guidelines based on lessons learned in the first phase
   • Initial Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) submitted by the bidders were faulty due to lack of
       detailed manual of procedures and processes and lack of detailed instructions on the type of
       information required to be included in the technical and financial proposal
   • Requirement of state government approval for the DPR due to the presence of state executed
       projects resulted in some part of the delay
   • The upstream approval processes from each ministry are cumbersome and numerous resulting in
       additional delays
   • All project sites chosen by the concessionaires were in peri-urban areas; i.e., outside the
       municipal limits but near to the city rather than remote areas. The inclusion of mandatory income
       generating activities for investment by the Concessionaire has resulted in this selection of areas
       where there is likely to be greater demand or less demand/ revenue risk
   • The level of penalties has not been set scientifically and appears to be very low; there may be
       incentives to the concessionaire to not fulfill some of the targets for indicators and pay penalties
       instead.
   • There is lack of capacity in the gram panchayats to negotiate and manage the contract. The
       MoRD has found a temporary solution through splitting the concession agreement into three parts
       of which Concession Agreement 1 is signed by the GP and remains in the possession of the GP,
       the second part is heavy with the legal requirements and is negotiated and remains in the
       possession of the MoRD. But as the number of projects keeps growing, it will not be feasible for
       the MoRD to play the detailed / micro-level role it is trying to play in the projects.




                                                                                                        35
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Gandhinagar Rooftop Solar Project
Country: India
Sector: Solar
Name of Project: Gandhinagar Rooftop Solar Project
Contracting agency: Gujarat State Petrochemical Corporation Limited/ Department of Energy and
Petrochemicals
Agency type: Sub-national entity
Type of PPP: BOO
Contract term: 25 years
Construction period: -
Bid Parameter: Technical qualification and lowest tariff
Total cost of project: $9 million
Total Population served: 12000
Per unit cost: ~ 19 cents/unit
Basic specifications: Industry best standards are used, government’s agreed technical specifications
Stage of project: The agreements were signed in April 2012. The projects are operational
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 18 months
Local or foreign investor: Local investors, Azure Power and SunEdison
Applicable legislation: Gujarat Solar Power Policy 2009, Gujarat Infrastructure Development Act 1999
Approving authority: Committee headed by the Chief Secretary for approval of PPP projects, Principal
Secretary, Energy & Petro Chemicals, Government of Gujarat who is also Chairman cum Managing
Director, Gujarat Power Corporation Limited at line Ministry level
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Yes
Role of Private Party: Procure financing; install solar photovoltaic panels on the rooftops of public
buildings made available by government and on private residences and connect to grid; identification of
private rooftop space; supply to grid
Role of Public Authority: Provide access to rooftops of public buildings; facilitate Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA) with power procurer; monitor contract according to performance standards
Financing: IFC loan of $3 million to Azure Power; other financiers were IDBI Bank, India; financial
support of $300,000 was provided by Netherlands and Finland.
Payment Mechanism: The local private power distributor Torrent Power buys the power according to
the PPA and pays based on the tariff set through bid.
Tariff: Tariff is based on bid.
Comparison to existing rates: -
Government Support: Facilitation of PPA; public rooftops made available by government
Other advantages: Emissions savings of 6000 tons
Contingent liabilities created: Termination payments- 3 year equivalent of tariff payment in case of
Government of Gujarat default.
Risks: Site risk
Level of risk: Low for demand risk as well as site as the public entity covers these adequately as shown
under the risk mitigating features
Key risk mitigating features: PPA covers the demand / revenue risk, most of the rooftop sites are public
buildings committed to be made available by government
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: This specific
project was small, but government has been looking to prepare packages of a size acceptable to the
investors. The Gandhinagar project consists of two projects of 2.5 MW each totaling approximately $15
million
Lessons learned:
    • Policy framework is required in order to scale up the projects—the IFC is now working on a


                                                                                                      36
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


      policy framework for rooftop solar, regulations are being drafted by the forum of regulators
  •   Multiple agreements needed to be signed: rental agreements between private provider and the
      private residential owners; between the private entity and the public entities owning rooftop
      space; but there were no standardized documents—for example, appropriate rental agreements for
      renting rooftop space had to be developed from scratch for this project.
  •   Grid connectivity issues needed to be solved and a framework for connecting such projects to
      grid could be useful
  •   Choosing between technical options—in this case the issue was between choosing concentrated
      solar power or photovoltaic panels
  •   Whether gross metering model should be used or the net metering model; there were no specific
      guidelines for choosing options
  •   Multiple jurisdictions can be joined as seen from the efforts to bundle 5 cities into 3 packages for
      rooftop solar projects in Gujarat following the first success of this specific project.




                                                                                                       37
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Bhubaneswar Street-lighting Project
Country: India
Sector: Street-lighting
Name of Project: Bhubaneswar Street-lighting Project
Contracting agency: Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation
Agency type: Sub-national entity – urban local body
Type of PPP: Performance based operation and management contract
Contract term: 10 years
Construction period: 8 months from effective date of contract
Bid Parameter: technical qualifications and energy savings committed by the bidder with a minimum of
30%
Total cost of project: $4.8 million
Total Population served: The project covers all the streetlights of the city numbering about 20000. The
population of the city is over 0.8 million.
Per unit cost: NA
Basic specifications: Meter based billing, remote switching, use of energy efficient bulbs
Stage of project: The agreement was signed in October 2013. The project is operational.
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 24 months
Local or foreign investor: Local investors, Shah Investments, Developments & Consultants Private
Limited (An Energy Savings Company or ESCO)
Applicable legislation: Odisha PPP Policy
Approving authority: Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Approval Process followed was as per Odisha
PPP policy i.e., approvals were sought at the ULB, Department (Housing & Urban Development) and
Empowered Committee on Infrastructure
Role of Private Party: Finance and install luminaire retrofits, operate and maintain the city’s street-
lighting system by way of a remote control center
Role of Public Authority: Setting standards and specifications, monitoring and verification of
performance and contract management
Financing: DevCo financing, equity financing
Payment Mechanism: Payments made by the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation based on the savings
realized. ESCO to receive 90% of energy savings realized plus an Operation and Maintenance fee for
each light pole that is taken over by the ESCO under the contract
Tariff: NA
Comparison to existing rates: NA
Government Support: Monthly payments made to the private party out of the energy savings realized
plus operation and maintenance fee
Other advantages : Annual savings to government of $100000 by way of decreased energy consumption
and operation and maintenance costs and emissions savings
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments are created but overall there are net benefits as
compared to the situation prior to the project in terms of savings in energy that cover the payments of the
provider fully and leave a net benefit to the municipal corporation in addition
Risks: Project non-viability, payment risk, performance risk
Level of risk: Low
Key risk mitigating features: Advance payments using escrow accounts and automatic approval of 75%
of operator invoices; detailed performance targets against indicators; covering all streetlights in the city
for a viable project size
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: The project
needs to be large enough to be viable and to realize sufficient savings in energy to the municipal

                                                                                                         38
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


corporation to enable payments to the provider from the savings realized.
Lessons learned:
    • Policy framework is not required for projects in this sector, however standardizing documents
        could help scale up the projects;
    • There is less precedence for these projects and these are less known by lenders; therefore, there is
        less appetite for lending to such projects. Lenders in general do not have lending products for
        these projects. So projects are mostly financed by 100% equity
    • There is only lender in India that has specific clean energy lending products; i.e., Tata Cleantech
        Capital Limited (TCCL), which is a JV of the Tata Capital Limited and IFC.
    • In addition, lenders do not have appraisal skills for such projects; upstream work is required on
        how to appraise such projects for financing;
    • Partial risk facilities may need to be created. BEE has created such a facility in India
    • BEE grades companies for energy efficiency projects based on financial capacity. However many
        companies are too small, with Grade A companies having a net worth of Rs. 1 crore or
        approximately $0.5 million
    • Wholesaling with projects in multiple cities being packaged could work well from the point of
        view of project structuring and financing, but such efforts have failed in the past due to multi-
        jurisdictional issues and enhanced risk profile of projects arising from this reason
    • There are capacity issues at local body level both in the public sector as well as the local equity
        investors/ service providers/ financiers




                                                                                                       39
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Punjab Grain Silo Project
Country: India
Sector: Grain storage/ silos
Name of Project: Punjab Silo Project
Contracting agency: Punjab State Grain Procurement Corporation (PUNGRAIN)
Agency type: Sub-national, state owned enterprise
Type of PPP: BOO
Contract term: 30 years
Construction period: 12 months
Bid Parameter: Technical evaluation and the lowest level of fixed tariff
Total cost of project: $7 million
Total Population served: NA
Basic specifications: The silos are required to be fully equipped with weighing and testing facilities,
automatic quality control devices, mechanized conveyor systems, and arrangements for the unloading and
loading of wheat grain and for the scientific management and handling of the grain.
Stage of project: The agreement was signed in 2010, and the project was commissioned in April 2012
and is operational.
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 24 months
Local or foreign investor: Local investor, LT Foods Limited, a company with 40 years of experience in
processing, storing and marketing Basmati rice globally.
Applicable legislation: Punjab Infrastructure Development Act, 2002
Approving authority: Empowered Committee chaired by the Chief Secretary
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Yes
Brief Description of the project: The project consists of 4 silos of 12500 MT each for a total capacity of
50000 MT, which will store grain procured by the government for its food subsidy schemes as well as
under its support price operations.
Role of Private Party: The private party is responsible for the financing, design, construction, operation
and maintenance of the silo. The private party is also responsible for procuring land for the project.
Role of Public Authority: The Authority (PUNGRAIN) is required to procure and deliver the wheat
grain in bags to the Concessionaire for storage in the Silos. The authority is responsible for making
payments based on availability to the private party as agreed. It is also responsible for setting standards
and specifications, monitoring and verification of performance, and contract management
Financing: IFC’s advisory services were funded by DevCo; Debt financing to LT Foods was by YES
BANK, Rabobank
Payment Mechanism: The payment mechanism consists of fixed and variable charges; the fixed charges
for the agreed tonnage are paid irrespective of usage.
Tariff: The Fixed Service Charge was at Rs. 1,400/MT and the Variable Acceptance and Dispatch
Service Charges are at 7.5% of the Fixed Service Charge. However, subsequently, the Government of
Punjab decided that the rates were too high and re-negotiated these to Rs. 1100/ MT.
Comparison to existing rates: Higher than rates later fixed for MP silos, higher than the prevailing FCI/
government rates for storage. However, there’s a basic difference in the two models; i.e., the MP model
where land and VGF is provided by the government and the Punjab model where land is procured by the
concessionaire and there is no VGF.
Government Support: Availability payments irrespective of usage, but subject to availability of agreed
storage
Other advantages : Savings to government of $6 million
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments based on fixed charges for guaranteed tonnage over
30 years, termination payments
Risks: Payment risk
Level of risk: Low

                                                                                                        40
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Key risk mitigating features: -
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: The project
needs to be of a size sufficient to ensure coverage of all costs and reasonable returns to the investor over a
reasonable period of time without unreasonably increasing the tariff level
Lessons learned:
    • Policy framework was not in place at the time, so documents had to be prepared from scratch
    • Quick scaling up was not possible due to the same reason
    • Large savings to government due to reduction in wastage and retention of grain quality
    • Need to replicate projects all over the country
    • Planning Commission working on finalizing standard contract document for silos given that if a
        project is to be scaled up, upstream work needs to be in place while creating the project structure
        to save time and money
    • The bid tariff was relatively high (as compared to the later MP model) due to the specific model
        adopted; i.e., no construction grant (VGF), land by private party; probably also newness of the
        project and no precedence for rates for this type of storage
    • The tariff was renegotiated and brought down after bidder selection, but it is not clear what the
        basis of modification was; essential that benchmark tariffs are created by government early on in
        order to be able to gauge bids against government’s own well analyzed benchmark levels
    • Only 10 year financing is available to projects in India. Financing is difficult to come by even
        with availability payments. There is no true project finance as the credit rating of the firm and
        debt profile of the firm continues to remain an important consideration of financiers
    • There were major governance issues at the provincial government level that delayed contract
        signing




                                                                                                           41
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Berhampur Solid Waste Project
Country: India
Sector: Solid Waste Management
Name of Project: Berhampur Solid Waste Management Project
Contracting agency: Berhampur Municipal Corporation
Agency type: Sub-national, local body
Type of PPP: BOT
Contract term: 20 years
Construction period: 12 months
Bid Parameter: Technical evaluation and the lowest level of grant required (with a cap of 25% of total
project cost)
Total cost of project: $10.3 million
Total Population served: 400000
Per unit cost: NA
Basic specifications: Standards based on legislation and rules
Stage of project: The contract was signed in August 2013. The waste processing facility is under
construction; operations are expected to begin in August 2014
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 24 months
Local or foreign investor: Local investor, UPL Environmental Engineers Limited
Applicable legislation: Municipal Solid Waste Management and Handling Act and Rules, Odisha PPP
Policy
Approving authority: Government of Odisha
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Approval Process followed was as required by
the Odisha PPP policy i.e., approvals were sought at the local body, Department (Housing & Urban
Development) and Empowered Committee on Infrastructure level
Role of Private Party: The private party will be responsible for collection, transportation, segregation,
recycling, treatment and scientific disposal of waste, construction, operation and maintenance of
composting facility and closing of existing dump site.
Role of Public Authority: Setting performance standards, monitoring and verification of performance
and contract management
Financing: Support from DevCo, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Netherland; debt and equity financing by
investor
Payment Mechanism: Payments made by the Berhampur Municipal Corporation based on output
Tariff: Berhampur Municipal Corporation is not levying user charges
Comparison to existing rates: NA
Government Support: Monthly payments made to the private party; construction grant and concessional
loan from Odisha Urban Infrastructure Development Fund (OUIDF), which is financed by KfW
Other advantages : Annual GHG emissions savings of 16000 tons
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments and contingent liabilities are created for the
municipal corporation as a result of (a) monthly payments during contract term, (b) provision for
termination clauses; comfort letter may present contingent liabilities to the state government as well.
Risks: project non-viability, payment risk, technology risk, performance risk
Level of risk: Moderate
Key risk mitigating features: Construction grant to mitigate lack of viability; 3-month reserves
maintained in escrow account and automatic release of funds monthly to cover payment risk as also a
letter of comfort from the Housing and Urban Development Department; detailed performance targets
against indicators to cover performance risk;
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: Viability was
an issue here, but as the project serves the entire municipal area and is not a joint project, there was no


                                                                                                        42
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


scope for increasing the size of the project; however, in the case of Cuttack and Bhubaneswar
municipalities, they have developed a joint solid waste management project to ensure project viability
Lessons learned:
    • Standardizing documents could help scale up the projects; two other projects are being developed
        and implemented on similar lines now;
    • Waste treatment technologies are limited and it is especially difficult to understand at local level
        which technology will work or not work;
    • Solid waste projects with waste treatment facilities require large upfront investments but revenues
        are low;
    • There is less precedence for these projects and these are less known by lenders; there is less
        appetite for lending to such projects;
    • Since the Municipal Corporation pays, the payment risk was high due to lower credit profile ; this
        had to be supported by escrow mechanisms as well as comfort letter from the state government;
    • Lenders do not have appraisal skills for such projects; upstream work is required on how to
        appraise such projects for financing;
    • Infrastructure development funding facilities and partial risk facilities may need to be created to
        improve financing flows to such projects;
    • There are capacity issues at local body level both in the public sector as well as the local
        investors/ providers/ financiers




                                                                                                       43
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Health Diagnostics Project
Country: India
Sector: Health
Name of Project: Upgrading Radiology Services in Andhra Pradesh
Contracting agency: Department of Health, Medical and Family Welfare, Government of Andhra
Pradesh
Agency type: Sub-national; provincial government
Type of PPP: BOOT
Contract term: 7 years
Construction period: 8 months
Bid Parameter: Lowest tariff
Total cost of project: $7 million
Total Population served: An estimated 1.2 million persons over 7 years in the cities of Kakinada,
Kurnool, Vishakhapatnam and Warangal
Basic specifications: Output based standards and specifications derived specifically for the project
maintaining the most recent quality accreditation, compliance with Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
(AERB) guidelines
Stage of project: The project is operational since 2010-2011
Time taken for processing project from concept to contract execution: 8 months
Local or foreign investor: Local investors, Wipro GE Healthcare Limited and Medall Healthcare Private
Limited
Applicable legislation: Andhra Pradesh Infrastructure Development Enabling Act 2001, AERB
Guidelines
Approving authority: PPP Committee in Government of Andhra Pradesh
Is the approval process the same as for other projects: Yes, the route followed is as follows: approvals
within the Department of Health, Medical and Family Welfare followed by approval of the Government
of Andhra Pradesh
Role of Private Party: Financing, building / upgrading radiology facilities, equipment including MRI
and CT, operation and maintenance in 4 teaching hospitals in the state
Role of Public Authority: Setting standards and specifications, monitoring and verification of
performance, contract management and making regular payments for referral patients
Financing: Equity and debt by private provider
Payment Mechanism: Payments made by the Department of Health, Medical and Family Welfare for
low-income patients, user charges for non-referral patients
Tariff: Set by bid, INR 1700
Comparison to existing rates: The tariff for the PPP radiology services is at 50% of the average
prevalent tariff in the market per scan; however some anecdotal evidence is reported that tariff in the
surrounding markets did fall following the commissioning of the 4 diagnostic facilities
Government Support: Advisory work supported by the Dutch Technical Assistance Trust Fund, VGF of
0.6 million by state government with the help of DFID funding, monthly payments made to the private
party by the state government, GPOBA subsidy
Other advantages:
    • Government can now enable treatment of a much larger number of patients (almost double the
         earlier number) with the same budget due to the low price of bid;
    • Since these facilities are attached to teaching hospitals, they provide good opportunities for
         students to acquire skills using sophisticated diagnostic equipment
Contingent liabilities created: Fiscal commitments are created but overall there are net benefits as
compared to the situation prior to the project in terms of a larger number of patients treated.
Risks: Demand risk, payment risk, performance risk


                                                                                                     44
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


Level of risk: Moderate
Key risk mitigating features: There is no escrow mechanism or letter of support of the Government. For
demand risk, while no minimum level of demand has been guaranteed, it is mandatory for all public
hospitals in the area to refer patients to the PPP project for diagnostic testing
Factors affecting decisions on the size of project or population serviced by the project: The project
needs to be large enough to be viable and to realize sufficient revenues to cover investment and costs;
therefore, 4 teaching hospitals catering to populations in four districts were brought together in one single
project.
Lessons learned:
    • The project reduced long waiting lines
    • Resulted in getting in better skills as well as better maintained equipment
    • A policy framework and standardized documents could help scale up the projects
    • The project had high level champions and therefore, could be rolled out within a reduced time
         frame, however, it is important to institutionalize processes, produce standardization and
         encourage use of templates to reduce dependence on individual champions.
    • Availability of financing is not a problem for such projects. There are several health equity funds
         in India, so there is a lot of private equity looking for such projects
    • Cumbersome process of approvals for project needs to be shortened
    • Cumbersome process for approving and making payments to the private party, which needs some
         overhaul given that the initial payments to the project were delayed
    • Substantial upgrading work in the hospital environment was required before the equipment could
         be installed and used
    • There are capacity issues at the level of hospitals as they need to acquire currently non-existent
         contract management skills in order to ensure best performance
    • Governments need to aggregate and roll out such projects in the future whereby there could be a
         better effort at contract management
    • GoAP did not have the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY)/ health insurance scheme to
         provide cover for the out-patient diagnostic services. It had Agrogyashree, which caters to in-
         patient services only; GoAP therefore took the burden of paying for all low income patients.




                                                                                                          45
A PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF TRENDS IN SMALL-SCALE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECTS


                                             Resources

  1. Guaipatín, Carlos. 2013. How to Promote High-Impact Innovations through Social Innovation
     Funds: A Call for Public-Private Partnerships. Discussion Paper No. IDB-DP-319. Washington,
     DC: Inter-American Development
     Bank. http://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/6396/CTI%20DP%20How%20To%2
     0Promote%20High-Impact%20Innovations%20through%20SIF.pdf

  2. European Commission. JESSICA: Joint European Support for Sustainable Investment in City
     Areas. http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/thefunds/instruments/jessica_en.cfm

  3. IFC Success Stories, various projects

  4. Hussain, Mustafa Zakir; Etienne, Catherine. 2012. Lessons from Output-Based Aid for
     Leveraging Finance for Clean Energy. Working Paper. The World Bank &
     GPOBA. https://www.gpoba.org/node/665

  5. MIF. Basic Services for the
     Poor. http://www.fomin.org/mif/Projects/AccesstoBasicServices/BasicServices/tabid/454/languag
     e/en-US/Default.aspx

  6. Murariu, Inga; Johannes, Lars. 2010. Output-Based Aid in Education: A Solution for Quality
     Education. Note No. 32. GPOBA. https://www.gpoba.org/node/417

  7. HM Treasury. 2003. PFI: Meeting the Investment Challenge. London, United Kingdom: HM
     Treasury. http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130129110402/http://www.hm-
     treasury.gov.uk/media/F/7/PFI_604a.pdf

  8. Provision of Urban Amenities to Rural Areas. http://pura.org.in/

  9. PPIAF. South Africa Municipal Service Delivery and PPP
     Guidelines. http://www.ppiaf.org/node/221

  10. Morgan, Nancy; Larson, Gunnar. 2011. Missing Food: The Case of Postharvest Grain Losses in
      Sub-Saharan Africa. Agricultural and Rural Development Joint Note No. 56. Washington, DC:
      World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/05/15283304/missing-food-case-
      postharvest-grain-losses-sub-saharan-africa

  11. World Bank. Solid Waste and Waste Management PPP. http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-
      partnership/sector/solid-waste/toolkits




                                                                                                  46
