                                                                     93263
									                                MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT




                         Mali: Impact of the Crisis on Social Sectors
                              Education Resilience RES-360° Report
                                                          June 2014


             Critical Case Insights from Mali:
         Strengths and Opportunities for Education
                      Reform in the Midst of Crisis




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                    	     1
             Mali: Impact of the Crisis on Social Sectors
                  Education Resilience RES-360° Report
                                              June 2014


           Critical Case Insights from Mali:
Strengths and Opportunities for Education
              Reform in the Midst of Crisis
                                       Research Team
                                         Joel Reyes
Senior Institutional Development Specialist, Education Global Practice, the World Bank Group

                                           Jo Kelcey
            Education Specialist, Education Global Practice, the World Bank Group


                                     Mali Investigators
     Mohamed El Moctar Mahamar – member, Pilot Committee, Ministry of Education
 Coulibaly M’Batogoma Aminata Sogoba – member, Pilot Committee, Ministry of Education
          Oumar Sékou Fofana – member, Pilot Committee, Ministry of Education
            Adama Savadogo – member, Pilot Committee, Ministry of Education
               Modibo Sylla – member, Pilot Committee, Ministry of Education
           Moctar Diarra – member, Pilot Committee, INSAT-Ministry of Finance
             Issa Bouaré – member, Pilot Committee, INSAT-Ministry of Finance
                       Dramane Traoré – consultant, Pilot Committee
                         Naffet Keïta – consultant, Pilot Committee
                          Balla Keïta – consultant, Pilot Committee




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the Education Resilience Approaches
program team, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
Email: educationresilience@worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the government they represent.
	      The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permission
	       The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncom-
mercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
	       Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office or the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-
522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

	        This report is the product of a collaboration between the World Bank Global Education
Practice, Knowledge and Innovation Program and the Africa region. It is part of the broader
programmatic economic and sector work (ESW), “Mali: Impact of the Crisis on Social Sectors”.
It is also part of the various case studies prepared within the Education Resilience Approaches
(ERA) program of the World Bank’s Education Global Practice. The final report has been informed
by inputs and suggestions from Emanuela di Gropello (Program Leader for Social Sectors, Mali
Country Management Unit), and Pierre Kamano (Senior Education Specialist, Education Global
Practice). Kalilou Sylla also provided ongoing technical support for the mission in Mali.




Photos: © Jo Kelcey / World Bank.
Cover photo: Students displaced from the north of Mali have been welcomed into schools in the
south, such as the three girls pictured who attend the Bolivarian School.
									                                                           MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Acknowledgments
    The authors and research team particularly thank the peer reviewers for their insightful comments:
    Olav Christensen, Juan Manuel Moreno, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. External peer review was
    also provided by Ita Sheehy, UNHCR. We acknowledge the valuable support of Earl Hain for data
    entry, as well as Andrea Diaz Varela and Renata Piñedo during the data analysis stage. Restituto
    Cardenas provided administrative support from Washington, DC. The report was also discussed
    and validated with the Ministry of Education in Mali, and incorporates their suggestions which
    were greatly appreciated.

    We also are grateful for the cooperation and effort of the staff and students of the five schools
    that participated in the assessment: the Sala Community School, Souban Basic School, Yirimado
    School, Boulkassounbougou Basic School, and the Bolivarian School. Students, teachers, school
    principals, parent committees, and local Ministry officials graciously allowed us into their
    classrooms and institutions, and provided valuable perspectives into their often difficult lives
    and education experiences. A significant part of this work was possible only because of their
    willingness to share important insights and feedback about what helped them stay in school,
    learn, and move forward in the face of adversities.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                    	       7
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			   		




 8   										                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                              MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT



    Contents
    Foreword: Education Resilience Approaches					                                                   10
    Executive Summary									                                                                       11
    Introduction: The Rationale for a Mali Education Resilience Assessment	                          21
    Chapter I. Risks and Resilience Assets in the Malian Education Context 	                         25
    I.I The Mali 2012 crisis and its consequences on education 					                                 27
    I.II Perceptions of pre-existing risks and those associated with the 2012 security crisis	       28
    I.III The assets (strengths, resources, and opportunities) in schools and communities
    experiencing crisis										                                                                    35
    Chapter II. Mobilizing School and Community-Based Res ources, Strengths,
    and Opportunities			            							                                                          40
    II.I Protecting and sustaining existing community and school assets				                          41
    II.II School-based management structures to foster and use school and community assets           42
    II.III Education policies and programs to sustain community participation in schools	            44
    Chapter III. Aligning the Education Systam and Relevant Services with a
    Resilience Approach									                                                                     48
    III.I Windows of opportunity for a more flexible education system that improves access
    and quality of learning									                                                                 48
    III.II Windows of opportunity to improve the interrelation between education, nutrition,
    health and livelihoods										                                                                 52
    III.III Windows of opportunity to strengthen the education system’s response to crisis 	         57
    Chapter IV. Additional Areas for Study and Evidence Collection to Support
    Post-Crisis Education Reform in Mali							                                                      65
    References 											                                                                           69
    Annex 1. The methodology for the rapid mixed-methods resilience
    assessment 											                                                                           74
    Annex 2. Mali RES-360° questionnaire						                                                       77




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                    	        9
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                     		


      Foreword: Education Resilience Approaches
      Research and practice in situations of adversity have highlighted the importance of education
      in protecting at-risk children and youth, nurturing their social and emotional well-being, and
      supporting their learning. Resilience theory and associated evidence show that human beings
      have inherent strengths and coping abilities that allow them to recover, function, and transform
      crisis situations into opportunities. These abilities are both individual and communal, and can
      be nurtured by external support and services. Individuals in crisis show hope, purpose, social
      competence, problem solving, and autonomy. Community members can provide care, support,
      high expectations, and opportunities for culturally meaningful participation by school, family, and
      the community.1

      However, resilience does not imply that children, youth, families, and communities should be left to
      cope with crisis on their own. Resilience also has an institutional and service provision component.
      Recovery, performance, and positive change in the midst of crisis require the purposeful support
      of social services.2 Education systems, especially, can help education actors (students, parents,
      teachers, and principals) find meaning in adversity; find purpose in education; develop new skills
      and knowledge; and build positive, supportive relationships and mutual accountability. To do this,
      education systems need to learn about both the risks and “assets” (strengths, opportunities, and
      resources) present in at-risk communities.

      Education systems, policies, and programs can support education communities during crises and
      play a crucial role in preventing and responding better to future difficulties. 3 A transformative
      definition of resilience encompasses this two-pronged approach: response to crisis and ongoing
      development. For example, education systems and schools can support the academic progress,
      as well as develop social and emotional skills in children and youth; they can engage family and
      community support, using school as the center for community activities; and they can help
      deliver other social services (health, school feeding, and psychosocial interventions). In general,
      education systems and schools can both protect students from different types of risks and foster
      their capacities, not only to recover, but also to transform their lives in the face of very difficult
      living situations.

      Without undermining the pain and suffering that crises bring, they also can open up opportunities
      for education reform—reforms that can play an important transformative role from crisis to
      ongoing development in society.4




      1	        See, for example, Werner and Smith (1992).
      2	        See Ungar (2008; 2011; 2012).
      3	        See Reyes (2013).
      4	        See, for example, Benard (2004); Borman and Overman (2004); Cefai (2008); Comer et al., (1996); Gizir and Aydin
      (2009); Krovetz (2008); and Masten et al. (2008).


 10   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                           MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Executive Summary
    It is estimated that more than 350,000 Malians have been internally displaced due to the 2012
    political and security crisis and its aftermath.5 Thousands of students and teachers who fled from
    the north have been integrated into schools in the south. To better understand the experiences
    of displaced and host communities, the Mali education resilience assessment conducted various
    focus groups and applied a perception survey to 270 students, 50 parents, 43 teachers, and 10
    school administrators across 5 communities in the south that were hosting displaced communities
    from the north. The assessment looks at both new risks and pre-existing risks aggravated as a
    result of the crisis, with emphasis on the consequences of displacement and economic difficulties.
    Its ultimate aim is to help Mali identify windows of opportunity from which to devise strategies
    that are relevant to both emergency responses and resilience to crises, as well as longer-term
    development of the education system in the whole country.

    Risks and assets in host and displaced education communities
    The starting point for understanding education resilience is the context of adversity that negatively
    affects education communities, including students, families, teachers, and administrators. The
    other is the assets—strengths, opportunities, and resources—that have helped these actors cope
    with their difficult living situations. Understanding both risks and assets is crucial to formulate
    relevant programs and services that support vulnerable but resilient education communities.
    These programs should seek to protect existing assets from risks and foster new ones. By doing
    so, the potential of resilience to stimulate transformation emerges for education services, so they
    not only respond better to crisis, but also become more relevant for long-term development.

    The displaced and host education communities in Mali pointed to a series of education, health,
    school feeding, and livelihood risks that they faced in the context of the 2012 political and security
    crisis. Most risks had manifested already before 2012, but the conflict aggravated them: the
    education system faced existing challenges, for example (as confirmed by secondary data), of
    limited access to schools, student dropout rates, overcrowded classrooms, shortage of qualified
    teachers, and limited training services. The same situation applied to health, school feeding, and
    livelihood risks as well.

    This set of education, health, school feeding, and livelihood concerns seems to be related. The
    financial difficulties of the internally displaced communities—and the host communities as well,
    given the combined pressures of supporting displaced populations and the economic consequences
    of the crisis—undermine children’s education. Maladaptive coping mechanisms, such as taking
    children out of school or relying on child labor for extra family income, are common. While basic
    education is free in Mali, additional financial strain may come from other associated costs, such
    as transportation and school materials. Indeed, students and adults involved in schools (parents,
    teachers, and administrators) who participated in this study considered child labor a high risk,
    which is possibly related to the need for supplemental income in order to cope with financial
    pressures and food insecurity.

    5	       Reported by the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center (IDMC 2013), based on estimates by the Commission of Pop-
    ulation Movement.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                           	        11
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                          		


      Risks are only part of the story of crises, which cannot be understood solely in terms of the external
      threats and vulnerabilities experienced by individuals and their communities. Human beings in
      contexts of crisis also possess strengths, opportunities, and resources, which can be summarized
      as “assets.” A foundational component of any resilience assessment is the identification of assets
      that individuals and communities utilize to cope with and overcome adversities. Education systems
      can use these assets to design more relevant services that protect and strengthen the capacities
      of vulnerable individuals and communities—along with supportive social services to prevent risks
      from manifesting or mitigate their negative impact.

      In Mali, displaced and host communities called attention to assets that are both intangible (such
      as hope and a feeling of being protected in schools) and tangible (such as community solidarity
      when families opened their homes to internally displaced persons (IDPs) and schools welcomed
      both students and teachers from the north). In many instances, schools provided the structure
      to bring schools and communities together. This most often occurred through the community-
      school management committees, called comités de gestion scolaires (CGS) in Mali. The flexible
      policies of the Ministry of Education, which allowed displaced teachers from the north to find
      temporary positions in schools in the south, also provided a system-wide structure that fostered
      school-community interactions during the crisis. Such flexibility promoted voluntarism and caring
      support of displaced children by teachers, during and after school.

      It is important to note at the outset that community and individual assets are also vulnerable
      to shocks and can change overtime. For example, host families cannot support IDPs indefinitely
      without the help of formal social services. For this reason, the Mali education resilience assessment
      documented the relevant education and social programs that could sustain the identified resilience
      assets of schools and communities. Such supportive programs, which must already be in place in
      times of crisis and for the long term, include the community-based management of schools and
      flexible strategies that integrate relevant education, health, and livelihood programs.

      Protecting and mobilizing school and community assets
      Households and communities in Mali have largely shouldered the impact of displacement and
      other financial difficulties tied to the political and security crisis. At the same time, they also
      have shown a high degree of hope, solidarity, and voluntarism. Despite these assets, however,
      resilience does not imply that households and communities should be left to cope by themselves.
      It propels education systems to look at the institutional structures and services that can support
      vulnerable groups in times of adversity. This institutional support is made more relevant by using
      and protecting existing assets, and fostering new strengths, opportunities, and resources in
      vulnerable but resilient communities. Institutions must also prevent maladaptive coping, such
      as families sending their children to work instead of to school in order to gain needed income to
      survive.

      The 2012 crisis in Mali uncovered a strong set of community and family assets that the education
      sector needs to take advantage of. For example, it can build upon the positive relations seen
      between host and displaced communities and, at the same time, channel needed social services.
      To do this, the education system needs to find strategies to sustain the community solidarity
      expressed by host communities, the high motivation towards education shown by displaced


 12   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                              MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Malian students and families, and the caring and after-school services provided by teachers and
    school administrators. This is possible.

    Education policies, programs, and resources can provide structures that sustain and promote
    the assets that schools and communities develop from working together. Mali already has in
    place a school-based management structure, its CGS (comités de gestion scolaire). These can
    be strengthened and aligned to further the long-term mutual support that emerged between
    schools and communities during the crisis. CGS can improve administrative efficiency and—
    critically for crisis contexts—can also promote solidarity among school and community actors.
    They offer guidance to education communities for making decisions that advance the well-being
    of students, their schools, and communities, and for working together to implement them. These
    decisions focus on issues of safety, social and emotional well-being, and the quality of learning of
    Malian students across the country—south and north alike.

    For example, CGS can provide the forum where parents and other community members come
    together to discuss, negotiate, and agree on how to address important issues identified in the
    resilience assessment, such as language of instruction, relevant learning and skills for youth, girls’
    education, community activities to improve social cohesion, and respect for diversity, etc. School
    improvement plans, grants, and training (provided by national and international partners) can
    support CGS to implement these important decisions.

    To strengthen the school-based management structures in Mali, the education resilience
    assessment identified three initial recommendations based on the community assets:

           1.	     Agree on expanded goals for communities and families in schools, beyond
           the merely administrative functions, including risk protection, promotion of
           community assets, and student learning. Communities are the first line of support
           in protecting the well-being of children and youth. They also support their learning.
           Education structures and policies can promote community-school relations and
           solidarity as policy goals for more relevant and supportive environments for
           students in contexts of adversity.

           2.	     Make CGS structures more culturally relevant. Presently, CGS in Mali heavily
           emphasize bureaucratic, administrative, and financial accounting procedures.
           These need to be complemented by guidelines (including materials, training,
           and financial resources) that facilitate the indigenous ways by which Malian
           communities manifest mutual support, community solidarity, and accountability.
           Accountability is important, but it must be expressed through innovative and local
           ways for each context. The CGS model in Mali could be reformed to include more
           culturally sensitive strategies and terminology for organization, agenda setting,
           planning, and participation.

           3.	     Formally recognize the extended family as a structure of support for
           children and youth in Mali. The assessment data showed that the extended
           family is a key community structure and source of support in Mali. It is therefore
           crucial for community-based interventions to reflect this in their program designs
           and mechanisms for service delivery (for example, by specifying the participation

EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                        	       13
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                         		




             of siblings, grandparents, uncles, and aunts in the management of schools,
             preparation of school plans, and school-community activities during and after
             school hours).

      Relevant education services and system alignment to a
      resilience approach
      Education systems can protect, foster, and use existing assets in communities and schools that
      have helped both host and displaced communities cope with the recent political and security crisis.
      Three relevant windows of opportunity were identified by the education resilience assessment.
      First, the communities welcomed the flexible access that allowed students and teachers from
      the north to attend and teach in schools in the south. Second, the findings showed that host and
      displaced communities intuitively understood the relations between education, health, school
      feeding, and livelihoods, especially in times of crisis. Both of these opportunities, uncovered in
      the midst of the 2012 political and security crisis in Mali, can inform education system reform in
      the country. Third, in order to make long-term goals of education access, quality of education,
      and quality of living more sustainable, Mali should improve the response of its education system
      in the face of crisis.

      Windows of opportunity for a more flexible education system that can improve
      access and quality of learning during crises
      Flexible education services can help schools and communities better respond to crisis and
      continue to support longer-term educational goals. Notably in Mali, the Ministry of Education’s
      “emergency” policy allowed internally displaced teachers from the north to continue to work
      in the south. Thus, many schools were able to continue providing education services, despite
      the crisis, and welcomed internally displaced students and teachers. However, the education
      system was missing needed flexibilities and guidance for other issues, such as how to deliver
      the curriculum when students faced many lost hours of instruction and how to respond to the
      language mismatch between displaced students from the north and schools in the south. More
      elastic structures can help address these problems, as well as other inherent education system
      challenges, such as teacher-centered pedagogy (and gaps in teacher preparation and training)
      and classroom management.

      The Mali education system has shown that it can be flexible in times of crisis; this flexibility
      should also be permanently introduced into longer-term development objectives for access
      and quality. These include variable school schedules, after-school classes, and even pedagogical
      practices outside the classroom, such as community projects, internships and mentorships, and
      in-classroom support by community members and families. This flexibility and participation in
      education delivery are as valuable in stable times as in crisis.

      Research has shown that combining academic and socio-emotional activities contributes to
      learning (World Bank and International Red Cross 2013). Thus, in Mali, education services should
      broaden their focus on supporting and integrating academic, social, and emotional needs and

 14   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                            MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    skills simultaneously, for example, through student-led clubs, team-based learning, community
    projects, and other pedagogical activities that develop and demand social proficiencies from the
    teaching-learning process. Similarly, emotional skills can also be fostered and modeled by caring
    and supportive teachers, and altruistic behavior among peers. Self-esteem, confidence, mutual
    care, and even culturally appropriate humor in the classroom also support learning. Interestingly,
    these social and emotional skills have also been identified as assets that foster resilience in
    children and youth (Masten and Obradović 2008, Benard 2004).

    This Mali education resilience assessment revealed four key considerations for adopting flexible
    education approaches to improve access and equity, strengthen the quality of learning to render
    the education system more resilient to crisis, and fulfill long-term development:

           1.	     Provide flexible education services to improve access and equity. Building
           on efforts already under way, schools in Mali can adopt more flexible schools hours
           and competency-based assessments and equivalency (to recognize learning outside
           of the classroom), offer after-school activities, and design remedial programs or
           accelerated curriculum for over-age children or those at risk of dropping out.

           2.	     Organize learning priorities and curriculum delivery. Quality learning is
           not necessarily promoted by a demanding curriculum (too many courses, too many
           subjects, too much content for short school hours, etc.). However, establishing a
           minimum amount of time for each core subject and content area is important.
           This can be done in the primary levels by guaranteeing that children can read and
           write well at the end of the second grade, providing foundational learning for
           more advanced content, reducing memorization of content, and including time for
           discussions and applications.

           3.	     Integrate social and emotional activities with academic learning. Social
           and emotional competencies contribute to the overall well-being of children and
           youth by helping them cope with chronic exposure to violence and improving their
           academic performance. Infusing academic instruction with social and emotional
           instruction helps develop social skills and demands that students interact with
           other students and the community at large.

           4.	      Provide opportunities for peer-to-peer support. Given the high levels
           of peer camaraderie mentioned by both students and adults in the surveys,
           approaches that make use of peer support in the classroom may be especially
           effective in the Malian context. Providing teachers with skills and activities to
           facilitate peer-to-peer learning can help institutionalize this asset over the longer
           run. Reforms to teacher training programs, in line with this more student-centered
           approach, are needed. In the present context of mass internal displacements, for
           example, host students could support catch-up classes for displaced students, and
           displaced students in turn could help host community students with their French.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                      	     15
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                         		


      Windows of opportunity to improve the interrelation between education, school
      feeding, health and livelihoods
      The participants in this study intuitively recognized the numerous interrelations between
      education, health, school feeding, and livelihoods (both subsistence and income generation).
      Holistic approaches are needed to ensure that communities play a more effective role in the
      education of their children and young people. For example, school canteens and classes that
      teach skills for livelihoods are especially important and largely missing in education interventions
      in stressed areas of Mali. Schools are central structures in Malian communities and are natural
      spaces for integrative social services that support education, school feeding, and livelihoods.
      More broadly, there is also scope for integrating services at the local community level.

      The Ministry of Education in Mali recognizes the importance of providing both education and
      school feeding services in schools. This is reflected in the government policy to support and expand
      the availability and functionality of school canteens. The school meals program, however, lacks a
      nationally harmonized implementation framework and resources for follow up and reporting. The
      recent establishment of a department dedicated to the school meals program was unfortunately
      stalled by the onset of the latest crisis, which affected the implementation and consolidation
      of the strategy. However, the cross-sector vision and initial strategy combining education and
      school feeding exists as an education system asset. It now can benefit from political engagement
      and advocacy on school meals at all levels. The strategy has to be adopted and implemented
      by different actors, which will require concerted efforts in communication, awareness raising,
      training, and sustainable financing. A long-term education and school feeding strategy, moreover,
      can be well served by making use of the community and schools assets identified in this study:
      community solidarity, CGS, and teacher motivation and support.

      In terms of the cross-sector relations between education and livelihood support, a number of
      public policies demonstrate the Malian government’s willingness to assist the poor and the
      vulnerable. This is illustrated by policies for youth employment, technical and vocational education
      and training, and social protection frameworks. However, the achievements remain fragile and
      a significant proportion of the population will be left out if innovations are not developed,
      particularly for safety nets and skills-development opportunities. Safety-net interventions are not
      targeted at the poorest, are small in scale, and are designed as temporary interventions. Youth
      employment programs need to be integrated and coordinated among different agencies, and the
      existing skills development programs need to be scaled up to absorb the growing demand for
      training, in coordination with the labor market and in partnership with the private sector. The
      role of schools and communities in a national program of youth skills and employment should be
      explicitly spelled out as well.

      Five key considerations arose from the Mali education resilience assessment to facilitate and
      integrate the support of schools and communities for education, school feeding, and livelihood
      skills services:

             1.	     Consider school meals programs as a foundation for learning. In revitalizing
             the school meals program in Mali, it will be important to consider the educational
             objectives of this program. Notably, while school meals are largely conceived of as

 16   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


        a way to promote access to education and retain students, they can also positively
        impact cognitive abilities and learning outcomes through better school feeding and
        guaranteed meals. There are also applications to the curriculum, such as offering
        practical courses on health and school feeding, incorporating vegetable gardens as
        an applied learning tool, etc.

        2.	     Coordinate school feeding and health for holistic impact and sustainability.
        School meals programs can also link to other complementary services to provide
        more holistic support to vulnerable communities. School canteens provide
        opportunities for other services, such as deworming and providing micro-nutrient
        supplements (as popular health interventions). Another creative approach is for
        the school to provide take-home food rations to the most vulnerable children and
        their families. This can serve as a form of conditional “cash” transfer to alleviate
        the financial burden of purchasing food stuffs for families living below the poverty
        line. Similar to cash-transfer programs, take-home meals can be conditioned upon
        regular school attendance.

        3.	     Utilize the education system’s comparative advantage in skills
        development. A comparative advantage of the education sector in supporting the
        livelihoods of vulnerable populations is its contributions to skills development—
        both short-term and long-term. Schools can provide relevant short-term training
        to youth and even to community members. A curriculum that incorporates short
        technical skills courses can also be the foundation for more structured technical
        programs offered by post-secondary schools and the private sector. These skills
        can become protective assets in times of adversity and the basis for accumulative
        lifelong productive learning for students.

        4.	      Use school-community assets to support school meals programs and
        skills training. Community-level assets present in Mali can support the design and
        implementation of programs for school meals and productive skills, for example. In
        school meals programs, canteens can be run with greater community involvement:
        local mothers can participate in preparing and delivering food, and school gardens
        can supply food, while giving students an opportunity to learn about sustainable
        agricultural practices and local food options.

        Teaching productive skills can also be supported by community members. CGS
        members who participated in this study were parents with occupations, such as
        business managers, farmers, tailors and seamstresses, mechanics, etc. They could
        teach and support short skills-development courses. In more urban communities,
        the private sector can be a source of internships and mentorships.

        5.	     Coordinate with safety nets. The education sector can be a good ally for
        safety-net programs that seek to protect vulnerable populations from economic
        shocks. Schools provide a central community space, not only in stable times, but
        especially in times of crisis. During emergencies, different school actors can identify
        beneficiaries, monitor support for affected children and youth, and help protect all
        children, for example, by keeping them in school and providing them with routine

EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                     	   17
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                         		


             and familiarity in the midst of chaos. The role of the education sector in these types
             of programs is one of coordination and integration with other key services, such
             as meals and food programs, emergency health services, and subsistence help.
             Down the line, it may be worth envisaging a system of cash transfers conditional
             on school attendance.

      Windows of opportunity to strengthen the Mali education system’s response to
      crisis
      The pre-existing and new risks related to the 2012 crisis have major implications for the overall
      response capacity of the education system. For a more proactive response, the education system
      in Mali can strengthen its capacity by integrating its national and local emergency response
      strategies. This combination is important in light of the findings of the education resilience
      assessment, which points at the local assets that help education communities cope with crisis,
      and at the national programs and services necessary to use, foster, and protect community and
      school strengths, opportunities, and resources.

      To be effective, emergency responses to crisis must link to the long-term management of the
      education sector, which should have planning strategies and flexible mechanisms in place. In the
      education system, these flexible mechanisms include a first line of response at the community
      and school levels. Some specific emergency response strategies are the flexible deployment of
      teachers, flexible school hours, and flexible curriculum delivery at times of crisis, as well as the
      coordination of education services with health, security, safety nets, etc. Reactive interventions
      are important, but so is the preparedness of community, school, and education system for the
      eventuality of crisis and overarching prevention strategies. Better coordination across education,
      school feeding, health, livelihoods, safety net, and other sectors can build on the relative gains
      and windows of opportunity to improve response capacity.

      The Mali education resilience assessment found six key considerations to strengthen emergency
      response and prevention strategies within the education system:
             1.	     Improve coordination with other sectors. The limited inroads that have
             been made in terms of cross-sector coordination should be consolidated in Mali.
             (National-level coordination was identified as a weakness in the preparation of
             the national monitoring and evaluation strategy.) In addition to institutional
             willingness and structures, national coordination and planning can be heightened
             through local partnerships that holistically address community concerns around
             education, food security, health, income generation, etc.
             2.	    Strengthen and support school and community first line of response. In
             general, immediate crisis response is initially addressed at the community level,
             where schools can be a key structure through which to coordinate response. To
             support this, school plans and community participation are crucial—in particular
             to define the ways in which communities (and extended family structures) can
             protect vulnerable children and youth in times of crisis. In turn, the education
             system must provide appropriate support to school-community structures, such


 18   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                          MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


        as the CGS, as well as emergency funds to be used at time crisis. This is particularly
        important, given the depleted resources in Mali’s communities, to ensure that the
        financial and material burden of crisis does not lie with already vulnerable families.
        3.	     Involve CGS members in the local planning process. Using existing
        community-school structures, such as CGS, can improve the reliability of local
        emergency response plans. CGS, given their recognized and predetermined role
        in crises, are better positioned to communicate their goals and objectives, and
        strengthen their local relevance. To support the CGS in school-based emergency
        response and prevention plans, approaches can be designed that share areas of
        authority across CGS members (maintenance, new infrastructure, school materials,
        school schedule, curriculum, teachers, school canteens, etc.), that ensure that
        school emergency plans address not only actually occurring risks but also latent
        risks, and that involve CGS in simple but systematic collection of relevant data
        about risks and assets present in schools and communities.
        4.	     Prepare education strategies for resettlement and relocation needs in
        advance. In addition to instituting policies to promote the management and safe
        return of IDPs to the north, policy makers also need to consider the availability and
        relevance of education services in place. These services must adapt and respond
        to how the recent crisis undermined the social fabric and altered the nature
        and concept of community for local people. Especially in the north, education
        programs should include components for social cohesion strengthening and
        positive community interactions.
        5.	       Improve crisis response capacity at the national level. The education
        system is one of many state actors that play a key role in times of emergencies.
        The requisite cross-sector coordination implies inter- and intra- education sector
        planning, coordination, and adequate and timely resources. Explicit government
        commitments to crisis response, planning, and monitoring must include both
        national emergency services and national support to schools and communities as
        first line of response. This is only possible with broad coordination across providers
        of technical assistance: the Ministry of Education, nongovernmental organizations
        (NGOs), universities, and international humanitarian and development agencies.
        6.	     Scale up successful humanitarian and crisis response innovations.
        Successful humanitarian interventions, which can provide important inputs
        to bring models to scale, must be identified. In particular, these models should
        provide a longer-term foundation to connect emergency response readiness to
        the education system and address key issues of quality, community participation,
        complementary programs, and even planning processes. Some of the previous
        recommendations on flexible strategies for school management, programs, and
        community participation can provide this bridge between humanitarian response
        and ongoing development. At times of crisis, such as the recent one in Mali,
        transition strategies should capture lessons learned to consolidate positive models
        of response and fill in weakness gaps.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                    	   19
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                        		


      As a general conclusion, this education resilience assessment in Mali pointed to the importance of
      documenting not only the risks and threats brought about by the 2012 crisis but also the tangible
      and intangible strengths, opportunities, and resources within schools, families, and communities.
      Documenting such assets as community solidarity, teacher voluntarism, and student peer relations,
      which emerged in the face of the 2012 crisis, not only illustrated how communities cope on their
      own in Mali but also how they can inform national education services to better respond to crises
      and can become more relevant over the long term. We propose that key national programs be
      made more effective by incorporating flexible strategies and community participation that have
      been shown to be relevant for both long-term education development and crisis response.




 20   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                    MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Introduction: The Rationale for a Mali
    Education Resilience Assessment
    The education resilience assessment for Mali was conducted within a wider programmatic study
    and technical assistance framework, “Mali: Impact of the Crisis on Social Sectors” (World Bank,
    2013c). The broad assessment and action plan supported by this framework crosses the education,
    health, and social protection sectors. Initially, however, the resilience assessment placed particular
    emphasis on the education sector and school actors (students, families, community, teachers,
    and administrators).

    As a component of a larger crisis-impact study, this assessment introduces a resilience lens to
    identify both the risks brought about or accentuated during the recent political and security crisis
    in the country,6 and the community and institutional assets that have helped displaced and host
    communities cope with it. This focus on risks and assets is fundamental to a resilience approach,
    and they are indeed interrelated. Risks imply the possibility of danger, harm, and loss in the context
    of existing threats and vulnerabilities. Assets are inherent ongoing strengths and opportunities,
    and also available resources and services that protect from risks and promote desirable outcomes
    (well-being, education achievement, health, etc.). Protecting recognized assets and fostering new
    ones in individuals, communities, and organizations, therefore, can mitigate the manifestation
    of impending risks and support on-going development. This dual goal of crisis response and
    continued development defines the transformative nature of resilience.
    In education resilience, we stress how the education system protects and fosters the assets of
    local school actors, but resilience also suffuses the institutional level, contributing to the policies,
    programs, and resources that address the protection and educational development needs of
    students. In this Mali education resilience study, the education communities7 of interest are those
    displaced from the north, due to the 2012 political and security crisis, and those in the south
    hosting them. However, we also extrapolate lessons learned for the overall education system of
    Mali.
    Resilience is a complex and contextualized process. Given its multiple meanings, a context-specific
    understanding and application of resilience is warranted. For the purpose of this study, the team
    of Mali education professionals and local consultants, facilitated by the World Bank Education
    Resilience Approaches (ERA) team, defined education resilience and its associated outcomes as
    “the longer-term transformation of our education system to address both education related risks
    existing before the recent crisis of 2012, which were aggravated by it, and the newly created risks
    due to the political and security crisis. [“Resilience” is]…our education system transformation (to
    rebuild better) by identifying, protecting, and using the assets of both host and displaced education
    communities (students, parents, communities, teachers, and principals) to address present needs
    and mitigate or better respond to future crisis, while improving education outcomes in the long
    term.”

    6	        While Mali has experienced several crises over the last few years, the focus of this study is the effect of the 2012 political
    and security crisis on the country.
    7	        “Education communities” refers to the students, families, teachers, and administrators interacting within one commu-
    nity (town, village, neighborhood), and is used interchangeably with “school actors.”


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                         	        21
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                          		


      The local definition of resilience, as applied to Mali, aligns with a transformative understanding
      that not only refers to better coping during crises but actually places a premium on growth and
      ongoing development. It is precisely the assets (strengths, opportunities, and resources) that are
      identified in the midst of extremely difficult situations that can add value in the longer term to
      education communities and systems.

      The rapid assessment approach
      This study benefitted from the RES-360°, a rapid
      mixed-methods assessment methodology focused               The RES-360° Assessment Tool
      on resilience. A team of local researchers and Mali        The RES-360° tool identifies the risks and
      Ministry of Education staff, supported by the ERA          assets in the education sector, pointing
      team, interviewed students, parents, teachers, and         to paths away from risks and toward
      school administrators in two host communities              resilience. The tool provides a systematic
      in the south. The interviews and focus groups              and sequential process for collecting and
      explored the displaced Malians’ perception of the          analyzing qualitative and quantitative
      risks they experienced and the assets that helped          data. It starts with interviews and focus
      them cope with displacement and the economic               groups of education actors, which are
      consequences of the crisis. Their feedback informed        the basis for designing a local survey of a
      a locally designed resilience survey that was used         larger sample of participants.
      to triangulate their opinions with a larger number         In Mali, the qualitative phase explored and
      of participants (from three additional schools in          identified the risks and assets relevant to
      which host communities had taken in displaced              two carefully selected host communities
      students and families). Together, the qualitative          and schools in the south. The quantitative
      interviews and the perception survey also identified       phase validated this exploratory data with
      those education services that were considered most         approximately 400 participants across
      relevant to protect host and displaced communities         rural and urban settings. (See annex 1 for
      and foster longer-term education reforms.                  the methodological details.)

      This report has four chapters. Chapter I presents the
      data collected from participating school actors about the risks they faced as a result of the crisis
      and the assets they used to cope. Chapter II extrapolates some of the implications of these risks
      and assets for school-based management structures and programs in Mali. Chapter III presents
      some initial recommendations for aligning relevant education policies and programs in Mali with
      a resilience-based approach. Chapter IV briefly guides the reader to additional relevant research
      questions and topics that could further support the education reform process in Mali. These
      areas would also build upon the initial exploratory findings of this rapid assessment.

      The 2012 Malian crisis
      In March 2012, a military coup ousted the democratically elected government of Mali. Shortly
      after, northern Mali was seized by extremist groups. Under the mandate of the United Nations
      Security Council, a coalition of Malian and foreign troops launched military operations in northern
      Mali in January 2013. A Transitional Government of National Unity was subsequently formed and
      recognized by the international community, with the mandate of restoring sovereignty over the
      entire territory of Mali and organizing fair and transparent national elections (in July 2013). These

 22   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                            MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    unprecedented events constituted the most severe political and security crisis faced by Mali since
    its independence in 1960.

    Mali is no stranger to crisis. As a landlocked country in the Sahel region, it is vulnerable to the
    negative effects of climate change, experiencing recurrent droughts and desertification. Its
    demographic growth is high, but its population density is extremely low, especially in the north.
    The Malian economy is characterized by a few exports (gold, cotton), which makes it vulnerable
    to commodity price fluctuations. The combination of these risk factors has exposed the country
    to several external and structural shocks, including a prolonged food insecurity crisis.

    This context of environmental and economic risks was compounded by the March 2012 military
    coup. Northern Mali was seized by extremist groups that established a religiously strict and
    violent occupation. This crisis and the ensuing French-led international military operation,
    which disrupted the insurgents’ occupation, resulted in massive displacement of civilians from
    the north, both as refugees into neighboring countries and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
    into communities in the south. The majority of IDPs have been hosted by extended families and
    through ethnic community ties. This crisis has also had a severe economic impact.

    As of March 2014, significant progress has been made towards resolving the crisis, with regard
    to re-establishing territorial integrity and democracy. Peace talks are also ongoing. Following
    the military intervention of the Malian and foreign troops—led first by France under Operation
    Serval and then by the UN’s (July 2013) Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
    (MINUSMA)—control has been regained over the entire area between Gao and Tombouctou,
    and access to main northern cities has been reestablished. Additionally, fair and transparent
    presidential elections took place in July and August 2013, resulting in a newly elected president.
    The National Assembly was elected in two rounds between November and December 2013.

    These positive developments, accompanied by a very substantial surge of overseas development
    assistance funding in 2013 (following the Paris meeting on Mali), point to a gradual resolution
    of the political, security, and related economic crises. In 2013, following the security-related
    economic disruptions in 2012, economic growth rebounded to 3 percent, up from a meager 1
    percent in 2012, which may further accelerate in 2014.

    However, many challenges remain, especially the considerable uncertainty about the magnitude
    of the economic impact of the political crisis in 2012 and the subsequent recovery since 2013.
    While security has improved, the risk of renewed violence and guerrilla-type conflict remains
    high, deterring many displaced households from returning to the north. Unemployment is also
    projected to increase and poverty will undoubtedly worsen. After a decline from 55.6 percent in
    2001 to 43.6 percent in 2010, the poverty rate is estimated to have increased to 46 percent of
    the population by 2012, increasing the number of the poor by 7.2 million. As a further indication,
    the first post-crisis household surveys suggest that per capita consumption decreased in southern
    regions from spring 2011 to spring 2013, except in Bamako.

    The Mali education system today faces a three-pronged challenge: 1) address the educational
    risks and vulnerabilities existing before the crisis, 2) address the critical needs that the 2012
    crisis itself brought, and 3) address its own mandate to improve education access and quality.
    These combined needs are most apparent in communities in the south that are hosting displaced

EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                     	       23
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                            		


      populations from the north. Both host and displaced groups are demanding access to social
      services. In general, the crisis has placed additional strains on service delivery in the south, as well
      as on the financial and material resources of host communities. The education sector has a crucial
      role to play in dealing with these heightened vulnerabilities related to the crisis in the short term,
      but it must also continue to confront longer-term challenges of education access and quality that
      predated the current conflict. Assessing and addressing both short- and long-term needs require
      a combined approach.




 24   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                               MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    I. Risks and Resilience Assets in the Malian
    Education Context
    The Mali education resilience assessment adds to the existing body of evidence to sustain a
    resilience lens and framework within education systems prone to crises. The findings are in line
    with the education resilience approach to education policies, illustrated in figure 1.

    In general, the education resilience approach recommends that Mali’s education system should
    strive to develop policies and programs with the following goals:

                     1.	 Manage and minimize risks.

                     2.	 Use and protect school and community assets.

                     3.	 Foster school-community support.

                     4.	 Deliver resilience-aligned education services.
                                                        Figure 1
                              The Education Resilience Approaches Conceptual Framework

                              RESILIENCE&
                                                        RESILIENCE&LEVERS&                                POLICY&GOALS&
                             COMPONENTS&


                             Educa-on&in&   • What&adversi-es&students&face&                                Manage&and&
                              adversity&    • How&the&educa-on&system&is&addressing&risks&in&schools&
                                                                                                            minimize&risks&




                                                                                                                                 Posi-ve&learning&outcomes&&
                                                                                                                                    in&spite&of&adversity&
                                            • How&students&seek&resilience&through&control,&
                              Assets&and&                                                                      Use&and&&
      Educa-on&resilience&




                                             competence&and&being&accountable&
                             engagement&    • How&students&seek&resilience&through&their&socio>
                                             emo-onal&well>being&via&engagement&with&others&
                                                                                                            protect&assets&
                                             (peers,&teachers,&families,&etc.)&and&iden-ty&forma-on&
           process&
   &




                               Relevant&    • How&schools&provide&support&and&opportuni-es&to&              Foster&school>
                                             students&through&ac-ons&or&approaches&regarding&
                               school&&&     access,&permanence,&teaching&and&learning&
                                                                                                             community&
                              community&    • How&school&and&community&partnerships&support&                   support&
                                support&     student&outcomes&in&contexts&of&adversity&
                                                    &        &       &        &        &
                                                                                             &
                                                                                               &
                                                    &        &       &&




                               Aligned&     • How&the&educa-on&system&provides&a&strategic&
                                             direc-on&for&relevant&educa-on&in&adversity&contexts&&        Deliver&resilience&
                              educa-on&     • How&educa-on&programs&integrate&learning,&
                               system&       socioemo-onal&well>being&and&protec-on&&                      aligned&services&
                                            • What&human,&material&and&ﬁnancial&resources&are&
                               support&      accessible&to&support&at>risk&educa-on&communi-es&
                                                    &        &        &        &      &&




    The starting point for understanding education resilience is the context of adversity that negatively
    affects school actors—students, families, communities, teachers, and administrators. The other
    is the assets—strengths, opportunities, and resources—that have helped them cope with their


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                                	                 25
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                           		


      difficult living situations. Understanding both
      risks and assets is crucial to formulate relevant                   Mixed-Method Research Design
      programs and services that support vulnerable                       A mixed-method research design capitalizes on
      but resilient communities. In the case of this                      the strengths of qualitative and quantitative
      education resilience assessment in Mali, we                         data, which we used in this study. Initially, we
      applied our acquired understanding of risks                         involved education communities (students,
      and assets to host and displaced communities                        parents, teachers, and school administrators)
      created as result of the 2012 political and                         to help identify the risks and assets they
      security crisis.                                                    perceived through interviews and focus groups.
                                                                          We purposefully selected two communities in
      The findings of the risks and assets in this chapter                the south of Mali that were hosting displaced
      represent feedback from five purposefully                           people from the north. Subsequently, to validate
      selected host and internally displaced                              further these exploratory findings, a survey was
      communities in the south of Mali.8 There are                        prepared that listed these risks and assets and
      two interrelated reasons for this focus. First,                     was conducted in three additional communities.
      social services in the south, which were already                    The final purposeful sample totaled five
      weak, have been under significantly more                            communities in the south.
      strain trying to accommodate the massive (and                       The quantitative phase validated the initial
      probably protracted) influx of IDPs from the                        exploratory qualitative data with approximately
      north of the country. It is therefore important                     400 participants across rural and urban settings.
      to capture this important consequence of the
      crisis.                                                             Locally Designed RES-360 Questionnaire
                                                                          The locally designed RES-360° questionnaire
      Second, the risks and assets of displaced
                                                                          captured the level of risks and assets perceived
      populations in the south identified in this
                                                                          by host and displaced education actors, and
      report can guide reintegration policies and
                                                                          the opinions of students, parents, teachers,
      programs in the north. At the same time,
                                                                          and school administrators. Regarding risks, the
      the sample also allowed us to capture the
                                                                          questionnaire included items asking about the
      broader consequences of the crisis (notably the                     frequency of manifested risks (or the possibility
      economic consequences) on already vulnerable                        of a risk becoming a real problem). It also queried
      communities of the south (such as access to                         to what extent these risks were aggravated by
      schooling), and to distinguish new risks from                       the crisis. Regarding assets, the questionnaire
      aggravated pre-existing risks. The delivery of                      included items about the frequency of assets (or
      social services in Mali in the short to medium                      their availability) and how important they were
      term will need to address both the impact                           to the participants. The pilot questionnaire used
      of the crisis and the still longer-term unmet                       a 5-point scale, which was later converted to a
      education needs.                                                    3-point scale to simplify analysis. (See annex 1
                                                                          for methodological details).
      Section I.I provides further facts on the 2012–
      2013 Mali crisis, emphasizing the initial impacts
      on education inputs and outcomes.


      8	         “Purposeful sample” refers to specifically selected study participants based on their life experiences. These samples are
      not probability and statistical samples, and are inherently small. Their validity rests on the knowledge and contributions they can
      make to an increased understanding of a specific phenomenon, based on their lived experiences. For a mixed-methods approach,
      both qualitative and quantitative data can be collected from purposefully selected participants (Tashakori and Teddlie 2010).


 26   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Section I.II reports on the risks perceived in the education system, many of which predate the
    2012 crisis. While IDPs required education services, host communities commented that their
    education needs before the crisis were still unmet. Nonetheless, they recognized that the new
    security risks and the eminent threats and vulnerabilities created by displacement—especially
    the psychological, physical, and economic hardships experienced by children and youth forced
    to leave their homes and communities—had to be addressed. In particular, most participants
    intuitively understood the inter-relations between the risks that threaten education, health,
    school feeding, and their livelihoods.
    Section I.III, in line with a resilience approach, details the assets or the ways that internally
    displaced and host communities have coped with their difficult living situations. It discusses
    how these assets overwhelmingly pointed to community solidarity, as exhibited by the host
    communities welcoming the displaced population, the support from extended families, and
    teacher voluntarism. It also discusses institutional-level assets, including the flexibility provided
    by the education sector allowing displaced students and teachers to access schools in the south.
    The institutional assets defined exemplify the crucial role of education systems in protecting,
    fostering, and using school and community assets to enhance both the responses to crisis and
    long-term development goals.

    I.I The Mali 2012 crisis and its consequences on education
    Even before the crisis, Mali was far from achieving the Millennium Development Goal in
    education. The primary education completion rate in 2012 was only 55.3 percent, compared to
    a sub-Saharan average of about 70 percent. The quality of learning was also poor. The recently
    published PASEC data (assessment conducted in 2011) showed that in second grade, only 33.2
    percent of students were able to read and understand a simple sentence, while 44.2 percent
    had the required competencies in math. At the end of grade five, 13.4 percent of students
    performed satisfactorily in French, but less than 10 percent performed satisfactorily in math.
    Gender inequality also remains high, with fewer than 8 girls enrolled in basic education for every
    10 boys. The quality of teachers is also a huge concern, since around 75 percent of teachers are
    not qualified in primary education (PASEC 2004).
    The crisis has further aggravated access to quality education. Initial data show that the occupation
    in the north has created significant constraints on school attendance, particularly for girls; caused
    infrastructure damage, with 140 schools and 8 offices damaged or destroyed; created a shortage
    of learning materials; and forced the exodus of qualified teachers (about 5,000 teachers were
    displaced from the north). Indeed, 2013 estimates indicated that about 54 percent of schools in
    Gao, Tombouctou, and Kidal were not functional, which has resulted in significant drops in access
    to educational and other services for communities in the north. By May 2013, about 100,000
    students had no access to education.9 Decreased access to education is further corroborated
    by data on the 2012/2013 school year, which indicate a gross enrollment ratio (GER) of about
    30 percent in Tombouctou and 14 percent in Gao. This is down from a high in 2010/2011 of 77
    percent in Tombouctou and 98 percent in Gao.10 The primary completion rate also decreased
    substantially, from 30–40 percent in 2010/2011 to 10–20 percent in 2012/2013.

    9	     Data shared by Education Cluster for Mali (2014).
    10	    Mali Ministry of Education (2014).


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                       	       27
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                           		


      On a more positive note, initial data on the 2013/2014 school year (still to be fully validated) show
      a GER climbing back to about 50 percent, and completion rates on the order of 20–25 percent in
      Tombouctou and Gao. This is in part related to the partial return of displaced teachers (although
      the teaching force reported in 2013/2014 in both regions still only represented about 30–40
      percent of the initial numbers) and students. The situation, however, is still far from returning to
      pre-crisis levels.

      At the same time, it is estimated that the crisis led to approximately 120,000 displaced students
      in primary and lower secondary grades, of which around 35,000 have moved to the south. About
      90 percent of these 35,000 internally displaced students eventually managed to enroll in a school
      in 2012/2013 (UNDP 2013). Enrollment rates were also high for displaced students who did not
      return to the north as the crisis waned in 2013/2014. While it indicates the success of granting
      access to education to displaced children, this massive inflow of new students in the south is
      expected to remain an issue for the 2014/2015 school year—and potentially longer, until the
      north is secure and teachers have fully returned. These new students are placing tremendous
      pressure on already overcrowded facilities in the south, adversely affecting overall access and
      quality of education, on top of the growing economic constraints.

      Data on the 2012/2013 school year show notably declining GER in primary education in Bamako
      (from 116 percent in 2010/2011 to 90 percent in 2012/2013) and Segou (from 79 percent in
      2010/2011 to 70 percent in 2012/2013). These rates, which have continued to decrease in
      2013/2014 (85 percent in Bamako and 55 percent in Segou), likely also reflect broader economic
      straits. The primary completion rate is also falling: for instance, Segou rates have fallen from 56
      percent in 2010/2011 to 37 percent in 2013/2014.

      This evidence also points to a poor and deteriorating learning environment in the south with,
      according to 2013/2014 data, classroom sizes of about 50 students on average. Bamako reports
      almost 70 students per class, with more than 80 students in many schools. These findings were
      confirmed by the survey, which has helped clarify both pre-crisis and crisis-induced risks, as well
      as some of the coping strategies of affected communities.

      I.II Perceptions of pre-existing risks and those associated with
      the 2012 security crisis
      The initial focus groups conducted with displaced and host students, parents, teachers, and
      administrators listed a series of risks they faced across education, health, school feeding, and
      livelihood domains. Special concern for girls was also mentioned, especially in terms of education
      access, but also protection from harassment (table 1). In education, limited access, school drop-
      outs, overcrowded classrooms, lack of qualified teachers, and limited training services were
      challenges that predated the crisis. The same is true for health, school feeding, and livelihood risks.
      What is important to note, however, is that these three types of services—education, health, and
      income generation—were deemed critical in times of crisis, according to both host and displaced
      communities. Intuitively, both communities considered these services, along with the focus on
      girls, as qualifying for emergency response measures, as well as long-term development.

      Two types of risks were stressed as directly associated with the 2012 security crisis. One set of

 28   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    risks had to do with large displacements caused by the armed conflict in the north, plus other
    associated tensions, such as lack of subsistence means, fears of integration in host communities,
    and negative impacts on young people (including psychological trauma and dropping out of school).
    The other type of risks concerned support services during the crisis. Displaced populations were
    especially worried about the closure of schools and limitations of other support services (table 1)
    for health and livelihoods in the midst of the security crisis and armed conflict in the north, but
    the host communities were equally apprehensive about them.

    Focus groups with the first two participating host and displaced communities provided the basis
    for locally designing the RES-360° survey. To triangulate their opinions, the survey was then
    applied to almost 400 participants in three additional host communities.
                                               Table 1
                  Overview of Risks Identified by the RES-360° Exploratory Sample

               Risks before the crisis and                            Risks due to the crisis
                aggravated by the crisis


       1.	 Education system and teachers                  1.	Armed conflict, displacement, and
              •	 Lack of access to school (host              associated tensions
                   residents and displaced people)               •	 Displaced communities and lack
              •	 School drop-out (infrequent                          of subsistence means
                   attendance and total drop-out)                •	 Integration problems
              •	 Overcrowded classrooms                          •	 Negative impacts on young
              •	 Lack of qualified teachers                           people
              •	 Insufficient in-service training for     2.	Lack of emergency response capacity
                   teachers                                      •	 Closure of schools
              •	 Lack of training for CGS                        •	 Limitation or cessation of services
       2.	 Health and school feeding
              •	 Malaria	
              •	 Lack of sanitary facilities near the
                   community
              •	 Not enough to eat (no school
                   canteens)
              •	 Lack of hygiene kits (from NGOs)
       3.	 Livelihoods
              •	 Loss of livelihoods or unemployment
                   of parents
              •	 Child labor
       4.	 Gender-related issues
              •	 Lack of access to schools for girls in
                   particular (e.g., early marriage)
              •	 Harassment of girls



    Manifestation of new education risks in host and internally displaced communities
    and effects on pre-existing education risks
    The RES-360° survey also reported two education risks directly resulting from the crisis: 1)
    problems with displaced students understanding the language of instruction in the south; and 2)
    a demanding curriculum.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                         	   29
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                          		

                                                Figure 2
                 Education Risks Manifested in Communities Hosting IDPs in Southern Mali




                                                                                                                       	  

      Education community actors reported that the displacement severely impacted pre-existing
      problems in the education system. Host schools in the south that were already struggling with
      overcrowded classrooms had to make space for additional students. Host teachers with varying
      levels of qualifications had to support additional academic and socio-emotional demands from
      students in very difficult living situations. Curriculum delivery was disrupted during the school
      year, resulting in fewer classroom hours with which to complete the planned content.11

      The education resilience assessment also showed that, in the multilingual context of Mali,
      displacement makes the language of instruction a new challenge. In many areas of the south,
      the new curriculum under implementation uses Bambara as the predominant language of
      instruction. For most IDPs from the north, Bambara is not their native language. This is a more
      significant problem for younger displaced children, whose schooling thus far has been largely in
      French and who need to attend the early grades in the south taught in Bambara. Because French
      is the language of instruction in higher grade levels in the south (secondary school), integrating
      northern youth into southern schools has been less problematic in this regard.

      Finally, concerns about girls’ access to education raise important equity and inclusion considerations
      that were present before the 2012 crisis and still need to be addressed. Interestingly—with
      the caveat that these are purely illustrative results, given the small sample and the difficulty of
      comparing responses across stakeholders—the survey reflected that students and teachers were

      11	         A 2010 study (Mali Ministry of Education) on effective learning time showed that, on average, students are losing 30
      percent of the official learning time per year. With the crisis and IDP phenomenon of 2012, the loss of learning time has been
      exacerbated, especially for displaced students. In addition to the limited time to deliver the academic curriculum, two syllabuses
      still co-exist: a renovated one in local languages and the old one in French.


 30   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                                  MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    well aware of the gender difference in access and considered it a risk that has been increasing
    during the crisis. Although parents and principals considered girls’ enrollment a risk, they did not
    consider it to be more prominent during the crisis (figure 3).

                                                    Figure 3
                         The Risk of Reduced Education Access for Girls during the Crisis
                                                (% of response)

               100	  
                90	  
                80	  
                70	  
                60	  
                50	  
                40	  
                30	  
                20	  
                10	  
                 0	  
                                   Students	                                 Teachers	                                 Principals	                              Parents	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                  	  


    Manifestation of pre-existing and new health, school feeding, and livelihoods risks
    in host and internally displaced communities
    In addition to the education risks, other social and economic risks presented problems for
    the education communities in Mali. Economic and livelihood concerns of child labor, financial
    problems, and food insecurities were noted as growing more severe as result of the crisis (figure
    4). This was recognized and felt not only by adults in the communities surveyed but also by
    students (again with the caveat of the small sample).

                                                                                           Figure 4
      Financial and Food Insecurity Risks Manifested In Communities Hosting IDPs in Southern Mali


                                                    percentage	  of	  adults	  saying	  that	  this	  happens	  someAmes	  or	  frequently	  

                                                    percentage	  of	  students	  saying	  that	  this	  happens	  someAmes	  or	  frequently	  



                                       Child	  labor	  




                             Financial	  problems	  




                                 Food	  insecurity	  



                                                            0	     10	        20	         30	       40	        50	         60	        70	         80	     90	          100	  
                                                                                                                                                                                           	  




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                                                                                            	   31
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                            		


      The data show a strong correlation between education and livelihood concerns. Financial
      difficulties experienced by IDPs and the additional pressures of supporting displaced populations
      on host communities—plus the broader economic effects of the crisis felt by both—combine
      to undermine children’s education. Maladaptive coping mechanisms appear, including taking
      children out of school or relying on child labor for extra family income. While basic education is
      free in Mali, financial pressures may come from other associated costs, such as transportation and
      school materials, as well as the opportunity cost of having a child in school rather than contributing
      some type of support to the household. The survey data also show that both students and adults
      perceive child labor as a high risk, possibly related to the need for supplemental income in order
      to cope with financial pressures and food insecurity.12

      Finally, it is important to note that displaced students and displaced teachers especially see the
      important interplay among education, health, and livelihoods in terms of risks and assets. For
      students, not understanding the language of instruction, not being able to cover the academic
      curriculum, and risking dropping out of school are closely linked to psychosocial problems and
      child labor concerns (figure 5). Displaced teachers commonly cited psychosocial problems due to
      displacement and the marginalization of IDPs, along with closure of education and social services,
      and a lack of follow up by CGS (figure 6).

                                                Figure 5
          Five Risks that Displaced Students Perceived as More Prominent than Host Students



                           Children	  don't	  understand	  
                            language	  of	  instruction	  




                                                                                                                     percentage	  of	  host	  
                           Psychosocial	  problems	  for	  
                                                                                                                     students	  saying	  that	  
                                   students	  
                                                                                                                     this	  risk	  happens	  
                                                                                                                     sometimes	  or	  
                                                                                                                     frequently	  

                                                                                                                     percentage	  of	  
                                        School	  drop	  out	                                                      displaced	  students	  
                                                                                                                     saying	  that	  this	  risk	  
                                                                                                                     happens	  sometimes	  or	  
                                                                                                                     frequently	  


                                               Child	  labor	  




                               Overloaded	  curriculum	  



                                                                    0	     20	     40	     60	     80	     100	  
                                                                                                                                                          	  



      12	        Food insecurity has long been a problem in Mali and the existing weaknesses have been heightened as a result of the
      crisis. The impacts of this in education are twofold: implementing a school meals program is not only an important incentive for
      children to attend and stay in school, but other research has highlighted its positive impact on cognitive abilities and learning
      outcomes (Bundy et al. 2009, 23).


 32   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                                          MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                                              Figure 6
        Five Risks that Displaced Teachers Perceived as More Prominent than Host Teachers



                                 Education	  services	  closed	  



               Social	  service	  provision	  affected	  by	                                                                                                       Risk	  frequency	  
                                     crisis	                                                                                                                           perceived	  by	  host	  
                                                                                                                                                                        community	  teachers	  
                                                                                                                                                                        (sometimes	  or	  
                Displaced	  persons	  marginalized	  in	                                                                                                            frequently)	  
                        host	  communities	  

                                                                                                                                                                        Risk	  frequency	  
                                                                                                                                                                        perceived	  by	  
                          Lack	  of	  follow	  up	  by	  the	  CGS	                                                                                              displaced	  teachers	  
                                                                                                                                                                        (sometimes	  or	  
                                                                                                                                                                        frequently)	  
                                Psychosocial	  problems	  for	  
                                        students	  


                                                                               0	       20	            40	            60	            80	            100	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  



    Manifestation of new risks brought on by the 2012 political and security crisis
    The RES-360° data showed that students as well as the adults within education communities were
    concerned by the negative impact of forced displacement caused by the political and security
    crisis in Mali. This concern also included the psychosocial problems affecting students, as well as
    the potential for tension over limited resources in host communities that are supporting those
    displaced (figure 7). The data suggest that the majority of the displacement impact has been
    shouldered at the household level.
                                                            Figure 7
                                     Security-Related Risks Manifested by the Recent Crisis:
                                               Displacement and Related Impacts

                    100	  
                      90	  
                      80	  
                      70	  
                      60	  
                      50	  
                      40	  
                      30	  
                      20	                                                                                                                                         percentage	  of	  students	  
                      10	                                                                                                                                         saying	  that	  this	  
                                                                                                                                                                   happens	  sometimes	  or	  
                        0	                                                                                                                                        frequently	  
                                 Presence	  of	  IDPs	   Overcrowded	   Children	  don't	               Psychosocial	        Displaced	  
                                      in	  the	           host	  families	   understand	  the	          problems	  for	      persons	  
                                   community	                                    language	  of	              students	        marginalized	  in	             percentage	  of	  adults	  
                                                                                   instruction	                                       host	                      saying	  that	  this	  
                                                                                                                                  communities*	                   happens	  sometimes	  or	  
                                                                                                                                                                   frequently	  
                                    direct	  community	  impacts	  of	             social	  and	  emotional	  impacts	  of	  displacement	  
                                               displacement	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      	  
    	       *This question was only asked of adults.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                                                                                                       	   33
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                                       		

      People displaced from the north to communities in the south placed additional or new constraints on those education and social
      problems existing before the 2012 crisis. Principals, teachers, and school administrators especially noted the depletion of already
      limited school resources (classrooms and teachers), as well as the financial constraints at the household level (overcrowded homes and
      child labor). These were reflected in the data from students, who also mentioned mental health and lack of food as worsening after the
      crisis (figures 8a and 8b). These effects are also a reflection of the broader economic implications of the crisis.
                                                                                           Figure 8
                                                     Top Five Risks Related to the Security Crisis, as Expressed by Students and Adults



                   Overcrowded	  host	  families	                                                                                                      Child	  Labor	  




                                   Displacement	                                                                                                 Host	  families	  are	  
                                                                                                                                                   overcrowded	  



                                                                                                         Percentage	  
                                                                                                         of	  students	                                                                                                   Percentage	  of	  
                            Financial	  problems	                                                                                   Overcrowded	  classrooms	                                                           adults	  




                   Psychosocial	  problems	  for	  
                           students	                                                                                                 Lack	  of	  qualiDied	  teachers	  




                                 Food	  insecurity	                                                                                Particular	  access	  problems	  
                                                                                                                                               for	  girls	  



                                                          0	     20	     40	     60	     80	     100	                                                                     0	     20	     40	     60	     80	         100	  
                                                                                                                              	                                                                                                                   	  
            	  




 34   										                                                                                                                                                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                    MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    I.III The assets (strengths, resources, and opportunities) in
    schools and communities experiencing crisis
    Risks are only part of the story of crises. Crises cannot be understood solely in terms of threats
    to the environment and communities, and increased vulnerabilities of individuals. Human beings
    in contexts of crisis also possess assets in the form of individual and community strengths,
    opportunities, and resources, which can be tapped to prevent risks or mitigate their impact.
    Understanding and identifying these assets is crucial to the design, relevancy, and implementation
    of programs and services that are important components of a social-ecological13 understanding
    of resilience—derived from institutions, systems, communities, and individuals.

    Education systems can use these assets to design more relevant services that can prevent known
    and new risks, and strengthen capacities of vulnerable individuals and communities to cope with
    and overcome adversity. Schools’ main objectives are to support access, permanence, and a
    quality teaching and learning process. But schools also exist within a communal context. They
    can be catalytic actors to protect children and youth, as well as provide them the cognitive, social,
    and emotional skills they need to better navigate the adversities in their lives. This is best done
    when education systems align their own institutional assets (policies, programs, institutions, and
    resources) with assets present in education communities.

    In Mali, the displaced and host students, parents, teachers, and administrators participating in the
    focus groups listed a series of strengths and opportunities, which helped them face the risks arising
    from the 2012 security crisis (table 2). They uncovered prominent community assets ranging from
    the intangible—such as hope and a feeling of protection in schools—to the tangible—such as
    opening schools, support from school staff, and wider societal solidarity of welcoming IDPs into
    their homes and communities.

    It is important to note at the outset that community and individual assets are also vulnerable
    to shocks and can change overtime. For example, host families cannot support IDPs indefinitely
    without the help of formal social services by the government. However, identifying assets
    uncovers the available opportunities to align education and other formal services with them.
    Institutional support can protect existing community assets and support the emergence of new
    ones before, during, and after crises. For this reason, the RES-360° assessment also documents
    relevant education and social programs that can sustain schools and communities in times of
    crisis and in the long term: community-based education services, flexible and relevant education
    programs, and health and subsistence support.




    13	       “Social ecology” refers to a complex approach to understanding human and social behavior as influenced by multiple
    and interacting layers and processes across individuals, families, communities, institutions, society, state, and culture. It originates
    in Urie Bronfenbrenner’s ecological system theory.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                         	        35
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                		

                                                  Table 2.
                     Overview of Assets Identified by the RES-360° Exploratory Sample

                  Community-based assets                                    External sources of support
              (risk-management approaches)                           (possible resilience-promoting strategies)


         1.	Motivation associated with education                  1.	Relevant education initiatives
                •	 In spite of the difficulties, there is still            •	 Community mobilization and
                     a strong desire to attend school.                         school management implemented
                •	 Students feel protected by the                              by communities
                     school routine.                                       •	 Flexible education programs
         2.	Support and solidarity of the host community                       (curriculum, delivery of
                •	 Solidarity between community                                pedagogical services, and
                     members                                                   evaluations)
                •	 Friendships and camaraderie                    2.	Health and school feeding initiatives in
                     between displaced students and                  schools
                     resident students                                     •	 School meals programs (school
                •	 Language as an integrating factor                           canteens)
                     (for displaced students                               •	 Psychosocial support (whole
                •	 Family support (the support of                              school approaches, referrals and
                     extended families and family friends;                     other services, and critical case
                     ideally the continuation of regular                       management)
                     family life with both parents)               3.	Subsistence means
         3.	School-community mutual relations                              •	 Programs teaching job and market
         Management: community to school                                       skills for youth
                •	 Community management (school–                           •	 Revenue-generating activities in
                     community relations                                       communities
                •	 Community participation (payments              4. Crisis prevention and strategic response
                     and contributions)
                •	 Administrative structure supplied by
                     the school (routine plus the support
                     that comes from being part of a
                     system)
         Management: school to community
                •	 Displaced teachers organizing
                     informal after-school classes
                •	 Engagement and commitment of
                     teachers (required and voluntary)
                •	 Provision of financial support by
                     head teachers


      Demand for education in the midst of crisis
      Although hope and motivation are intangible assets, they are the foundation from which people
      recover from crises and continue to perform throughout it. In both the focus groups and the RES-
      360° survey responses, participants reported that being motivated to go to school and feeling
      welcome and accepted provided strength to cope with the difficult living situations (figure 9).
      These intangible assets may reflect also a sense of safety and protection by students from being
      in school, as well as a sense of the value and life purpose that education instills in students.




 36   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                                     MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                                                      Figure 9
                             Importance of Individual Assets for Students (% of response)

                 100	  


                   90	  


                   80	  


                   70	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Of	  little	  
                   60	                                                                                                                                            importance	  

                                                                                                                                                                   Important	  
                   50	  

                                                                                                                                                                   Very	  important	  
                   40	  


                   30	  


                   20	  


                   10	  


                     0	  
                               Students	             Parents	          Education	  staff	     Students	            Parents	         Education	  staff	  
                                        Motivation	  to	  go	  to	  school	                     Students	  are	  made	  to	  feel	  welcome	  
                                                                                                       	  
    	      Note: For this analysis, teachers and directors were combined into one group, “education staff”.

    Support provided by school staff in host communities
    Support from school staff was noted as an important asset for IDPs and host communities, such
    as displaced teachers from the north leading after-school activities in host community schools.
    School-led activities and routines—during and after school—play a crucial care-giving role in very
    difficult times, as the structure and staff provide a sense of safety for students.

    In the focus groups, the commitment and dedication of teaching staff were recognized by students,
    parents, teachers, and administrators alike. Data from the RES-360° survey showed the relative
    importance that students, parents, and education staff placed on the value of (in descending
    order) school routine in times of crisis, voluntary support provided by school staff, and after-
    school activities (figure 10).




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                                                                              	   37
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                                              		

                                           Figure 10
            Importance of School-Based Assets to Students, Parents, and Education Staff
                                        (% of response)


                  100	  
                    90	  
                    80	  
                    70	  
                    60	  
                    50	  
                    40	  
                    30	  
                    20	  
                    10	  
                      0	  
                              Students	         Parents	      Educa8on	  staﬀ	     Students	           Parents	      Educa8on	  staﬀ	     Parents	     Educa8on	  staﬀ	  

                                    Voluntary	  support	  provided	  by	              Displaced	  teachers	  lead	  a9er	  school	  
                                       teachers	  and	  principals	                                                                              Students	  ﬁnd	  support	  
                                                                                                           classes	                               through	  school	  rou7ne	  

                                  Very	  important	                 Important	                Of	  liDle	  importance	  
                                                                                                                                                                                       	  

      	      Note: For these analyses, teachers and directors were combined into one group, “education staff”; and 	
      	      students were not asked the last question on school routine.

      Finally, a government directive allowed displaced teachers from the north to continue teaching
      in schools in the south. These teachers became an important asset, as noted by many students,
      especially through their leadership of after-school activities. The “easy teacher transfer” policy
      provided not only a safety net for displaced teachers but also supplied students with teachers
      who understood the extreme adversity they experienced from their displacement. The role of
      displaced teachers in leading after-school activities and remedial classes were an asset noted by
      the majority of students, parents, and teachers themselves (figure 10).

      Support provided by the host community and extended family
      Outside school, significant support for IDPs also came from the wider community and, in particular,
      extended families. The extended family structures—as conceived in the Malian culture—seem
      to be especially important and have been the main mechanism for safety nets in the south
      for families displaced from the north. Although the study participants noted the importance
      of general community support and extended family support, the latter was considered most
      important (figure 11).




 38   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                                            Figure 11
             Importance of Community and Extended Family Support for Students, Parents,
                               and Education Staff (% of response)

                     100	  
                      90	  
                      80	  
                      70	  
                      60	  
                      50	  
                      40	  
                      30	  
                      20	  
                      10	  
                       0	  
                               Students	           Parents	           Educa8on	  staﬀ	       Students	               Parents	            Educa8on	  staﬀ	  
                                              Community	                                                Support	  of	  extended	  family	  
                                               support	  
                                                Very	  important	                  Important	                Of	  liDle	  importance	  	  
                                                                                                                                                                      	  
       	      Note: For this analysis, teachers and directors were combined into one group, “education staff”.

       The particular importance of extended family support points to the need for social services that
       focus more on community-based interventions and participatory approaches. Communities and
       extended families represent not only a safety net mechanism during times of adversity (for both
       IDPs and residents) but also an asset to the ongoing development of the education system in Mali.
       The existing community-participation structures, such as CGS, provide channels through which
       to strengthen the protective and development role of communities and families in education
       systems.


Students from Boulkassoungoue
Public School preparing to fill out the
education resilience questionnaire.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                                                                	   39
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                                                           		


      II. Mobilizing School and Community-Based
      Resources, Strengths, and Opportunities
       We turn now to the institutional policies, programs, and resources that can protect and foster
      the assets found in education communities in Mali. Targeted education and social interventions
      can both address impending risks and enhance the positive role that communities, families, and
      schools play in the education process. Chapter II discusses policies and programs specifically
      focused on community participation.

      Households and communities in Mali have shouldered the majority of the displacement impact,
      while at the same time displaying crucial assets of solidarity to manage the crises threatening
      at-risk Malians. Despite these assets, however, resilience does not imply that households and
      communities should be left to cope by themselves. Institutional structures and services can and
      must support them. Resilience research has shown that the coping skills and competencies of
      individuals, families, and communities in contexts of adversity are not merely innate, but also
      need to be fostered and supported if they are to augment state-level provision of relevant services
      and resources for at-risk populations (Ungar 2011).

      Mali has a strong culture of community and family assets that need to be protected, nurtured, and
      above all used. Indeed, of all of the assets identified in the RES-360° survey, the most significant
      are community support structures (figure 12). Continuing to foster social cohesion—as well as the
      respect and value for diversity—remains an asset in times of crisis and as a foundation for longer-
      term development and peace.
                                               Figure 12
                 Relative Availability of School and Community Assets, as Expressed
                              by All Adults Interviewed (% of response)


                                                         School	  canteen	  working	  

                                           Community	  cereal	  bank	  working	  

                                   Income-­‐generating	  activities	  available	  

                                   Other	  sources	  of	  support	  are	  available	  

                               Teachers	  trained	  in	  psychosocial	  support	  

                              Community	  	  mobilized	  to	  provide	  support	  

                                                 Support	  from	  the	  community	  

                                         Students	  motivated	  to	  go	  to	  school	  

                                       Students	  understand	  host	  language	  

                                               Support	  from	  extended	  family	  

                     Voluntary	  support	  from	  teachers	  and	  principals	  

                    Teachers	  from	  the	  north	  redeployed	  to	  the	  south	  

                                              Students	  made	  to	  feel	  welcome	  

                                           School	  routine	  supports	  students	  
                                                                                                 0	     10	     20	     30	     40	     50	     60	     70	     80	     90	     100	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                    	  


 40   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                              MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Can education systems continue and internalize the enthusiasm for attending school felt by
    displaced Malian students and families? Can schools take advantage of the welcome support and
    tangible assistance provided by host communities? Can teachers and administrators be motivated
    to care for students in difficult life situations and even support after-school and community
    activities? The answer is unequivocally yes. Education policies, programs, and resources can
    provide the structures and guidelines to sustain and uphold community solidarity.

    II.I Protecting and sustaining existing community and school
    assets
    Both displaced and host communities participating in the Mali education resilience assessment saw
    the importance of school-community relations, especially in adverse, uprooted living situations.
    Schools were seen as spaces for safety, learning, encouraging social and emotional skills, and
    bringing children, youth, their extended families, and teachers together in difficult times. The
    Malian education system can protect and continue to foster the positive impact of schools and
    communities working together, recognizing that its ongoing support of host communities is
    necessary for the return and resettlement needs of displaced populations, and its own long-term
    development.

    Protecting and sustaining the identified community and school solidarity assets is also useful
    for containing possible rising tensions. A story of forced displacement in the Sahel region (GPFD
    2013) noted that community support to IDPs is two-edged. It is an important asset, but also can
    be a latent risk: social cohesion tensions can materialize when host communities are stretched to
    a breaking point and lack external support.

    The RES-360° data confirmed the presence of strong community support in Mali, but the bulk
    of the crisis cannot be absorbed indefinitely at the community level alone. The fact that IDPs
    have been accepted and supported by host communities, rather than housed in temporary
    encampments, is indicative of strong community dynamics. Yet the influx of displaced persons
    from the north has altered the very nature of community across Mali. Cities, towns, and villages
    in the south now contain more people, and this situation is reducing the availability of resources
    for both existing residents and new arrivals. Without parallel provision of compensatory social
    services, these changes in demographics may well lead to community tensions over allocation of
    resources and competing needs (which the initial 2013/2014 statistics on access to school in the
    south already seem to be pointing to). This will rapidly grow more severe, as it seems more and
    more likely that the situation will persist for some time, given the continual security threats in the
    north.

    At the same time, beyond the primary need for greater security, a number of other factors will
    come into play when displaced children return home. The regular, reliable education services and
    structured school routine (which takes into account both their academic and socio-emotional
    needs) that existed before—and secure and stable communities—have been decimated in the
    crisis areas of the north by violence and people fleeing the conflict. In addition, education system
    structures that promote positive community-school relations still have to address the pre-crisis
    demands for education access and quality.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                        	       41
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                       		


      Longer-term policies, structures, and resources are necessary to protect and sustain the community
      solidarity and mutual support that rose to the fore during the security crisis. Community-based
      structures that channel and support the implementation of public services is one important
      mechanism to both sustain positive host and displaced community relations and, at the same
      time, channel needed social services.

      II.II School-based management structures to foster and use
      school and community assets
      In order for the education system to tap into the potential of the identified assets, including schools
      and communities working together, it needs to provide relevant support structures. Fortunately,
      Mali already has existing school-based management committees—the CGS—in place, that can be
      strengthened and aligned to bolster the cooperation between schools and communities. Mali’s
      CGS must step forward and take advantage of the windows of opportunity14 that have opened
      because of the crisis.

      When given the guidelines and structure to do so, school-based management committees, such
      as Mali’s CGS, can help guide education communities to take decisions and work together to
      implement them. Decisions can be made on issues of safety, well-being, and the quality of learning
      of Malian students across the country—the south and the north alike. Examples of school-based
      management structures that are useful to promote school-community relations exist in many
      countries. Consisting of education community members, they offer school improvement plans,
      subsidies for school budgets, guidance manuals, and training.

      These structures, procedures, and tools work best when contextualized within each country
      and situation. Nonetheless, globally, two main approaches have influenced the direction and
      focus of school-based management committees. One is an administrative and management
      efficiency model that focuses mainly on school maintenance and financial administration—which
      is important but limited. The second approach involves models that can also respond and focus
      on the ways school and community act together to provide the safety for children and youth in
      the community and foster their social and emotional well-being, as well as helping teach useful
      learning and skills.

      In Mali, the CGS are already in place in about 6,000 schools, composed of parents, teachers, and
      representatives of local governments. They are an opportunity to strengthen school-community
      relations in the aftermath of the recent crisis and for the future. For example, CGS can provide
      the forum to bring parents and other community members to discuss, negotiate, and agree on
      the role of education in their communities. These conversations between the school and the
      community can expand beyond maintenance and administrative issues to touch upon other
      important issues identified in the resilience assessment, such as language of instruction, relevant
      learning and skills for youth, girls’ education, community activities to improve social cohesion and
      respect for diversity, etc. School improvement plans, grants, and training (provided by national
      and international partners) can support CGS to implement these important decisions. These
      recommendations are substantiated by examples of school-based management structures—in El

      14	    For a discussion on windows of opportunity for positive change amidst crisis, see Nicolai (2009).


 42   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                  MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Salvador, Nepal, Afghanistan, and around the world—that have risen from contexts of violence,
    conflict, or generalized adversity (see box below, and box in Chapter II.III).

       Models of Community-Based Schooling in Crisis: Examples from Nepal and Afghanistan
       Research on community involvement in education shows positive findings. Communities can be
       instrumental, not only in providing access to education, but also in using the strength of traditional
       and local community structures to help re-open schools and provide safer learning environments,
       even in the context of ongoing violence. As Mali looks to transition its community schools and
       improve the relevance and cultural sensitivity of its CGS, lessons from successful community-
       participation models in other crisis contexts may offer some insights for reform. The Afghan model
       is characterized by incremental transition and the development of community initiatives. These
       are then developed further and scaled up through coordination and external support until finally
       community models can be integrated into national policy and education systems (World Bank EQUIP;
       and Sullivan-Owomoyela and Brannelly 2009, 59–60.)
       Nepal. Nepal has a long history of community participation in education. Nonetheless, in the 1970s,
       it initiated a disastrous centralization policy for the more than 8,000 schools. A combination of
       remoteness, diversity, and weak government capacity resulted in teachers regularly abandoning
       classrooms; inability of the government to provide adequate financing (while community resources
       dried up); and a plummeting quality of education. In 2001, in the midst of an internal conflict in
       the country, decision-making power for schools was transferred back to a community-management
       model. This was supported by the World Bank-financed Community School Support Project, launched
       in 2003 (World Bank 2009).
       The first step was to encourage communities to take back the management of schools by providing a
       one-time government incentive grant. The second was to transform the role of the government from
       being a provider of education to a facilitator. The results of these reforms have been heartening. From
       2003 to 2009, net primary enrollment rose from 84 percent to 92 percent. Gender parity improved
       from 83 percent to 98 percent during the same period. More than 9,000 schools transferred to
       community management. At the current rate of transference, the goal of achieving community
       management for all public schools by 2015 appears attainable (World Bank 2009).
       Afghanistan. In Afghanistan, community-based education has long been a response to conflict and
       low education access rates. The participation of communities in Afghan schools is holistic, rather
       than just administrative. Parents and community members cooperate to ensure the safety of
       students (especially girls), maintain school premises, and support teachers in the classroom. This
       participation is supported by the Ministry of Education through the formation of school-management
       committees (SMCs), grants for school construction and maintenance, and training and supervision
       of SMCs and schools. The SMC members are both men and women, who reflect the composition of
       the community and who take the lead in engaging the community and encouraging involvement in
       education activities (Dubovyk 2008).


    The lessons learned from global experiences, as well as from the risks and assets related by the
    participants in the Mali education resilience assessment, provide evidence that school-based
    management structures can succeed in fostering solidarity and mutual support in times of crisis.
    They can also serve as the institutional and legal structures to support community participation
    in schools in the long-term.

EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                              	     43
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                     		


      II.III Education policies and programs to sustain community
      participation in schools
      This section expands further on improving the CGS model in Mali, recommending ways to align
      CGS structures closer to existing community and culturally relevant assets in order to create
      safer and more successful schools. It also provides suggestions and concrete steps to launch
      improvement strategies. The data collected by the education resilience assessment shows that
      there is significant variance in the role of Mali’s CGS.15 In some communities, the CGS has mobilized
      to respond to the crisis, but in others they have remained dormant. This reflects the disparities
      in, and constraints to, CGS functioning, which was confirmed by secondary data16 showing that
      only about 1,869 CGS are fully functional. Sharing lessons and good practice across CGS will be
      important to capitalize on the learning of the functional CGS.

      Mali has a rich history of community participation, evidenced through the presence of community
      boards in schools, their management of school grants, the availability of training materials and
      manuals to guide the community’s role in schools, and a long tradition of schools being at the
      center of community life. Mali clearly shows high potential to improve on its CGS model, given
      the importance of the school, family, and community supports attributed by children and adults
      alike in displaced and host communities. These existing structures need to be reviewed in light of
      the risks and assets framed within a resilience approach.

      Based on the education resilience assessment and the international evidence, we offer four
      recommendations to CGS structures to build on Malian host and displaced community assets:

             1.	     Protection and education goals. As for any management structure, the
             first function of the CGS is to identify the goals for their schools. The RES-360°
             survey pointed to three types of goals that seem relevant to schools across Mali:
             1) promoting learning and completion of school cycles for all children, 2) rallying
             community support to increase access of girls and other marginalized groups to
             education, and 3) monitoring and mitigating local risks to avoid repeated crises. 	

             The education system can guide the CGS to think more holistically about their role
             through promotion campaigns, training, and even grants earmarked for specific
             objectives. For example, in Colombia, the Ministry of Education offers grants to its
             school management committees to finance small community projects for social
             cohesion (convivencia) and quality learning.

             2.	    Culturally relevant participation approaches. The CGS system in Mali can
             continue to promote and seek the participation of families, extended families, and
             community members. This is best accomplished when the structures, processes,
             and rules of participation are culturally sensitive. Countries, such as Rwanda, sought
             indigenous approaches to consolidate their community participation objectives.
             (See box on local and culturally relevant innovations that features Rwanda in
             Chapter III.) For example, Mali could consider formalizing participation of elders,

      15	    Forty percent of parents who responded to this question were CGS members, as well as one director and two teachers.
      16	    Mali Ministry of Education (2013).


 44   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


        traditional forms of community discussion and meetings, and use of radio programs
        or other oral traditions with folk stories to promote community participation in
        school. Strategies to promote school-community relations should be defined by
        each country and be based on the local culture, language, and customs. Training
        manuals and an extensive strategy for guidance of the CGS already exist in Mali.
        These materials could be revised to reflect more culturally sensitive participation
        strategies and even structures.

        3.	     Community participation as an education and crisis response asset. In
        fragile and conflict-affected states, communities play a key role in the provision of
        education. Indeed, some of the most effective models of school-based management
        and community schooling originated as innovative local responses to the cessation
        or limitation of education services due to conflict and violence. Although social
        services in Mali have been significantly compromised by the crisis (or terminated
        in the most extreme cases), it is also clear that the crisis has shed light on the
        key role played by community-based support. For example, the RES-360° data
        showed that displaced and host communities strongly agreed on the importance
        of community-school relations and participation, but they also requested that CGS
        be more active and relevant. This request can be extrapolated to the entire system
        to support and improve the relevance of the structures in place for community
        participation in schools.

        4.	     Formally recognizing the extended family as a structure of support for
        children and youth in Mali. Building on the above recommendations, Mali should
        consider the sociocultural norms already present in the communities, which
        recognize how much extended families support children and youth (also shown in
        the RES-360° data). It is thus crucial for community-based interventions to reflect
        this in the design of their programs and their mechanisms for service delivery.
        In other words, community-participation structures in Mali should incorporate
        extended families into the decision making, planning, implementation, and
        accountability of the mechanisms that support students, their safety, social and
        emotional well-being, long-term enrollment in school, and positive learning
        environment. In Western contexts, the focus of school-community relations is
        usually on parents, but Mali may benefit more from expanding the range of the
        adults in the community who participate and advocate for children and youth.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                   	   45
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                            		


       Institutionalized Learning on Community–School Relations in Post-Conflict El Salvador
       This case study on the role of community participation in the post-conflict period in El Salvador
       provides some succinct examples on how education systems can learn from indigenous-born
       solutions to fulfill education needs in times of crisis.
       During the war years in El Salvador, due the absence of any formal education services, communities
       organized themselves to teach children how to read and write. Community members offered their
       homes or physical space elsewhere in the community as make-shift classrooms, and community
       committees were established to gather resources and identify educators. Much like the community
       school program in Mali, this practice was later formalized after the conflict by the elected government,
       which created schools with formal structures for parental and community participation.
       This program, called EDUCO, provides important lessons. Of note, the principles below supported
       the education system structures and helped sustain the school-community relations that bloomed
       during the time of crisis in El Salvador.
       Learning from the crisis phase
       •	 Recognizing adversity and its impacts. During the early post-crisis days, the government of
           El Salvador realized that the conflict had fundamentally changed community needs related
           to education. It needed to rethink how it supplied existing education services, which were
           unattractive and did not reach the most vulnerable communities.
       •	 Recognizing and supporting the new community structures and dynamics. During the post-
           war transition, efforts were made to systematically introduce education in rural communities
           and specifically re-integrate key caregivers from the war period, local educators, and refugees
           returning from neighboring countries.
       Institutionalizing community capacity and indigenous knowledge
       •	 Consolidating local capacities. Community educators were supported by gradually adding other
            educators who had higher levels of academic qualifications and training. This process was not
            simply imposed, but guided by the local communities (through the Coalition of Communities
            and Resettlement). They decided whether to continue to operate schools along traditional lines
            or whether to open the schools up to other members of the community who could be teachers.
       •	 Ensuring locally relevant community participation. Throughout this process, attention was
            paid to the particular patterns of community involvement of families and their sociopolitical
            principles. This helped ensure a shared vision and accountability for education. It was deemed
            essential that members of the community participate in the educational process and that they
            assess the experience as it unfolded.
       Providing the institutional and legal framework
       •	 Progressively strengthening the leadership role of the Ministry of Education. This was achieved
          through dialogue with grassroots organizations about how to support the operation of the
          schools and establish mechanisms to gradually transition them into the formal system. Through
          this process, the government was able to conduct a survey to map the popular schools and
          demographics. It developed and accelerated a popular certificate program to allow all educators
          to complete three years of secondary school. It implemented advanced training programs for
          teachers with high school qualifications. And it designed a professional development program
          that gave each area of the country more flexibility in requiring training methods with more
          rigorous content and academic demands, and proficiency tests for teachers engaged in self-


 46   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                   MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


            learning processes.
         •	 Establishing a supportive legal framework. A supportive legal framework was established to
            address previous laws that did not facilitate the education transition process and did not involve
            the community in the selection and appointment of teachers (with recognition by the Ministry of
            Education).
         •	 Focusing school-community efforts to expand access and ensure quality. While the government
            sought to expand rural coverage, it also introduced a clear focus on quality throughout the
            educational system, systematizing curriculum reform, teacher training, and assessment, and
            improving services for the most vulnerable.

         Source: Meza (2009).




A focus group conducted by the
Mali investigators for the education
resilience study.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                              	     47
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                         		


      III. Aligning the Education System and Relevant
      Services with a Resilience Approach
      Chapter II focused on how education systems can protect, foster, and use the assets of the
      community and schools within CGS and school-based management structures. Education system
      reform in Mali can also be well served by these assets. Chapter III discusses how the opportunities
      uncovered in the midst of Mali’s 2012 political and security crisis—flexible government education
      policy and the inter-relations between education, health, nutrition, and livelihoods services—can
      contribute to education system reform in Mali. Such reform should account not only for attaining
      long-term education access and better quality of education but also for improving the education
      system’s resilience to crises, especially establishing more proactive response mechanisms to
      emergencies.

      In addition to improving the CGS discussed previously, three strategies that take advantage of
      windows of opportunity are relevant to both emergency response and resilience to crises, and
      longer-term development of the education system in Mali:

         1.	 Provide flexible education strategies for access and quality.

         2.	 Form partnerships to sustain complementary programs, such as school meals, skills
             development, and safety nets.

         3.	 Institutionalize a crisis-response plan and monitoring system.

      The particular focus for these three additional areas should be on how to gear existing structures
      toward the longer-term strengthening of the education system, while at the same time fostering
      resilience and education outcomes together. For each programmatic intervention, the next section
      discusses recommended next steps and considerations for building upon existing structures in
      order to improve their relevance in both stable and critical times.

      III.I Windows of opportunity for a more flexible education
      system that improves access and quality of learning
      The flexibility that the Mali education system has shown during the current security and political
      crisis can be utilized to improve resilience to new crises and develop longer-term objectives
      of access, quality, and equity. During this crisis, many schools across the country continued to
      provide services and welcomed IDPs. Of the 43 teachers who participated in the RES-360° survey,
      almost 30 percent had been displaced from the north. The sample communities also felt that
      students were staying in school longer (as opposed to dropping out), probably because school
      was a safe refuge during the crisis.

      Important lessons from the recent flexible education responses to the Mali crisis can enlighten
      reforms in access, teaching, and learning for greater resilience and sustainable development.
      Flexible and participatory education can bring communities together and support the most
      vulnerable members of a community. Formal education structures can adopt flexible strategies,


 48   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                               MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    such as flexible school schedules, after-school
    classes, learning opportunities outside the                            Institutionalizing Locally and Culturally
                                                                           Relevant Innovations
    classroom (community projects, internships,
    and mentorships), and prospects for community                          In Rwanda, following the 1994 genocide,
    members and families to help teach.                                    communes and prefectures were persuaded
                                                                           to take charge of services, including
    While expanding access to education remains                            education. This allowed local management
    a core goal in Mali, student learning is also                          practices to be built into the education
    a crucial concern. The education resilience                            sector after the crisis.
    assessment identified problems with the delivery                       Traditional forms of local participation and
    of the curriculum, language of instruction, and                        representation have been institutionalized
    teacher training. These risks existed prior to the                     in the formal education system, such
    crisis and were compounded by new challenges                           as ubudehe (a structure for communal
    from the 2012 crisis, which directly or indirectly                     support), umuganda (for community
    affected the quality of learning, including teacher                    service), umwiherero (government retreat),
    redeployment and the psychosocial impact of the                        and umushyikirano (national dialogue). All
    conflict, especially on students.                                      represent indigenous solutions that have
                                                                           supported strong decentralized structures,
    Given these compounded needs for learning                              precisely because of their local relevance and
    quality, it may be opportune for Mali to                               acceptance of the inherent accountability
    incorporate some of the newest research on                             between centralized providers and
    learning. It links social and emotional skills with                    communities.
    academic competence and takes advantage of
                                                           Source: Arden and Claver (2013).
    their combined contribution to overall well-being,
    improved academic performance, and ability to
    cope with chronic exposure to conflict and heal from it: “Children with social and emotional
    skills do better in school, have improved relationships with peers and adults, are better adjusted
    emotionally, and have improved mental health” (World Bank and IRC 2013). Social and emotional
    learning refers to a process through which children and adults acquire the knowledge, attitudes,
    and skills they need to foster healthy relationships with peers, manage conflicts with others,
    express care and concern, and work effectively with peers and teachers. It is especially pertinent
    to conflict and post-conflict contexts, where additional efforts are needed to strengthen and
    reinforce healing, and boost coping mechanisms of vulnerable children and youth. Interestingly,
    these social and emotional skills have also been identified as assets that foster resilience of
    children and youth (Masten and Obradović 2008, Benard 2004).

    In line with this, displaced and host communities in Mali are correct in calling for more psychosocial
    support from teachers and more training for them in this area (figure 13). While some initiatives17
    exist to train teachers in psychosocial support, Mali’s capacity to meet this need is clearly
    insufficient. Such skills in teachers not only help mitigate the emotional suffering of children and
    youth affected by difficult life contexts but contribute to the quality of their learning.




    17	      UNICEF supports an initiative within Mali’s Education Cluster to train over 900 teachers in psychosocial support, peace
    education, and emergency education (Berther and Evans 2013).


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                 	        49
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                  		

                                                Figure 13
               Importance versus Availability of Trained Teachers in Psychosocial Support
                                            (% of responses)




      	         Note: As reported by parents, teachers, and administrators.

      Concretely, the RES-360° survey identified two flexible interventions already in place in some
      schools in Mali that combine socio-emotional and academic learning, and could be strengthened:
      after-school classes and peer-to-peer support. After-school classes or extracurricular activities, in
      addition to being learning opportunities, also require students to connect socially and emotionally
      with their peers and teachers in informal or non-academic settings. The RES-360° data show
      that students eagerly seek opportunities to socialize with their peers and build camaraderie and
      friendships. Innovative educational programs have taken advantage of peer-to-peer interactions
      to promote academic learning through student-led activities, student-managed classrooms, self-
      organized study groups, and student mentors for other students. 18          2




      These four key considerations for flexible education approaches to improve access and equity,
      and strengthen the quality of learning can make the education system more resilient to crisis and
                                                       fulfill long-term development:
          “Armed conflict and its aftermath, by their           1.	 Provide flexible education services
          very nature, create flux and change in a              to improve access and equity. A key
          society. This instability can leave windows of        lesson from the recent crisis in Mali was
          opportunity even amidst and after the terrible        that permitting the education system
          violence of war. Thus, during periods of conflict     to be responsive in managing displaced
          and recovery, there are real prospects for
                                                                students and teachers opened the door
          transformation of education systems along
                                                                to long-term reform via initiatives that
          with other sectors.”
                                                                were already under way: flexibility
          Source: Nicolai (2009, 28).                           in schools hours, competency-based
                                                                assessments, equivalency assessments

      18	       See for example the “Escuela Nueva” model from Colombia or the peer-to-peer academic mentorship in UNRWA
      schools (World Bank 2013b).


 50   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                          MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


        and informal and non-formal education (recognition of learning outside of the
        classroom); and introduction of after-school activities and remedial programs
        or accelerated curriculum for over-age children or those at risk of dropping out.
        Continuing to institutionalize these initiatives will strengthen the education
        system’s response to crisis and improve learning outcomes over the long term.

        2.	     Organize curricular priorities to support content delivery. Quality learning
        is not necessarily promoted by an overloaded curriculum (many courses, many
        subjects, too much content to cover within short school hours, etc.). In contexts
        lacking resources, where children can spend only a few hours in school, it is more
        effective to teach smaller units of a curriculum (fewer courses and subjects) that are
        more aligned to students’ needs. This can be done, for example, by guaranteeing
        that children can read and write well by the end of the second grade, providing
        solid foundations for more advanced content, reducing memorization of content,
        and incorporating time for discussion and practical application of content, etc.
        Current research backs up these reforms. For instance, early reading competency
        is a predictor of school success and completion (RTI International 2009).

        3.	     Integrate social and emotional learning with academic skill building.
        Academic instruction infused with social and emotional instruction contributes
        to the overall well-being of children and youth, helps them cope with extended
        exposure to violence, and improves academic performance. Complementary
        social skills can be developed through student-led clubs, team-based learning,
        community projects, and other educational activities that develop social skills.
        Similarly, emotional skills can also be modeled by caring and supportive teachers,
        and by altruistic behavior among peers. Self-esteem, confidence, mutual care, and
        even culturally appropriate humor in the classroom support learning.

        4.	     Provide opportunities for peer-to-peer support. Last, given the eagerness
        for student camaraderie, as identified by both students and adults, approaches
        that make use of peer support in the classroom may be especially effective in the
        Malian context. Education resilience research conducted with Palestine refugees
        highlighted the effectiveness of peer-to-peer learning approaches in Gaza. The
        students interviewed in Gaza noted that peer learning approaches supported non-
        cognitive skill-building—such as leadership skills and active listening—and helped
        create a shared accountability around the learning process (World Bank 2013b).

        Including peer-to-peer learning ideas and facilitation skills in teacher training
        programs can help to institutionalize this over the long run. Given the peer support
        available and the problem of overcrowded classrooms that can make learning
        more difficult, this is a useful approach to consider in Mali. Host students, for
        instance, could support local language catch-up classes for displaced students, and
        displaced students in turn could help host community students with their French.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                    	   51
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                             		


         Guidance for Integrated Academics and Social and Emotional Learning: Approaches for Supporting
         Social and Emotional Learning to Ensure Quality and Relevance in Contexts of Violence and Conflict
         Available research points to the need to promote social and emotional learning (SEL) through
         the classroom with teaching and pedagogy support to build student skills. Note that integrated
         approaches that involve families and communities, and utilize existing innovative and locally relevant
         activities are key to operationalizing SEL. Specific guidance to promote SEL includes:
             1.	 ensuring a classroom environment that is well-controlled and predictable, and where the
                 teacher provides clear and consistent structures, rules, and consequences for behavior;
             2.	 hiring teachers who have been effectively trained in SEL and instructional practice methods,
                 and whose own SEL is supported by the school system; and
             3.	 providing opportunities for practice and skill building to allow students to demonstrate
                 and model social and emotional knowledge, attitudes, and skills with peers, teachers, and
                 parents.
         At the system level, SEL programs that are integrated into an academic curriculum and are culturally
         sensitive have been found more effective. Examples include curricula that incorporate dance in
         Colombia, traditional music in Afghanistan, and arts in Cambodia. These examples point to the
         potential to support Malian children’s social and emotional well-being through activities and projects
         that build upon the country’s rich musical culture (World Bank 2013a).
         Another way to support the social and emotional health of the school community is by introducing
         school counselors. Set up in the right way, school counseling programs can also improve cross-sector
         coordination and crisis preparedness, alleviate certain pressures from students, and ensure timely
         and responsive referrals for help. A school counselor program was introduced in the West Bank and
         Gaza in 1996 and grew quickly. Counselors began by covering three schools, but as student demands
         grew, they could cover only one or two of the schools. During this process, initial and in-service
         training were key, given the lack of familiarity or practice in counseling.
         Counselors received training on contextually relevant topics, such as psychosocial support, protection
         from violence, and international humanitarian law. They were also trained to provide emergency and
         crisis support for teachers. At the outbreak of the second intifada, counselors played a crucial role
         supporting students, and their training matured to allow them to manage the new phenomena that
         affected the lives and communities of students (Nicolai 2007, 97–8).



      III.II Windows of opportunity to improve the interrelation
      between education, nutrition, health and livelihoods
      The participants in this study intuitively recognized the interrelation between education, health,
      and livelihoods (both subsistence and income generation). The connections between these cross-
      sector interventions are numerous and reflect the fact that holistic approaches are needed to
      ensure healthy communities that can play a more effective role in the learning process. The RES-
      360° data show that, despite the high priority accorded to these support systems, at the local
      level, they often do not function and add to the risks faced by vulnerable communities. School
      canteens and livelihood support are especially important and are largely lacking in intervention
      support. Schools are central in Malian communities and offer the scope and space for integrated

 52   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    education, nutrition, and livelihood social services.
                                            Figure 14.
         Importance versus Availability of Income-Generating Activities, Cereal Banks,
                            and School Canteens (% of response)




    	      Note: As reported by parents, teachers, and administrators.

    It is clear that the Ministry of Education in Mali recognizes the interrelations between education
    and feeding students and other people. Among other interventions, government policies support
    and have expanded the availability and presence of school canteens. The school meals program,
    however, lacks a nationally harmonized implementation framework and resources for follow up
    and reporting. Canteen management is fragmented among a variety of different actors: 809 are
    run by the national government, 724 by the World Food Program, 310 by Catholic Relief Services,
    and others by different NGOs.

    Another challenge is weak communication between central and local agents. To address the
    lack of coordination, the government adopted the National Policy on School Feeding in 2009,
    supported by more than 10 billion CFA francs. In 2011, the National Center for School Canteens
    was established, with the first phase scheduled for 2013–2015. To further improve the delivery of
    the school canteen programs, the National Strategy for Monitoring and Evaluation (2013–2017)


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                    	       53
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                          		


      looks to promote efficiency and efficacy. Specific tools have been developed for these areas. 19                            3




      Unfortunately, the effective roll out of the National Center for School Canteens was stalled by the
      onset of the latest crisis, affecting the implementation and consolidation of the monitoring and
      evaluation strategy. However, the cross-sector vision and initial strategy combining education and
      nutrition still exists, and can benefit from political engagement and advocacy for school meals at
      all levels. The strategy has to be adopted and implemented by different actors, which will require
      concerted efforts in coordination, communication, awareness raising, training, and sustainable
      financing. A sustainable education and nutrition strategy, moreover, can make good use of the
      community and schools assets identified in this study: community solidarity, CGS, and teacher
      advocacy and support.

      In terms of the cross-section between education and livelihood support, a number of public policies
      demonstrate the Malian government’s willingness to assist the poor and the vulnerable: the
      frameworks and policies of Youth Employment, Technical and Vocational Education and Training,
      and Social Protection. The government has set up a National Employment Policy (Politique
      nationale de l’emplois, PNE), which is yet to be formally adopted, that focuses on improving the
      (insufficient) supply of productive and decent jobs, the lack of skills causing low employability of
      human resources, and weaknesses in the labor market in terms of employment information and
      recruitment practices.

      A National Policy on Vocational Education (Politique nationale de la formation professionnelle,
      PNFP) was also developed in 2009, aimed at improving the quality, relevance, and equity
      of vocational programs. The development of a competency-based approach and revamping
      apprenticeships and skills development for unemployed youth with very limited education is part
      of this policy. The government also has a social protection framework since 1993 that includes
      the Health and Social Development Program 20 which achieved some encouraging results; the
                                                                    4




      Action Plan to expand Social Protection 2015 (Plan d’action national d’extension de la protection
      sociale); and some post-crisis emergency programs (e.g., in-kind support for displaced and host
      households).

      However, the achievements of this framework remain fragile. A significant proportion of the
      population will be left out if safety nets and skills development opportunities particularly are not
      upgraded or redesigned. A 2011 World Bank assessment of Mali’s social safety nets 21 shows that                 5




      most interventions are neither targeted to the poorest nor efficiently monitored or evaluated,
      and are small in scale (total spending is about 0.5 percent of GDP), designed as temporary
      interventions, fragmented, and financed by external and ad hoc resources.

      Similarly, youth employment programs are fragmented among different agencies and the existing


      19	         These tools include 1) inventory of the food stock maintained by the CGS, which looks at the daily movements of food
      stuffs; 2) the CGS monthly report, which covers the functioning of the canteen, stock management, and any challenges and locally
      developed solutions; 3) the tri-monthly school principal’s report provided to the pedagogical centers (CAP, or centres d’animation
      pédagogiques), which covers all aspects of school management, including data on attendance rates and the situation of sanita-
      tion, meals, and other infrastructure; 4) the three monthly CAP reports; 5) the follow-up sheet for the mayor; 6) and the school
      canteen visit report available to anyone wanting to visit a school canteen.
      20	         This is Mali’s Programme de développement sanitaire et social (PRODESS), phase II, 2005–2009.
      21	         World Bank 2011a.


 54   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                            MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    skills development programs are small in scale and cannot absorb the growing demand for
    training. Some programs are being phased out (such as dual apprenticeships programs) or are
    constrained by lack of resources, poor design, and poor implementation (such as the informal
    vocational training programs set up by the Ministry of Employment and Professional Training).
    Vocational training schools are characterized by several imbalances: a concentration of centers
    in Bamako, curricula that do not respond to labor market needs, and a lack of partnerships with
    the private sector.

    To rectify these shortcomings, youth employment programs need to be consolidated, if not better
    integrated and coordinated among different agencies. Existing skills development programs need
    to be scaled up to absorb the growing demand for training, coordinated with the labor market,
    and supported by private sector partnerships. The role of schools and communities in youth skills
    and employment programs should be explicitly incorporated into such national programs as well.

    The education resilience assessment suggested these five key considerations to support and
    integrate education, nutrition, health, and livelihood services into schools and communities:

           1.	      Consider school meals programs as a foundation for learning. In
           revitalizing the school meals programs in Mali, it will be important to consider the
           overall objectives. Notably, while school meals are largely intended to promote
           access to education and retain students, they also positively impact students’
           cognitive abilities and learning outcomes through better nutrition, guaranteed
           meals, and even delivery options (Bundy et al. 2009, 23). For example, studies
           from Jamaica point to the importance of breakfast for cognitive test outcomes,
           and in Uganda take-home rations improved education performance (Ibid., 24).
           Given the community concern around quality-of-learning issues, these are relevant
           considerations in Mali.

           2.	      Coordinate nutrition and health services for holistic impact and
           sustainability. School meals programs can also link to other complementary
           initiatives to provide more holistic support to vulnerable communities. Deworming
           and micro-nutrient supplements are among the more popular health and nutrition
           interventions, while schools providing take-home food to vulnerable students and
           their families can serve as a form of conditional “cash” transfer to alleviate the
           financial burden of purchasing food. As cash transfers, take-home meals can be
           conditioned upon regular school attendance.

           3.	     Utilize the education system’s comparative advantage on skills
           development. A comparative advantage of working through the education sector
           to support the livelihoods of vulnerable populations is its natural fit with skills
           development programs, both short and long term. Schools can provide relevant
           short-term training to youth, and even to community members, for specific
           vocational skills that can improve livelihood opportunities (even in times of
           adversity), and service-oriented skills, such as languages or computer skills. Such
           programs can offer transferable skills to displaced people that are useful when
           they are able to return to their homes. Of course, schools, given their academic


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                     	     55
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                           		


                cycle from childhood to adulthood, can
                also provide a framework for life-long                       School meal programs that are responsive
                                                                             to local needs, are locally owned, and
                learning needs. Longer-running programs,
                                                                             incorporate some form of parental or
                however, should develop and promote
                                                                             community contribution (cash payment or in-
                skills that are both economically viable
                                                                             kind donations, such as food or labor) tend to
                and relevant to the Malian context. The
                                                                             be the strongest programs and most likely to
                government will need to put renewed
                                                                             successfully transition from donor assistance.
                focus on skills development for groups by
                                                                             Programs that build in these characteristics
                scaling up apprenticeships and informal
                                                                             from the beginning and consistently maintain
                vocational programs.                                         them have the most longevity. Arrangements,
                4.	     Use school-community assets to                       however, have to be made to avoid increasing
                support meal and food programs and skills                    the cost of schooling to parents.
                training. It is important to consider how    Source: Bundy et al. (2009, 76).
                existing community assets can contribute
                to the design and implementation of
                school meals programs and productive skills training. In school meals programs,
                school canteens can be set up and managed by the community. Local mothers can
                help with food preparation and delivery, and school gardens can offer students an
                opportunity to learn about sustainable agricultural practices, as well as contribute
                to the local food supply. School gardens may require additional teaching support.
                They should not be relied upon to sustain a school meals program, but they can
                enrich it.

                During the years of drought before the crisis in Mali, some communities set up
                mechanisms to collect cereals in order to provide food for students, especially those
                who were away from their families. With the need to rebuild the local economy
                post-crisis, using local markets for cereals and other food stuffs for the canteens
                may be indispensable. 22 Mali may have other examples of community gardens that
                                              6




                were established locally or by external agencies and can be built upon. 23                     7




                Teaching productive vocational skills can also be supplemented by community
                members. The CGS members who participated in this study were parents with
                occupations, such as business managers, farmers, tailors and seamstresses,
                mechanics, and so on. They can support or teach short skills-development courses.
                In more urban communities, the private sector can be a source of internships and
                mentors.


      22	        A particularly good resource for school gardens is the FAO handbook, Créer et diriger un jardin scolaire: Manuel destiné
      aux professeurs, parents et communautés [Setting up and running a school garden: A manual for teachers, parents, and commu-
      nities], which includes specific advice on how to involve local communities in the establishment and implementation of school
      gardens. See ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/011/a0218f/a0218f.pdf (accessed May 2014).
      23	        Additional lessons can be learned from the impact evaluation launched by the Imperial College of London, Department
      of Infectious Disease Epidemiology. See E. Masset and A. Gelli, 2013, “Improving Community Development by Linking Agriculture,
      Nutrition, and Education: Design of a Randomized Trial of ‘Home-Grown’ School Feeding in Mali,” Trials 14: 55 (http://www.trials-
      journal.com/content/pdf/1745-6215-14-55.pdf; accessed May 2014). This study explores how local school meal programs have
      the potential to link to community-based stakeholders, including small-holder farmers and women’s groups.


 56   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


             5.	     Coordinate with safety nets. The education sector can be a good ally for
             safety net programs that protect vulnerable populations from economic shocks.
             Schools offer a central community setting, are able to identify beneficiaries, can
             monitor support to children and youth, and can protect children (by keeping them
             in school and providing them with routine and safety during times of adversity).
             The Mali government is now committed to supporting a safety net system, with
             a particular focus on targeted cash transfers that, in the context of a systemic
             approach to safety nets, are more efficient in addressing food insecurity and
             chronic and temporary poverty. This is a welcome development, especially in
             combination with education interventions.

             The role of the education sector is to help coordinate and integrate other key
             services and safety net interventions, such as food programs. 24 Additionally, it may
                                                                                              8




             be worth envisaging down the line a system of cash transfers that are conditional
             on school attendance.

    III.III Windows of opportunity to strengthen the education
    system’s response to crisis
    The pre-existing risks and new risks related to the 2012 crisis have major implications for the
    overall response capacity of Mali’s education system. To be more proactive, it should integrate
    national and local emergency response strategies. This coordination is crucial in light of the
    findings of the education resilience assessment, which point to the local assets available
    to help education communities cope with crisis, and the programs and services needed to
    use, foster, and protect these assets. The participants in this study mentioned three local
    concerns—lack of community resources, coordination, and school-based management—in
    their rating of the top five issues that affected the limited response to the 2012 crisis (figure
    15).




    24	       Another innovative service that can be provided through the education system was suggested by some of the children
    consulted during the qualitative stage of the RES-360°. When asked what would help them with their education, they described
    the costs and safety considerations of the burdensome distances they had to travel to reach their schools and requested bicycles.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                  	        57
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                                                  		

                                               Figure 15
             Issues that Affected Mali’s Education System’s Capacity to Respond to Crisis

                 100	  

                   90	  

                   80	  

                   70	  

                   60	  
                                                                                                                                                        percentage	  of	  all	  adults	  
                   50	                                                                                                                                 saying	  that	  this	  happens	  
                                                                                                                                                        sometimes	  or	  
                   40	  
                                                                                                                                                        frequently	  
                   30	  

                   20	  

                   10	  

                     0	  
                               Basic	  social	            Lack	  of	            Poor	             Education	           School	  based	  
                             services	  affected	       community	           coordination	   services	  closed	   management	  and	  
                               by	  the	  crisis	       resources	         around	  school	   following	  crisis	   follow	  up	  was	  
                                                           (material,	       management	  for	                          not	  conducted	  by	  
                                                         Cinancial	  and	     emergencies	                                       CGS	  
                                                            human)	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                	  

      In light of this, the education system should consider how it can support communities and
      schools (as first-line emergency response), what coordination is necessary for preparedness,
      and how to redeploy teachers.

      To be effective, emergency response must link to the long-term management of an education
      system. In addition to prevention and prevention-planning strategies, elastic emergency
      response mechanisms should be in place to support communities and schools, such as the
      already-discussed flexible deployment of teachers; flexible school hours and education
      services; and coordination of education, health, security, and safety net services.

      Given the above rationale, the last recommendation for the ongoing education reforms in
      Mali, learned from the recent emergency, is the design of a proactive crisis-response strategy
      within the education system. Emergency response capacity should not just be reactive
      interventions to the current crisis but also spell out community, school, and education system
      preparedness for the eventuality of crisis and overarching prevention strategies. Various
      mechanisms can develop this capacity, such as explicit direction for emergency plans and
      policies at the school and system levels, dedicated resources (financial, human, and material
      support) to meet response needs, and timely data collection for key “trigger” indicators to
      know when and in which direction to respond.

      Schools and communities are the first line of the education system’s response to crisis.
      However, they require system-level guidance to prepare their own crisis response plans
      in advance. The effects of Mali’s crisis were somewhat alleviated by the clear directive




 58   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                         MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    to all schools 25 in the south to welcome internally displaced students and facilitate
                     9




    displaced teachers’ redeployment. The 2012–2013 academic calendar was also modified
    to accommodate displaced students and teachers, and their integration into host schools.
    Nonetheless, there was little internal coordination among education offices; little guidance
    for emergency response, supervision, and follow up; and no clear structures for coordinating
    with other sectors (health, safety, natural disasters, and support services) during the crisis.
    Schools and communities reacted to the crisis with their own initiative and assets, but had
    not prepared or planned in advance (figure 16).
                                              Figure 16
            Importance versus Availability of School-Based Emergency Response Plans
                                         (% of responses)




    Note: As reported by parents, teachers, and administrators. Arrow depicts the shortfall between importance for
    the community and the availability/reality of provision and quality of the plans as perceived by communities.

    Improved response capacity can build on the relative gains or “windows of opportunity”
    that exist by strengthening coordination across sectors and institutions, since it is a weak
    area overall. With the exception of an under-staffed Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, there
    are no other clear structures in Mali that can coordinate plans or responses across multiple
    sectors in times of crisis. On the other hand, intrasector coordination, while still often weak,
    improved during the recent crisis, thanks to the actions of the education and health systems.
    These sectors have helped with specific-sector data collection and assessments within their
    own areas during the crisis, but there is still no national system-based comprehensive data
    collected on risks or crisis situations. Only quarterly data collection at the household level
    (which was temporarily suspended during the crisis) provides a basis for assessing emerging
    risks.




    25	      “Government Correspondence No. 0396 MEALN/SG, April 10, 2012” asked all academies to accept displaced students
    without conditions.


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                        	        59
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                            		

                                             Figure 17
                    Redeployment of Teachers during the Crisis Most Available Asset
                                          (% of response)

                       100	  
                        90	  
                        80	  
                        70	                                                         displaced	  adults:	  
                        60	                                                         these	  assets	  are	  
                        50	                                                         available	  or	  
                                                                                     sometimes	  
                        40	  
                                                                                     available	  
                        30	  
                        20	  
                        10	  
                         0	                                                         host	  community	  
                                                                                     adults:	  these	  
                                                                                     assets	  are	  
                                                                                     available	  or	  
                                                                                     sometimes	  
                                                                                     available	  




                                                                                                                  	  
      Teachers are the key resource in schools, and their own protection, well-being, and support
      is basic to any emergency response in Mali’s education system. As mentioned, the directive
      guiding teacher redeployment was highly valued by both displaced and host communities
      (figure 17). In addition, a clear strategy for managing the teaching force in times of crisis is not
      only a sound administrative tool but also can motivate teachers to support communities in
      distress. The displaced and host teachers who participated in this assessment recognized the
      importance of hope and school support in difficult times, valued community participation,
      and volunteered their time to support the psychosocial, economic and physical health of
      their students and families (figure 18).

      These kinds of beliefs and commitments by teachers are indispensable assets that need to
      be tapped by crisis-response strategies of Mali’s education system and nurtured by teacher
      training programs, mature school management, and a well-supervised system in general.
      Even in stable times, the education system should cultivate the commitment and skills of
      teachers and promote their work within the community, as part of the larger strategies that
      welcome vulnerable students and families, provide caring and flexible services, and promote
      the development of social, emotional, and academic skills of students. As mentioned earlier,
      these approaches contribute both to the resilience to respond in terms of crisis and also
      quality of learning and school success.




 60   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                                                                 Figure 18
                                      Displaced and Host Teachers’ Beliefs and Attitudes in Times of Crisis
                                                             (% of response)

       100	  
        90	  
        80	  
        70	  
        60	  
        50	  
        40	  
        30	  
        20	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 displaced	  
        10	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 teachers	  who	  
         0	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 think	  this	  is	  
                                                                                                     Understanding	  host	  language	  	  

                                                                                                                                    Support	  of	  extended	  family	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        School	  based	  emergency	  plans	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       School	  canteens	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Income-­‐generating	  activities	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cereal	  banks	  
                                                                                                                                                           Voluntary	  support	  of	  teachers	  
                  Motivation	  to	  go	  to	  school	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Other	  sources	  of	  support	  	  
                                                                                                                                                                                   After	  school	  classes	  provided	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Community	  mobilization	  to	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                           School	  routine	  as	  a	  source	  of	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Reployment	  of	  teachers	  from	  
                                                                       Welcomed	  by	  extended	  family	  
                                                     Community	  support	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Psychosocial	  training	  for	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             important	  or	  

                                                                                                                                                                                       by	  displaced	  teachers	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             very	  important	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         provide	  support	  
                                                                                                                                                                  and	  principals	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       teachers	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the	  north	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        support	  




                                                                   individual	  and	  community	  level	  assets	                                                                                                                                                                                           institutionalized	  assets	                                                                                                                             	  
    The education resilience assessment suggested these six key considerations to strengthen
    emergency response and prevention strategies within the education system:


                 1.	     Improve coordination with other sectors. Mali’s education system should
                 consolidate the limited progress made toward better coordination. This will also
                 help address some of the weaknesses identified in its monitoring and evaluation
                 strategy, which identified coordination between national and local levels as a
                 key challenge. Community partnerships, such as those to address key concerns
                 about food security, can also be integrated into local coordination and planning to
                 strengthen them.

                 2.	     Strengthen and support school and community first line of response.
                 Overall response capacity can be better addressed in schools by adapting existing
                 school plans. To do this, community participation is crucial, particularly to define
                 ways for communities (and extended family structures) to protect vulnerable
                 children and youth. Given the depleted resources in Mali’s communities, it will
                 be important to ensure that the financial and material burden does not lie with
                 families.

                 3.	     Involve CGS members in the local planning process. This can help improve
                 the reliability of plans, as well as help CGS better communicate their goals and
                 objectives, and strengthen their local relevance. To support CGS in school-based
                 emergency response and prevention plans, protocols can be designed to share
                 areas of authority between different actors, for such needs as maintenance, new
                 infrastructure, school materials, school schedules, curricula, teachers, etc. CGS can

EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	          61
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                            		


             also help ensure that emergency plans address not only actual risks but also latent
             risks within communities. Locally defined triggers and targets to guide systematic
             data collection can also be developed.

             4.	     Prepare resettlement and relocation strategies in advance. The implications
             of advanced preparation also extend to Malian policies governing the safe return of
             displaced persons to their homes in the north. These policies will need to consider
             specific community dynamics that can promote education services there. It will
             require a deeper understanding of the ways in which the current crisis may have
             undermined the social fabric and altered the nature and concept of community
             for local people. Education programs can address this by building on aspects that
             strengthen social cohesion and positive community interactions

              5.	      Improve response capacity at the national level. At the national or system
              level, it will be important to improve response capacity that can provide adequate
              and timely resources, and to spell out explicit commitments, based on the
              responsibilities for emergency response planning and monitoring that schools are
              capable of. This will require coordination across a broad range of technical assistance
              providers, such as the Ministry of Education, NGOs, universities, international
                                                       donors, etc. Evidence of coordination at
       Resource mobilization for risk reduction and    the local level should also be considered
       resilience                                      alongside macro-coordination mechanisms.
       National resources may offer greater
                                                         In Mali, the crisis resulted in an influx of
       flexibility and be less time-consuming
                                                         international humanitarian actors and
       than external funding mechanisms.
       Funding sources may include decentralized
                                                         programs, and prompted the establishment
       education budgets and national budget             of corresponding Inter-agency Standing
       allocation for small grants managed by            Committee “clusters” to coordinate this
       school management committees. When                work. As stability returns and work plans
       seeking external sources of funding, that         shift toward more sustainable support,
       funding should follow the government-             it will be crucial to build on and further
       planned education priorities and budget           nationalize and institutionalize the positive
       frameworks.                                       role that the education cluster has played.
                                                         This macro-level coordination should also
       Notably, donors are increasingly recognizing
                                                         explicitly complement and connect to
       that the imposed division of immediate
                                                         school-level responses discussed earlier.
       humanitarian relief and longer-term
       development support structures does not
                                                         Specifically, effective coordination should
       match the reality. (Crises do not occur in a      support the efforts of communities to
       linear fashion that permits simple transitions    draft and implement crisis plans for
       from one to the other.) By including school-      preparedness, prevention responses, and
       level risk reduction and resilience promotion     reconstruction after crises.
       activities in education sector strategic plans,
                                                         6.	 Scale up successful humanitarian
       ministries can keep their options open to
                                                         and crisis response innovations. Successful
       both funding sources.
                                                         humanitarian interventions must be
       Source: UNICEF and UNESCO-IIEP (2011).            identified to understand how to bring Mali

 62   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                      MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


        response models to scale. In particular, these models should represent more
        than hit-and-run humanitarianism. They should provide the foundations that can
        subsequently be connected to the system and the key issues of quality, community
        participation, complementary programs and even planning processes. Where
        necessary, transition strategies should be developed within plans to consolidate
        these gains. (See box on managing the return of teachers and building education
        and school resilience.)




                                                                 Parents from Sala School participated
                                                                      in the education resilience study.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                               	      63
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                               		


       Managing the Return of Displaced Teachers in Mali to the North and Staff Shortfalls: Good Practice
       Recommendations
           •	 It will be crucial to conduct an assessment of teacher availability and needs in the north.
           •	 While care should be taken to remove barriers to entry so as not to deter potential recruits, it will
              be important to establish minimum standards and clear contractual status to support recruitment
              of teachers. This can then be built upon with in-service support and professional development to
              make up for the capacity shortfalls.
           •	 Recruiting informal educators within the communities can provide a foundation to meet
              immediate needs. These could include young people who may have practical experience as
              classroom assistants or who were engaged in school and community activities. This strategy may
              also be helpful to address short-term staff shortfalls in the south.
           •	 Teachers in the north will also require training to meet the new needs of students in the post-
              crisis context. This may include needs for psychosocial support for students who were affected by
              violence and support to help students transition back to the language of instruction in the north.
       Building School and Education System Resilience in Mali: Good Practice Recommendations
       An important consideration for Mali is how to effectively bridge the current predominant modality of
       support—humanitarian assistance—with a longer-term development orientation. This predicament
       is a common one, but with some strategic planning, emergency interventions can provide important
       foundations for longer-term reform and transformation. This vision is inherent within the RES-360°
       approach as supported by the data:
           1.	 Ensure that the different perceptions of all the members of the education communities are heard.
           2.	 Identify the assets that can be mobilized during an emergency response.
           3.	 Emphasize the important institutional linkages and connections to longer-term, more sustainable
               interventions.
       Crisis contexts from Rwanda and Gaza also offer useful lessons and examples in this regard.
       Rwanda. Following the 1994 genocide, the Rwandan education system set up new legal frameworks
       (in the form of policies) that consolidated and expanded its initial emergency and recovery efforts to
       guide activity in different subsectors. It reached out to development partners for support and focused
       on strengthening structures, mechanisms, and human resources. This was followed up by a concerted
       effort to base its policies and proposed reforms on evidence from the education sector to justify mobilizing
       resources. Moreover, the leadership of the Ministry of Education ensured that emergency response studies
       and policies aligned with the country’s broader poverty reduction strategies and strategic visions (Arden
       and Claver 2013).
       Gaza. On a more local level, in Gaza, emergency support following the 2008–2009 war included a
       considerable number of trainings on the International Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE)
       Minimum Standards for Education. As the acute emergency phase ended, local educationalists built on
       this experience by introducing the training at the school level. They worked with teachers and school
       administrators to develop school-based contingency plans structured around the INEE standards. These
       plans were communicated to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education, which in turn contextualized
       them within the context of their ongoing emergency preparedness. The plans provided a structure for
       teachers, school principals, and parents to use to develop emergency mitigation and preparedness for
       schools and communities (Brooks et al. 2011).


 64   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                   MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    IV. Additional Areas for Study and Evidence
    Collection to Support Post-Crisis Education
    Reform in Mali
    This education resilience assessment provided additional evidence to sustain a resilience lens
    and framework for an education system prone to crises. For Mali, it prioritized some initial
    policies and programs that seem relevant for managing the recent 2012 security crisis, which
    also are foundational for ongoing education reforms in the country. However, this was an initial
    exploratory study and its data indicates areas that can be further explored and substantiated. It
    suggests that further research, policy, and practice should support the following goals: 1) manage
    and minimize risks, 2) use and protect school and community assets, 3) foster school-community
    support, and 4) deliver resilience-aligned education services.
    This concluding chapter looks briefly at a few additional areas for analysis that can help reveal
    latent risks, deepen the understanding of maladaptive coping, assess context-based risk and
    analyze assets, align education policies and programs (which are relevant for both crisis response
    and long-term development) to a resilience approach, and operationalize best practices.
       •	 Uncover latent risks.
    It may be important to conduct additional studies on the risks, threats, and vulnerabilities present
    in education communities in the country—both the north and the south. Risks are often latent
    and their manifestation is hard to assess without tangible evidence.

      Latent Risks
      The intensity and frequency of risks can change over time. It is critical to understand both critical and
      latent risks. Latent risks do not necessarily occur with great frequency, but worsen at particularly high
      rates. If left unaddressed they can result in more structural risks.
      Latent risks in Mali should be probed further with these questions:
       •	 Are there other education risks in Mali in addition to those identified by this study?
       •	 Are there other latent risks that can hinder the present welcome and support by host communities
          in the south to displaced families?


       •	 Understand and prevent maladaptive coping.
    Many of the assets noted in the Mali education resilience study can turn into risks or maladaptive
    coping if they are not supported by relevant programs and services. For example, the solidarity
    of host communities could turn into tensions if local resources in host communities are depleted
    without support from social services. Also, child labor is a growing concern at the same time
    that education is demanded by students and parents. Although this motivation for education
    is an asset, the lack of employment opportunities and financial support can propel very poor
    families to consider child labor as a “resilient” approach for economic survival. Understanding


EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                               	     65
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                              		


      and preventing these types of maladaptive coping strategies, and protecting exiting assets from
      being depleted, should be part of future resilience-informed studies.

        Adaptive and Maladaptive Coping
        A resilience approach focuses on the way individuals, families, communities and institutions achieve
        certain outcomes in spite of a context of adversity. However, it is important to understand if such
        coping mechanisms are maladaptive. That is, do they yield other negative impacts? For example,
        families facing economic shocks may seek to survive by taking their children out of school and
        condoning child labor.
        In Mali, these further questions about maladaptive coping must also be asked:
         •	 Are there other maladaptive coping strategies in IDP or host communities in Mali?
         •	 How can relevant education and other social services compensate for coping that may lead to
            other negative outcomes?
         •	 What is the “breaking point” of host-community support to displaced communities? What
            activities and interventions can be implemented to make sure that communities do not reach
            this point?


         •	 Conduct context-based resilience assessments.
      This first education resilience assessment in Mali explored the risks and assets in communities in
      the south, looking at both crisis-induced and longer-term risks. Its findings provide us with some
      initial guidance on how the education system can protect, foster, and use school and community
      strengths, opportunities, and resources to make education more relevant in contexts of adversity,
      while supporting longer-term education development goals. While many findings are relevant to
      the whole country, Mali is a large, multicultural state that also requires understanding resilience
      in different contexts. To that extent, for instance, when security allows it, it will be important to
      undertake a similar assessment of communities in the north where armed conflict took place, to
      better appreciate their specific risks and coping strategies.

        Risks and Assets across Different Settings in Mali
        The schools included in the study provided a range of different contexts. Each site can be further
        analyzed for a deeper comparative understanding of how its context may affect risks, assets, and school-
        level resilience processes. For example, was there greater mobilization of CGS in rural communities or
        urban communities, and what factors may account for this? Deepening the contextual understanding
        in this way can help identify priority contexts to address, through other relevant questions such as
        these:
         •	 How do risks compare between south and north communities affected by the crisis?
         •	 How important is the availability of community assets in community schools versus regular
            public schools?
         •	 How do risks related to food security and income compare by geographical location?
         •	 How does the availability of system-level assets and community-based assets compare by
            geographical location?


 66   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


           •	 Align education system services to a resilience approach.
       This study’s approach to resilience has a strong institutional component, focused on the education
       system. The overall recommendation is to align existing education services—such as school-
       based management, curriculum delivery, and technical and vocational training—to a resilience
       approach that supports communities both in stable times and crisis times.
           •	 Operationalize recommendations and best practices of resilience assessments.
       However, education systems are complex and dynamic, and eminently contextualized, which
       means that there are many factors and processes that need to be assessed. It also means that the
       system itself is constantly changing. Engaging with this complexity is necessary to operationalize
       some of the recommendations and best practice options provided in this study. Along this line,
       needs assessments and additional empirical and policy analyses on how to implement community-
       based school management, flexible education strategies, and integrative education/nutrition/
       livelihood support programs, among others, are needed.
       Resilience assessments will need to be complemented by in-depth assessments of the key
       structural constraints to education access and quality in Mali, including service delivery, teachers’
       capacity, and language of instruction issues, that further support the achievement of the country’s
       long-term development goals.




A student from Boulkassoungoue Public
School and participant in the education
resilience study.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                          	       67
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                              		


       Education System Dynamics, Complexity, and the “How To”
       This education resilience assessment has revealed the importance of considering both access and
       quality issues as they relate to the impact of the crisis in Mali. Yet, while access and quality are often
       split into two camps, there are important connections between them. Understanding this can better
       inform the design of technically specific programs and projects. Important trends related to this have
       already been uncovered through this analysis. At the same time, the analysis has pointed to several
       policy areas which, with some further refinement and consultations, could be the basis for a concrete
       action plan for Mali. To better inform the next steps in program design—moving from the “what” to
       the “how”—several additional areas of data collection and analysis could be considered. The following
       are suggested future assessment topics and areas of analysis:
        •	 A more in-depth analysis of teachers’ perceptions of community participation, volunteering
           activities, and teaching and learning in contexts of adversity—to help inform the design of
           training and other material support
        •	 An analysis of the curriculum and its delivery in order to provide a relevant match with available
           hours of instruction and foundational competencies for higher level learning
        •	 A study of how schools can support an integrative delivery of education, school feeding and
           health, and livelihood support services
        •	 An assessment of what classroom practices may already be supporting a more holistic notion of
           positive learning outcomes. (Namely, these include those relational processes between students
           and teachers, and school principals and parents that help develop key social and emotional
           learning competencies. Once identified, these practices could be better institutionalized within
           the current curriculum and teacher-training approaches in Mali to better understand how to
           initiate more effective classroom practices.)
        •	 An assessment of how peer learning can be enhanced (This seems to be an especially appropriate
           learning support strategy, given the large classroom sizes and the peer solidarity that largely
           characterized the sample used for this study. Deeper exploration of alternative education models
           that can be made more available and effective can help in this regard.)




 68   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                          MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    References
    Arden, R., and Y. Claver. 2013. “Rwanda: A Case Study in Institutional Education Resilience.” 		
    	      Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program, RES-Research Series; Systems Approach 	
    	      for Better Education Results (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.		
    	      worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/09/17917107/rwanda-case-study-institutional-			
    	      education-resilience. Accessed June 2014.
    Benard, B. 2004. Resiliency: What We Have Learned. San Francisco, CA, USA: WestEnd.
    Berther, A., and D. Evans. 2013. Education Cluster. UNICEF.
    Borman, G., and I. Overman. 2004. “Academic Resilience in Mathematics among Poor and 		
    	     Minority Students.” Elementary School Journal 104 (3): 177–95.
    Brooks, D., B. Hamaydah, and J. Kelcey. 2011. “INEE Minimum Standards Case Study: Building 		
    	      Capacity for Gaza Educationalists.” New York: International Network for Education 		
    	      in Emergencies (INEE). http://www.ineesite.org/uploads/files/resources/Case_study_		
    	      gaza_UNESCO.pdf. Accessed June 2014.
    Bundy, D., C. Burbano, M. Grosh, A. Gelli, M. Jukes, and L. Drake. 2009. Rethinking School 		
    	      Feeding: Social Safety Nets, Child Development, and the Education Sector. Washington,		
    	      DC: World Bank.
    Cefai, C. 2008. Promoting Resilience in the Classroom: A Guide to Developing Pupils’ Emotional 		
    	       and Cognitive Skills. Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
    Comer, J., N. Haynes, E. Joyner, and M. Ben-Avie, eds. 1996. Rallying the Whole Village: The 		
    	      Comer Process for Reforming Education. New York: Teacher College Press.
    Daiute, C. 2013. “Relational Resilience.” In Handbook of Resilience in Children of War, ed. C. 		
    	      Fernando and M. Ferrari. New York: Springer.
    Dubovyk, A., and INEE (International Network for Education in Emergencies). 2008. “Case 		
    	     Study on the Contextualisation of the INEE Minimum Standards by the Community-		
    	     Based Education Forum.” New York: INEE. http://www.ineesite.org/uploads/files/		
    	     resources/Contextualization%20Afghanistan_CaseStudy.pdf. Accessed June 2014.
    Education Cluster for Mali. 2014. Internal documentation. See also https://mali.				
    	      humanitarianresponse.info/fr/clusters/education; and https://mali 				
    	      humanitarianresponse.info/en/system/files/documents/files/EDUCATION_CLUSTER_		
    	      BULLETIN_JAN_2014_ENG.pdf. Accessed June 2014.
    Food and Agriculture Organization. Creer et diriger un jardin scolaire : Manuel destine aux 		
    	      professeurs, parents et communautes [Setting up and running a school garden: Manual 		
    	      for professors, parents, and communities]. Rome: FAO. ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/			
    	      fao/011/a0218f/a0218f00.pdf. Accessed June 2014.



EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                   	       69
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                           		


      Gizir, C.A., and G. Aydin. 2009. “Protective Factors Contributing to the Academic Resilience of 		
      	        Students Living in Poverty in Turkey.” Professional School Counseling 13 (1): 38–49.
      Government of Mali. “National Strategy for Monitoring and Evaluation (2013–2017).” 			
      	     PowerPoint presentation, Bamako, Mali.
      GPFD (Global Program on Forced Displacement). 2013. “Forced Displacement of and Potential 		
      	     Solutions for IDPs and Refugees in the Sahel: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and 		
      	     Niger.” Draft. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring Center). 2013. Mali: Internal displacement in brief. 		
      	      December 31. Geneva: IDMC. http://www.internal-displacement.org/sub-saharan-		
      	      africa/mali/summary/. Accessed June 2014.
      Krovetz, M.L. 2008. Fostering Resilience: Expecting All Students to Use Their Minds and Hearts 		
      	      Well. Thousand Oaks: Corwin Press.
      Mali. Ministry of Education (Ministère de l’Education de Base, de l’Alphabétisation et des	 		
      	      Langues Nationales; MEALN). 2010. Temps Réel d’Apprentissage [Real-Time Learning]. 		
      	      Direction Nationale de la Pédagogie (National Pedagogical Office), Direction Nationale 		
      	      de l’Éducation de base du MEALN (Ministry of Education National Office for 			
      	      Basic Education), and USAID/PHARE (United States Agency for International 			
      	      Development/Programme Harmonisé d’Appui au Renforcement de l’Education [Road to 		
      	      Reading Program]).
      ———. 2013. Rapport sur la préparation de la rentrée scolaire 2013-2014 [Back to School 		
      	   Readiness Report 2013-2014].
      ———. 2014. Analyse des Données et Indicateurs de l’Enseignement Fondamental entre les 		
      	   années scolaires 2010-2011 et 2013-2014 [Data Analysis and Indicators for Basic 			
      	   Education for school years 2010-2011 to 2013-2014]. National Planning and Statistics 		
      	   Unit (Cellule Nationale de Planification et Statistique).
      Masset, E., and A. Gelli. 2013. “Improving Community Development by Linking Agriculture, 		
      	     Nutrition and Education: Design of a Randomized Trial of Home-Grown School Feeding 		
      	     in Mali.” Trials 14: 55. http://www.trialsjournal.com/content/14/1/55. Accessed June 		
      	2014.
      Masten, A.S. 2001. “Ordinary Magic: Resilience Processes in Development.” American 			
      	     Psychologist 56: 227–38.
      Masten, A.S., D. Heistad, D.J. Cutuli, J. Herbers, J. Obradović, C. Chan, E. Hinz, and J. Long. 2008. 		
      	     “School Success in Motion: Protective Factors for Academic Achievement in Homeless 		
      	     and Highly Mobile Children in Minneapolis.” Cura Reporter 38 (2): 3–12.
      Masten, A.S., and J. Obradović. 2008. “Disaster Preparation and Recovery: Lessons from 			
      	     Research on Resilience in Human Development.” Ecology and Society 13 (1): 9.
      Mertens, D. 2009a. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York: Guilford Press.


 70   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                            MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Meza, D. 2009. Educational Services in the Context of Conflict and Post-Conflict. San Salvador: 		
    	SOTEMARI.
    Nicolai, S. 2007. Fragmented Foundations. Education and Chronic Crisis in the Occupied 			
    	       Palestinian Territory. Paris: UNESCO-IIEP; and London: Save the Children.
    ———, ed. 2009. Opportunities for Change: Education Innovation and Reform during and after 		
    	   Conflict. Paris: UNESCO-IIEP; and London: CfBT.
    Partnership for Advancing Community Education in Afghanistan (PACE-A). 2008. “Rapid Reading 		
    	      and Numeracy Test II Report 2008.” Washington, DC: USAID. www.eddataglobal.org/		
    	      reading/index.cfm/Rapid%20Reading%20and%20Numeracy%20Test%20Report%20-%20		
    	      CBE%20Afghanistan.pdf?fuseaction=throwpub&ID=247. Accessed June 2014.
    PASEC (Programme d’Analyse des Systèmes Educatifs de la CONFEMEN [Program for the Analysis 	
    	      of Education Systems in Francophone Africa]). 2004. http://www.confemen.org/le-		
    	      pasec/rapports-et-documents-pasec/les-rapports-du-pasec/. Accessed June 2014.
    PRODESS (Programme de développement sanitaire et social [Health and Social and 			
    	    Development Program]). Phase II, 2005–2009. Mali.
    Reyes, J. 2013. “What Matters Most in Education Resilience: A Framework Paper.” Education 		
    	       Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better Education Results 		
    	       (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank. http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/		
    	       ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/EDR/Framework_SABER-Resilience.pdf. Accessed 	
    	       June 2014.
    RTI International. 2009. Early Grade Reading Assessment Toolkit. Prepared for World Bank 		
    	       Office 	 of Human Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://www.ineesite.org/		
    	       uploads/files/resources/EGRA_Toolkit_Mar09.pdf. Accessed June 2014.
    Sullivan-Owomoyela, J., and L. Brannelly. 2009. Promoting Participation: Community 			
    	       Contributions to Education in Conflict Situations. Paris: UNESCO-IIEP; and London: CfBT.
    Tashakori, A., and Teddlie, C., eds. 2010. Sage Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and 			
    	      Behavioral Research. 2nd ed. Los Angeles: SAGE.
    UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2013. Impact de la crise politique et socio-		
    	     economique 2012 sur les Objectifs du Millénaire pour le Développement au Mali. [Impact 	
    	     of the 2012 political and socio-economic crisis on the Millennium Development Goals in 		
    	     Mali]. New York: UNDP.
    UNICEF-WCAR (United Nations International Children’s Education Fund-West and Central Africa) 	
    	     and UNESCO-IIEP (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization-		
    	     International Institute for Educational Planning). 2011. “Integrating Conflict and Disaster 		
    	     Risk-Reduction into Education Sector Planning.” Draft. Paris: UNESCO-IIEP.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                      	       71
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                      		


      UNESCO and Japan Funds-in-Trust. 2012. Flexible Learning Strategies for Out-of-School 			
      	    Children and Youth. Bangkok, Thailand: UNESCO-Thailand. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/		
      	    images/0022/002230/223023e.pdf. Accessed June 2014.
      UNESCO-IIEP. 2010. Guidebook for Planning Education in Emergencies and Reconstruction. 		
      	    Paris: UNESCO-IIEP.
      Ungar, M. 2008. Playing at Being Bad: The Hidden Resilience in Troubled Youth. Toronto: 			
      	      McClelland & Steward.
      ———. 2011. “Social Ecology of Resilience: Addressing Contextual and Cultural Ambiguity in a 		
      	   Nascent Construct.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 81(1): 1–17.
      ———. 2012. The Social Ecology of Resilience: Handbook of Theory and Practice. New York: 		
      	Springer.
      USAID (United States Agency for International Development) | Afghanistan. 2009. “Mid-term 		
      	      Evaluation of Partnership in Advancing Community Education in Afghanistan (PACE-A) by 		
      	      USAID in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan 2009.” Report prepared by Checchi and 		
      	      Company Consulting, Afghanistan Support Project, Washington, DC.
      Werner, E. 1990. “Protective Factors and Individual Resilience.” In Handbook of Childhood 		
      	     Intervention, ed. S.J.S. Meisels. Cambridge University Press.
      Werner, E., and R. Smith. 1982. Vulnerable but Invincible: A Longitudinal Study of Resilient 		
      	     Children and Youth. New York: McGraw-Hill.
      ———. 1988. Vulnerable but Invincible: A Longitudinal Study of Resilient Children and Youth. 		
      	   New York: Adams Banister, Cox.
      ———. 1992. Overcoming the Odds: High Risk Children from Birth to Adulthood. Ithaca, NY: 		
      	   Cornell University Press.
      ———. 2001. Journeys from Childhood to Midlife: Risk, Resilience, and Recovery. Ithaca, NY: 		
      	   Cornell University Press.
      World Bank. 2004. “Afghanistan - Education Quality Improvement Program (EQUIP) Project.” 		
      	      Internal document. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ———. 2009. “IDA at work: Nepal-Community Management Rekindles Schooling.” Human
      	   Development Network, Education Unit. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://web.
      	   worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/0,,contentMDK:21387809 		
      	   ~menuPK:5546517~pagePK:210058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:282386,00.html. Accessed 		
      	   June 2014.
      ———. 2010. Information for Accountability: Impact Evaluation of EGRA and Teacher Training. 		
      	   Washington, DC: World Bank.




 72   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    ———. 2011a. “Mali: Social Safety Nets.” Report No. 53222-ML. Washington, DC: World Bank, 	
    	   Human Development Department, Social Protection Unit, Africa Region. http://www-	
    	   wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2011/05/23/
    	   000333037_20110523001845/Rendered/INDEX/532220ESW0Gray0OFFICIAL0U
    	   SE0ONLY090.txt. Accessed June 2014.
    ———. 2011b. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, security and development. 			
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
    ———. 2013a. Learning and Resilience: The Crucial Role of Social and Emotional Well-Being. 		
    Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program, Policy Note Series; Systems Approach 		
    for Better Education Results (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.
    ———. 2013b. High Achievement in a Context of Protracted Displacement: What Helps UNRWA 		
    Students Learn under Adversity? Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program, Case 		
    Study Series; Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER). Washington, DC: 		
    World Bank.
    ———. 2013c. Mali: Impact of the Crisis on Social Sectors. Programmatic ESW Concept Note. 		
    Photocopy. Washington, DC: World Bank.




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                              	       73
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                                     		


      Annex 1. The methodology for the rapid mixed-
      methods resilience assessment
      A rapid mixed-methods (qualitative and quantitative) assessment and purposeful sampling
      were used to capture the main features of the latest crisis in Mali impacting IDPs and their host
      communities in the south. Following a sequential mixed-methods approach, a first qualitative phase
      conducted interviews and focus groups with central Ministry and community level participants
      (students, parents, teachers and principals). Within the Ministry of Education, ten professionals
      actively engaged in policy making and national level programs were interviewed. At the local
      level, the qualitative sampling strategy and focus groups sought to capture the perceptions and
      experiences of two education communities located in representative communities hosting IDP
      families from the north (figure A1).
      With regards to gender representation in the sample, the majority of respondents were male
      (56 percent) with females making up 39 percent. (The remaining participants did not respond
      to the question asking about their gender.) Surveyed communities represented critical cases of
      heightened vulnerability, based on a variety of socioeconomic indicators. They also offered a
      balance between urban and rural contexts. See table A1, which shows the study’s implementation
      sequence.
      The purposeful selection ensured the inclusion of individuals and communities in the sample,
      whose lived experiences of displacement and support for IDPs could provide the rich insights
      needed for policy makers. Further detailed information on the samples is provided in table A2. 26                                                       1




                                                        Figure 1A
                                   Sampling Strategy by Host and Displaced Participants
                                                     (% of response)

                                        Purposeful	  sampling	  was	  used	  to	  ensure	  the	  representa4on	  of	  
                       100	  
                                              displaced	  persons	  in	  ques4onnaire	  par4cipa4on	  

                         80	  

                         60	  

                         40	  

                         20	  

                           0	  
                                      Students	                     Parents	                              Teachers	                Principals	  

                                                                Displaced	        Not	  displaced	     Did	  not	  respond	  

                                                                                                                                                       	  




      26	        “People or cases may be chosen because they exemplify certain theoretically important characteristics or because their
      life experiences reflect critical cultural or historical positioning in regard to the phenomenon under study” (Mertens 2009, 214).


 74   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                         MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                                                  Table 1A
                                  Application process of the RES-360° in Mali

          Phase 1: Qualitative data            Phase 2: Quantitative data               Phase 3: Analysis and
                 collection                            collection                            reporting


     1.1 Introductory video                  2.1 Selection of the                  3.1 Data entry
     conference (to explain the              application school(s), sample
     concept of resilience and the           sizes and sample populations
     RES-360° rapid assessment               (including trust building with
     process)                                schools)

     1.2 Literature review                   2.2 Development of the first          3.2 Data analysis
                                             draft of the survey

     1.3 Development of typologies           2.3 Piloting of the first draft of    3.3 Preparation of the first draft
     of risks and strengths at the           the survey                            of the RES-360° report
     national level

     1.4 Selection of national actors        2.4 Adaptation and finalization       3.4 In-country feedback on the
     for national level focus group(s)       of the survey based on the            report
                                             pilot findings and lessons
                                             learned

     1.5 Implementation of national          2.5 Application of the final          3.5 Finalization of the RES-360°
     level focus groups                      survey in selected school(s)          report

     1.6 Purposeful selection of
     sample school(s), contact with
     schools, and trust building

     1.7 Implementation of focus
     groups within purposeful sample
     schools

     1.8 Analysis of the focus group
     data to create list of priority risks
     and list of priority assets



     Outputs:                                Outputs:                              Outputs:

     a) Literature review                    a) Definition of education            a) Consolidated data from the
     b) Typologies of risk and 	                resilience as it relates to the       surveys
        resilience                              study’s focus on access to
                                                education in vulnerable            b) RES-360° report, plus
                                                host communities in                   recommendations for
                                                southern Mali                         country dialogue to promote
                                             b) Conceptual framework for              resilience
                                                the study
                                             c) Final survey design
                                             d) 373 completed surveys




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                         	   75
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                     		

                                                 Table 2A
                                      Sample Size and Characteristics

       School                 Location/Environment (self-reported)                        Number and category of
                                                                                              participants


      Sala                  This is a community school* located in a rural                     Students     45
                            environment, serving approximately 400                              Parents     17
                            families in a disadvantaged area.                                 Teachers       6
                            * Community schools in Mali have a rich history. Originally                      1
                                                                                              Principals
                            an organic response to the lack of schools in many
                            rural areas of the country, community schools were
                            subsequently supported by the government in an
                            effort to expand access. While this strategy was largely
                            successful, concerns have been raised about the quality
                            of learning in these schools. Current government policy is
                            to transform community schools into public schools.


      Boulkassoungoue       This is a public school in an urban                                Students     42
                            environment that has approximately 320                              Parents      5
                            students and 8 teachers, serving about 200                        Teachers      11
                            local families in a disadvantaged area.                                          1
                                                                                              Principals
      École Boliviarienne   This public school was originally designed
                            to cater to the children of civil servants.                        Students     62
                            Located in a sub-urban environment outside                          Parents      8
                            Bamako, the school was initially established                      Teachers       9
                            with the support of the government of                             Principals     2
                            Venezuela.

      Yirimadio             This is another public school in an urban
                                                                                               Students     64
                            environment with 13 teachers, serving 145
                            students in a disadvantaged area. The                               Parents     10
                            school identified 56 students as displaced                        Teachers      10
                            students from the north.                                          Principals     2
      Souban-Koulikoro      This is a public school in an urban                                Students
                            environment with 9 teachers (5 women and                                        57
                                                                                                Parents     10
                            4 men), serving 284 students (135 boys and
                            149 girls from approximately 95 families) in a                    Teachers       7
                            disadvantaged area.                                               Principals     4



                                                  Total number of participants                 Students     270
                                                                                                 Parents     50
                                                                                              Teachers       43
                                                                                              Principals     10




 76   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


    Annex 2. Mali RES-360° questionnaire
    In the second quantitative phase, the initial exploratory findings on risks, assets, and relevant
    services were used to design a fully contextualized survey. This locally designed risk and resilience
    survey was conducted with 270 students, 50 parents, 43 teachers, and 10 principals or school
    administrators in 5 purposely selected schools and education communities, also in the south. The
    questionnaire below shows the distribution of host and displaced participants.



      For Office Use Only
      [This information is entered by the research team prior to administering the RES-360°]

      Participant ID: 				                          Site ID:
      						                                        Sample ID:
      						                                        Date of Administration:




                                                  ELEVES

    Merci de votre participation dans cette recherche sur la résilience. Ci-dessous figure la liste
    des questions portant sur les risques auxquels vous faites face dans votre école et votre
    communauté, et des ressources disponibles dans votre école, votre communauté et votre
    famille. Veuillez lire attentivement les instructions sur chaque question. Veuillez répondre à
    toutes les questions aussi honnêtement que possible. Il n’y a pas de mauvaises réponses.

    Vos réponses seront combinées avec celles des autres personnes. Seuls les résumés des
    informations seront partagés et retournés à l’école et au département de l’éducation, et toutes
    les réponses seront anonymes. Par conséquent, veuillez ne pas inscrire votre nom sur aucune
    partie de ce questionnaire.

    Merci !




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                         	     77
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                        		



      1.	Etes-vous


       Etudiant    □             Si oui êtes-vous au :               5eme   □             6eme    □
       Parent   □                Si oui êtes-vous membre du CGS:                    oui   □           non   □

       Enseignant      □         Si oui êtes-vous :       1ere   □     2eme     □     3eme    □   4eme      □   5eme   □    6eme   □

       Directeur    □
       Autre membre de la   □    Si oui qui êtes-vous :
       communauté



      2.	   Sexe		          masculin   □ 		      féminin   □
      3.	   Etes-vous récemment arrivé dans la communauté (pendant les dernières deux années)


      			Oui                    □			Non □
      			                   Si oui quel est votre lieu de provenance? ________________________________________________________




 78   										                                                                                                   EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                        MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                       Fréquence?                                            LES DEFIS AUXQUELS JE FAIS FACE                                    Changement?
      1. Pas du tout



                          2. Quelquefois



                                           3. Fréquemment




                                                                                                                                   changement
                                                                                                                                   1. pas de


                                                                                                                                                    2. aggravé



                                                                                                                                                                 3. amélioré
                                                             N’oubliez pas que chaque constat comprend deux parties et exige
                                                                      deux réponses (l’une à gauche et l’autre à droit)


         Les défis suivants se                                                                                                      Apres 2012 est-ce que la
        passent-ils avec quelle                                                                                                     fréquence de ces défis a
             fréquence?                                                                                                                    changé?
        O          O         O                              1. Les enfants ne fréquentent pas l’école                                O        O          O
        O          O         O                              2. Je connais les enfants qui abandonnent l’école                        O        O          O
        O          O         O                              3. Les élèves sont trop nombreux dans les salles de classe               O        O          O
        O          O         O                              4. Je ne comprends pas les leçons dispensées                             O        O          O
        O          O         O                              5. J’ai trop de leçons à apprendre                                       O        O          O
                                                            6. Je connais des enfants qui ne comprennent pas la langue
         O                   O                O                                                                                       O               O             O
                                                            d’enseignement
                                                            7. Je connais des enfants qui ne mangent pas les trois repas
         O                   O                O                                                                                       O               O             O
                                                            ordinaires
                                                            8. Ma famille n’a pas assez d’argent pour payer les fournitures
         O                   O                O                                                                                       O               O             O
                                                            scolaires
         O                   O                O             9. Je travaille pour soutenir les parents                                 O               O             O
         O                   O                O             10. Je connais les filles qui ne vont pas à l’école                       O               O             O
                                                            11. Je connais des élèves qui font des cauchemars, ou ont des
         O                   O                O                                                                                       O               O             O
                                                            frayeurs nocturnes ou maux de tête, etc.
         O                   O                O             12. Je connais des déplacés nord qui sont arrivés dans ma localité        O               O             O
         O                   O                O             13. Les familles d’accueil des déplacés sont surpeuplées                  O               O             O
                                                            14. Je connais des enfants déplacés ne parlent pas la langue de la
         O                   O                O                                                                                       O               O             O
                                                            communauté d’accueil




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                           	        					                                         79
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                               		

                          Disponibilité?                            LES SOURCES DE SOUTIEN – LES CHOSES QUI M’AIDENT                             Importance?
         1. Pas du tout



                               2. Quelquefois



                                                3. Disponible




                                                                                                                                  d’importance
                                                                                                                                  1. Peu


                                                                                                                                                     2. Importance


                                                                                                                                                                     d’importance
                                                                                                                                                                     3. Beaucoup
                                                                N’oubliez pas que chaque constat comprend deux parties et exige
                                                                         deux réponses (l’une à gauche et l’autre à droit)


        Quelle est la disponibilité                                                                                                Jusqu’à quel niveau est-il
       de ces sources d’appui dans                                                                                                   important pour vous?
           votre communauté?
          O          O         O    15. Malgré les difficultés, j’aime toujours aller à l’école                                       O                 O                O
                                    16. Je bénéficie du soutien de la communauté pendant les moments
          O          O         O                                                                                                      O                 O                O
                                    difficiles
                                    17. Les élèves déplacés ont été bien accueillis par leurs camarades
          O          O         O                                                                                                      O                 O                O
                                    résidents
                                    18. Les enfants déplacés comprennent la langue de la communauté
          O          O         O                                                                                                      O                 O                O
                                    d’accueil
                                    19. Les enfants déplacés ont bénéficié du soutien des familles
          O          O         O                                                                                                      O                 O                O
                                    élargies
                                    20. Mon maître et mon directeur me soutiennent pendant les
          O          O         O                                                                                                      O                 O                O
                                    moments difficiles
          O          O         O    21. Je connais les enseignants déplacés qui donnent des cours après l’école                       O                 O                O
          O          O         O    22. Aller à l’école m’aide à faire face aux défis                                                 O                 O                O

      Y’a-t-il d’autres défis dont on n’a pas déjà fait mention ? Si oui veuillez les lister ici
      ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
      ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

      Y’a-t-il d’autres sources de soutien dont on n’a pas déjà fait mention ? Si oui veuillez les lister ici
      ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
      ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________


 80   										                                                                                                                  EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT


      For Office Use Only
      [This information is entered by the research team prior to administering the RES-360°]

      Participant ID: 				                          Site ID:
      						                                        Sample ID:
      						                                        Date of Administration:



                                  ENSEIGNANTS/DIRECTEURS/PARENTS

    Merci de votre participation dans cette recherche sur la résilience. Ci-dessous figure la liste
    des questions portant sur les risques auxquels vous faites face dans votre école et votre
    communauté, et des ressources disponibles dans votre école, votre communauté et votre
    famille. Veuillez lire attentivement les instructions sur chaque question. Veuillez répondre à
    toutes les questions aussi honnêtement que possible. Il n’y a pas de mauvaises réponses.

    Vos réponses seront combinées avec celles des autres personnes. Seuls les résumés des
    informations seront partagés et retournés à l’école et au département de l’éducation, et toutes
    les réponses seront anonymes. Par conséquent, veuillez ne pas inscrire votre nom sur aucune
    partie de ce questionnaire.

    Merci !




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                         	   81
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                        		

      1.	Etes-vous


       Etudiant    □             Si oui êtes-vous au :               5eme   □             6eme    □
       Parent   □                Si oui êtes-vous membre du CGS:                    oui   □           non   □

       Enseignant      □         Si oui êtes-vous :       1ere   □     2eme     □     3eme    □   4eme      □   5eme   □    6eme   □

       Directeur    □
       Autre membre de la   □    Si oui qui êtes-vous :
       communauté



      2.	   Sexe		          masculin   □ 		      féminin   □
      3.	   Etes-vous récemment arrivé dans la communauté (pendant les dernières deux années)


      			Oui                    □			Non □
      			                   Si oui quel est votre lieu de provenance? ________________________________________________________




 82   										                                                                                                   EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                            MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                       Fréquence?                                             LES DEFIS AUXQUELS JE FAIS FACE                                       Changement?
      1. Pas du tout



                          2. Quelquefois



                                           3. Fréquemment




                                                                                                                                       changement
                                                                                                                                       1. Pas de


                                                                                                                                                        2. Aggravé



                                                                                                                                                                     3. Amélioré
                                                             N’oubliez pas que chaque constat comprend deux parties et exige
                                                                      deux réponses (l’une à gauche et l’autre à droit)


         Les défis suivants se                                                                                                          Apres 2012 est-ce que la
        passent-ils avec quelle                                                                                                         fréquence de ces défis a
             fréquence?                                                                                                                        changé?
        O          O         O                              1. Les enfants ne fréquentent pas l’école                                    O        O          O
        O          O         O                              2. Les enfants abandonnent l’école                                           O        O          O
        O          O         O                              3. Les élèves sont trop nombreux dans les salles de classe                   O        O          O
        O          O         O                              4. Il manque des enseignants qualifiés                                       O        O          O
                                                            5. La gestion et le suivi de l’école ne sont pas faits par les membres
         O                   O                O                                                                                           O               O             O
                                                            du CGS
         O                   O                O             6. Le curriculum de l’enseignement fondamental est surchargé                  O               O             O
         O                   O                O             7. Les enfants ne comprennent pas la langue d’enseignement                    O               O             O
         O                   O                O             8. Les enfants ne mangent pas les trois repas ordinaires	                     O               O             O
         O                   O                O             9. Les familles des élèves rencontrent des problèmes financiers.              O               O             O
         O                   O                O             10. Les enfants travaillent pour soutenir les parents                         O               O             O
         O                   O                O             11. Des filles qui ne vont plus à l’école                                     O               O             O
                                                            12. Je connais des élèves qui font des cauchemars ou des frayeurs
         O                   O                O                                                                                           O               O             O
                                                            nocturnes
         O                   O                O             13. Des déplacés sont arrivés dans votre localité                             O               O             O
         O                   O                O             14. Les familles d’accueil des déplacés sont surpeuplées                      O               O             O
         O                   O                O             15. Les déplacés sont marginalisés dans les communautés d’accueil             O               O             O
                                                            16. Les enfants déplacés ne maitrisent pas la langue de la localité
         O                   O                O                                                                                           O               O             O
                                                            d’accueil
                                                            17. La communauté (le CGS) ne dispose pas de ressources nécessaires
         O                   O                O                                                                                           O               O             O
                                                            (matériels didactiques, financements et ressources humaines)

EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                             	          					                                         83
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			                                                    		

                          Fréquence?                                               LES DEFIS AUXQUELS JE FAIS FACE                                         Changement?
        1. Pas du tout



                              2. Quelquefois



                                                3. Fréquemment




                                                                                                                                            changement
                                                                                                                                            1. Pas de


                                                                                                                                                               2. Aggravé



                                                                                                                                                                                 3. Amélioré
                                                                  N’oubliez pas que chaque constat comprend deux parties et exige
                                                                           deux réponses (l’une à gauche et l’autre à droit)


           Les défis suivants se                                                                                                             Apres 2012 est-ce que la
          passent-ils avec quelle                                                                                                            fréquence de ces défis a
               fréquence?                                                                                                                           changé?
                                                                 18. La coordination entre les acteurs de gestion de l’école est faible
           O                     O                 O                                                                                            O                 O                 O
                                                                 pour répondre aux urgences
                                                                 19. Les services sociaux de base (santé, eau, électricité, etc.) sont
           O                     O                 O                                                                                            O                 O                 O
                                                                 affectés par la crise.
                                                                 20. Les services éducatifs – écoles, instituts de formation et de suivi,
           O                     O                 O                                                                                            O                 O                 O
                                                                 administrations scolaires – ont été fermés suite à la crise

                         Disponibilité?                                LES SOURCES DE SOUTIEN – LES CHOSES QUI M’AIDENT                                    Importance?
        1. Pas du tout



                              2. Quelquefois



                                               3. Disponible




                                                                                                                                            d’importance
                                                                                                                                            1. Peu


                                                                                                                                                               2. Importance


                                                                                                                                                                               d’importance
                                                                                                                                                                               3. Beaucoup
                                                                  N’oubliez pas que chaque constat comprend deux parties et exige
                                                                           deux réponses (l’une à gauche et l’autre à droit)


       Quelle est la disponibilité                                                                                                           Jusqu’à quel niveau est-il
      de ces sources d’appui dans                                                                                                              important pour vous?
          votre communauté?
         O          O         O                                  30. La mobilisation communautaire autour et aux services de l’école            O                 O                 O
         O          O         O                                  31. Les enseignants déplacés sont redéployés par le Ministère                  O                 O                 O
         O          O         O                                  32. Les enseignants sont formés en appui psycho-social                         O                 O                 O
         O          O         O                                  33. Le plan d’action de l’école prend en compte la situation d’urgence         O                 O                 O
         O          O         O                                  34. La cantine scolaire est fonctionnelle                                      O                 O                 O

 84   										                                                                                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                                                                      MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT

                       Disponibilité?                            LES SOURCES DE SOUTIEN – LES CHOSES QUI M’AIDENT                               Importance?
      1. Pas du tout



                            2. Quelquefois



                                             3. Disponible




                                                                                                                                 d’importance
                                                                                                                                 1. Peu


                                                                                                                                                    2. Importance


                                                                                                                                                                    d’importance
                                                                                                                                                                    3. Beaucoup
                                                             N’oubliez pas que chaque constat comprend deux parties et exige
                                                                      deux réponses (l’une à gauche et l’autre à droit)


     Quelle est la disponibilité                                                                                                  Jusqu’à quel niveau est-il
    de ces sources d’appui dans                                                                                                     important pour vous?
        votre communauté?
       O          O         O    35. La banque de céréales est fonctionnelle                                                         O                 O                O
       O          O         O    36. La communauté dispose d’activités génératrices de revenus                                       O                 O                O

   Y’a-t-il d’autres défis dont on n’a pas déjà fait mention ? Si oui veuillez les lister ici
   ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
   ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

   Y’a-t-il d’autres sources de soutien dont on n’a pas déjà fait mention ? Si oui veuillez les lister ici
   ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
   ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								                                                                       	      					                                                   85
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			   		




 86   										                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                           MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT




EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)								   	   					                         87
MALI | EDUCATION RESILIENCE REPORT			   		




                                 The World Bank
                                1818 H Street, NW
                       Washington DC 20433 USA
            www.worldbank.org/education/resilience
 88   										EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
               educationresilience@worldbank.org
