                                            93293
                                           RES-Research
                         Resilience in Education Systems
                             Syrian Refugees in Lebanon


        The Resilience of Syrian Refugee
                    Children in Lebanon:
What do they need to acquire quality education?
                                           RES-Research
                         Resilience in Education Systems
                             Syrian Refugees in Lebanon


        The Resilience of Syrian Refugee
                    Children in Lebanon:
What do they need to acquire quality education?
                               Oula ABU-AMSHA, Ph.D.



                        Research conducted at
          Jusoor Non-Formal Education Centre - Beirut, Lebanon




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the Education Resilience Approaches
program team, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			              		




      Photos: © Courtesy of Jusoor Non-Formal Education Centre.

 6   	 EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Acknowledgments
 The support of the World Bank’s Education Resilience team, Jo Kelcey and Joel Reyes, for my
 desire to help Syrian children was decisive to the initiation and the evolution of this study. In
 addition, the work could not have been done without the full support and collaboration of
 Jusoor’s team in Beirut, namely: Hiba Ammar, Hani Jessri, Mahmoud Khalil, Suha Tutunji and all
 the great volunteers and the smart children. I hope this study will be of real benefit to all of them.
 My thoughts are also with the Basmeh & Zeitouneh team that is achieving a great work, especially
 the combatant mother and educator Siham Abu Sitta.

 I also thank Donna Mertens and Michael Ungar for the insightful discussions and advice that
 helped me conceive a deeper understanding of my first social study research.




		                                                               EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    7
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      Contents
      About the RES-Research Studies Series						                                                      9
      Executive Summary 									                                                                     10
      Introduction 									                      	                                                   12
      I.I Limitations of the study									                                                           13
      I.II Context of adversity and desirable outcomes	 					                                         13
      II. Theoretical Background							                                                               16
      II.I Objectives of the framework								                                                        17
      II.II Framework methodology								                       	                                     17
      II.III Design steps of a Mixed-Method Research study					                                       18
      III. Design of the Study									                                                               18
      III.I Population at risk										                                                              18
      III.II Research questions								         	                                                     18
      III.III Sample											                                                                       19
      III.IV Data collection methods									                                                         20
      III.V Analysis stages 										                                                                21
      III.VI Participation and ethics	 								                                                       21
      IV. Findings and Analysis									                                                              22
      IV.I The harmful mix										                                                                  28
      IV.II Parents’ role: An asset or a risk?								                                                28
      IV.III The violence issue									                                                              29
      IV.IV School dropout issue									                                                             30
      IV.V Girls versus boys										                                                                32
      IV.VI The effect of nostalgia									                                                          32
      IV.VII How Lebanese teachers work with Syrian students					                                     32
      IV.VIII How Syrian students relate with peers							                                            34
      IV.IX Interaction with the Syrian education system						                                        35
      IV.X Interaction with the Lebanese educational system 					                                     35
      IV.XI The lack of interaction between the school and the Syrian community		                     35
      IV.XII A major asset: The socio-emotional support role of Jusoor and other Syrian-run centres   36
      IV.XIII Negative outcomes to be treated							                                                  38
      V. Recommendations for Practice and Policy				                                                  39
      V.I Immediate actions to help children							                                                   39
      V.II Immediate actions to help parents							                                                   40
      V.III Immediate actions to help Syrian volunteer teachers					                                  40
      V.IV A resilience-fostering school operates with both Syrian and Lebanese teachers	             41
      VI. Conclusion	   								                                                                      42
      References 									                          		                                                44
      Annex A. Interview guides							                                                                46
      Annex B. Complete list of original codes					                                                   50
      Annex C. Questionnaire template 							                                                         57

 8   	 EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 About the RES-Research Studies Series
 Development practitioners in fragile and conflict-affected contexts are demanding better
 support for research, evaluation and assessments: this can range from conducting an exploratory
 needs assessment for an emergency intervention, monitoring and evaluating ongoing project
 impact, or building the evidence base to design a reconstruction or post-conflict program. In
 contexts of overwhelming adversity it is crucial not only to get reliable and valid data but to
 also ensure that we are going about this data collection in the right way. Doing research “right”
 in these contexts requires asking the right questions, talking to the relevant participants and
 stakeholders, using the most pertinent methods, and paying particular attention to ethics and
 power differentials.

 To address these concerns, the ERA Program developed the Resilience in Education Settings
 (RES)-Research training module. The training is specifically targeted for researchers
                                         living in context of conflict, violence and other
   As with all SABER tools, the RES-     adversities. It brings together resilience theory and a
   Research training module is openly    transformative research paradigm. Resilience theory
   available for education practitioners seeks to understand the process by which individuals,
   within the World Bank, as well as     communities and organizations recover from crisis,
   other agencies. The module consists   continue to perform in the midst of adversities and
   of a research manual and handouts,    even radically change to prevent future risk exposure
   power point presentations and         and continue their development process (Reyes
   additional guidance materials.        2013). The transformative research paradigm provides
   If you are interested in using this   methodological guidance to conduct studies with
   tool please contact the ERA team      vulnerable populations, while recognizing both their
   for the appropriate resources:        exposure to overwhelming threats but also their assets
   educationresilience@worldbank.org     such as strengths, opportunities and available services
                                         (Mertens 2009).

 Through a nine-month training program, RES-Research builds on the capacities of academics
 and education practitioners in fragile, conflict and violence-affected contexts to undertake
 locally relevant and rigorous education resilience research. First piloted in Central America, the
 training program was improved and recently implemented in the South Asia region as part of a
 multi-donor trust fund for the Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) initiative
 supported by DfID-UKAID, DFAT-Australian AID and the World Bank.

 This study is the product of one of the researchers who attended the nine-month RES- Research
 training. It provides valuable contributions to our on-going understanding of resilience in
 education settings in difficult context.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   9
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                            		


      Executive Summary
      Since the beginning of the turmoil in Syria, more than one million Syrians have been forced to leave
      their country and find refuge in Lebanon, a small neighbouring country with limited resources and
      its own political, social and economic challenges. This report presents the findings of a pilot study
      that follows the Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) framework (Reyes 2013). The purpose of
      the research is to discover the different risks, assets, and processes that influence the learning
      achievement of Syrian refugee children trying to access education services in Lebanon. The main
      research was conducted at Jusoor’s1 non-formal education centre in Beirut.

      The difficulties that confront Syrian children in the Lebanese educational system are not simply
      due to the difference in languages of instruction as it seems to be at a first glance. Although
      the language barrier is clearly recognized by all the stakeholders, this study reveals how many
      children could overcome this barrier through traditional and simple means such as extracurricular
      language instruction and proper support.

      In addition, there are difficulties that have more structural reasons related to deeply entrenched
      characteristics of the Syrian society, and such difficulties are usually not taken into account in
      traditional refugee education programs.

      For instance, this study indicates that Syrian parents from originally lower socio-economic classes
      have less access to provide means of support to their children. Their children seem to have
      experienced more violence (due to the war in Syria or potentially violence in their own families),
      and are more sensitive to discrimination. These combined risks make these children less resilient
      and push them to drop out of school. In such cases, offering language instruction adapted to the
      Syrian students’ needs is not enough to retain these children at school. An awareness and support
      program that involves the parents might have more positive impact on children’s retention.

      This study also reveals that the feelings of discrimination and exclusion felt by Lebanese peers
      are often the result of individual and communal apprehension and not necessarily the result
      of real incidents (except minor ones). This indicates that programs involving both Syrian and
      Lebanese peers could work well and might help the Syrian children to adapt at school and give a
      good feeling of responsibility and inclusion to their Lebanese peers. This is especially true as the
      Lebanese children who go to public schools come also from the most vulnerable socio-economic
      classes in the Lebanese society and they share many of the same risks as their Syrian peers.

      On the other hand, Syrian adults and children relate cases of mistreatment and discrimination
      from school staff and teachers. This also reveals the lack of proper training as most studies indicate
      that most of the Lebanese teachers and staff have not received any special training to deal with
      the massive arrival in their schools of Syrian children with special educational and psychological
      needs. In fact, the Lebanese educational system needed restructuring (Lebanon, Ministry of
      Education and Higher Education 2010) even before the spill over of the Syrian crisis. The massive
      arrival of refugees resulted in an upheaval that the educational system does not have the inner
      resources to absorb properly.

      1	        Jusoor is an NGO established by the Syrian diaspora in 2012. Jusoor runs among other activities oriented toward the
      Syrian youth, an aspiring refugee education program (Jusoor 2014).


 10   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 According to the education resilience framework (Reyes 2013), the study is not limited to a risk
 assessment. I try to understand the reasons behind each risk and the relationships between
 different risks. I also try to discover related assets of these children and the social ecology around
 them. The main assets that educational programs can build upon lie in the support that the Syrian
 diaspora provides to children in Syrian-run non-formal education centers. Besides education,
 Syrian volunteers in these centers offer refugee children much needed affection and psycho-social
 support in addition to limited financial support in some cases. At present, the Lebanese public
 education system does not make any space for Syrian educator to participate in the education of
 Syrian refugee children. The study indicates that the intervention of the Syrian diaspora will have
 positive impact on the children as Syrian teachers could provide them with emotional support
 and they are more able to define their educational needs.

 Hopefully, this study offers a better understanding of risks and assets to inform future educational
 programs and to better help Syrian children acquire quality education while they are living the
 difficult experience of being refugees.

  




		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     11
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                            		


      I. Introduction
      Syrian refugee children who had the chance to access education in Lebanon have faced many
      difficulties that pushed many of them to abandon school. This research, conducted at Jusoor’s
      non-formal education centre in Beirut, follows the Education Resilience Approaches (ERA)
      framework (Reyes 2013), and tries to discover and understand the different factors that influence
      the achievement of Syrian refugee children enrolled in Lebanese schools.

      The main purpose of resilience research is usually to explore the processes and assets that help
      people in acute adversity to better cope and overcome the effects of crisis. Resilience was initially
      defined by many researchers as the set of “individual” qualities that foster a process of successful
      adaptation and transformation despite risk and adversity (Benard 1995). Later, researchers
      proved that resilience is not only an individual process or set of characteristics, and that it is very
      influenced by the social ecology surrounding the individuals (Ungar 2011).

      This pilot study confirms once again the impact of the social ecology on the education resilience
      of the children, as it sheds a light on the unfortunate limitations of the original socio-economical
      background of the family on the refugee children’s coping processes at the Lebanese school.

      On the other hand, experts inform that offering adequate help and resources makes the children
      more resilient (Zimmerman, et al. 2013). Hence, it is essential to specify the adequate processes
      and resources that Syrian children and their families need to acquire a quality education while
      they are living in acute adversity as refugees in many neighbouring countries.

      The work is also based on a principle of the transformative paradigm (Mertens 2010) that states
      that before any attempts are made to change a situation, it is important to first understand it and
      understand the reasons underlying its existence. In addition, the researcher must not assume
      any version of reality, instead he has to discover and understand the real version adopted by the
      population in need of help. Furthermore, the transformative paradigm facilitates the application
      of the research findings to the design of future programs in order to better serve the targeted
      population.

      It should be noted that this research is only a pilot study limited to qualitative research according
      to the ERA framework. Nevertheless, the research helps reveal the complexity of the situation,
      and detects some hidden structural risks that have the greatest influence on the achievement of
      the children.

      The report is intentionally a mix of description of the formal methodology and a narrative of the
      experience and the findings of the specific study. As the human context is very meaningful to the
      researcher, Jusoor’s team and volunteers, it is desirable that the report be of help to other local
      researchers applying the ERA framework in future related studies.

      The following subsection presents a limited perspective of the context of adversity that Syrian
      refugee children are facing in Lebanon. The children are facing many risks and difficulties, but
      this pilot study is limited to the risks hindering their education. The presentation of the context
      of adversity is followed by a brief presentation of the methodology. Chapter 3 presents the study
      design details according to the ERA framework, then, Chapter 4 is dedicated to a conceptual

 12   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                         		                        RES-RESEARCH | 2014




 framework that summarizes the findings, followed by more detailed analysis of the most striking
 findings supported by stories and narratives. The analysis is followed by a proposal of possible
 direct actions on the ground and recommendations for institutional and policy level interventions.
 The conclusion contains reflections on this pilot study and recommendations to complement it
 with further study using a quantitative research plan inspired by its main findings.

 I.I Limitations of the study
 It should be noted that this study is only a pilot and it does not have an exhaustive research cycle
 nor scope. Notably:
     •	 I depart from a conviction of the right of education to all, but I don’t discuss whether the
        integration of Syrian children in the Lebanese schools is the best solution or not.
     •	 The study focuses on children who have access to schooling opportunities. It does not
        address the factors that prevent the majority of Syrian children from accessing education.2
     •	 The study is only qualitatively based on one case study through focus groups and interviews.
     •	 No focus group with Syrian parents was run.
     •	 The social ecology circles that are considered in the study are solely those that have direct
        contact with the children: the family, the community, and the school. The impact of high-
        level policies is not discussed.
     •	 The study revealed mostly risks as the situation of Syrian refugees in the region is one of
        acute adversity and instability. According to the resilience framework, assets must exist,
        hence, a subsequent study should be dedicated to better analyse the assets that mainly
        exist in refugee relief structures run by the Syrian diaspora.
     •	 More globally, a quantitative phase should be conducted in order to confirm and evaluate
        in a larger community the extent of the findings of the present study. A plan for this
        quantitative phase is suggested here for further research.

 I.II Context of adversity and desirable outcomes
 Since April 2014, the number of registered Syrian refugees in Lebanon has surpassed one million
 refugees. However, the real number of refugees is even higher as not all Syrians living in Lebanon
 are registered as refugees and as the flow of people fleeing Syria to Lebanon continues. This
 means that refugees represent more than 25 per cent of the Lebanese population (UNHCR-UK
 2014). More than half of these refugees are children, and about 400,000 are of school age.

 In addition to the obvious lack of access to education services due to the huge number of potential
 students,3 Syrian children who had the chance to go to school have confronted a language barrier,

 2	        A recent study reveals great differences in life conditions among Syrian refugees depending on the geographic regions
 (Van Vliet and Hourani 2014). These differences logically apply to the children’s access to education.
 3	        The number of Lebanese students is estimated to be one million students, 70 percent of which are schooled in private


		                                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)               13
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                              		


      as the Lebanese curriculum is developed in English or in French and Arabic takes a limited place.
      On the contrary, foreign languages in Syria were historically not adequately supported. Language
      instruction in Syrian public schools remains limited and lacks the appropriate practice.4

      Although Lebanon is a neighbouring country that shares a common history, cultural heritage and
      language with Syria, the people in the two countries evolved differently over the last seventy
      years. The differences are due to difficult economic and political circumstances that are out of the
      scope of this study, but it matters to know that Syrian people tend to live in a closed environment
      where the most influential social unit is limited to the family, especially in lower socio-economic
      communities. Even in big cities, people prefer to socialize in small homogeneous communities
      who share ethnic, religious, or regional characteristics.

      On the other hand, Lebanese people live in an open and more heterogeneous environment. An
      important part of the population lived abroad for several years, mainly during the Lebanese civil
      war.

      Another critical difference is that Syrian people were used to relying on public services, mainly
      in education, health and infrastructure, although there were large discrepancies between rural
      and city areas. In the case of Lebanon, since the Lebanese civil war people have learned to cope
      individually even for basic needs as electricity and water.

      These social differences are translated into big differences between the educational systems in
      both countries, and mainly in the expectations parents have of the education system. Lebanese
      parents mostly trust private schools and are struggling individually to plan and finance the
      education for their children. On the contrary, Syrian parents were used to benefitting from free
      public education services that were mostly available to everyone. As a counterpart, education
      quality issues were not really a concern in Syria and there was limited involvement of parents
      from lower socio-economic levels in the education of their children.

      This study reveals that the differences between the two societies make it difficult for the Syrian
      refugees and their children to adapt to the new (and unexpectedly different) environment.5 They
      also represent a risk for the education of Syrian children from lower socio-economic communities
      as they face many difficulties in understanding how the Lebanese education system functions.

      This hidden risk is in addition to the other known risks that face any population fleeing civil war,
      such as trauma, lack of resources, instability, etc. These risks also hinder the access of Syrian
      children to education. In addition, the Lebanese public education system that is supposed to host
      these children already suffers from many long-dated difficulties as it nearly collapsed during the
      Lebanese civil war (Zakharia 2004). The Lebanese public education system lacks resources and
      demand from Lebanese parents as it is surpassed by the private system that absorbs about 70
      percent of the students in the country (Le Commerce du Levant 2013).


      schools (Le Commerce du Levant 2013).
      4	        A young boy during an interview for this study stated: “In Syria, even English was taught in Arabic”.
      5	        This shock due to a transition from a closed to an open environment could not be an issue in the rural regions of Leb-
      anon. This pilot study was conducted in Beirut and its suburbs and this specific issue was revealed through the discussion with
      Lebanese teachers in contact with Syrian students.


 14   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                    		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Despite the difficulties facing the Lebanese public education system, the Lebanese Ministry
 of Education and Higher Education (MEHE), with the support of the UNHCR, allowed for the
 enrolment of close to 90,000 refugee children in public schools (UNHCR 2014) during the 2013/14
 school year. More than 30,000 of these children were enrolled in a second teaching shift that
 delivers a lighter certified curriculum for Syrian students with Arabic as the main language of
 instruction.

 Another 5,000 children also attend non-formal education programmes. UNHCR resources reach
 34 schools and 15 community centres that run such programs.

 The Syrian NGO Jusoor (Jusoor 2014) runs one of these non-formal education centres in Beirut.
 (This centre will be referred to in the rest of the report as “Jusoor’s school”). Young Syrian
 volunteers provide Syrian children with non-formal education and after-school support in order
 to prepare them to integrate Lebanese public and private schools. Children also receive some
 food for lunch and psycho-social support through an NGO called “Alwan” (colours). From October
 2013 and until January 2014, many children at Jusoor’s school had access to the first or second
 shift in Lebanese schools. However, many of them abandoned the formal school and preferred to
 return to Jusoor School.

 Jusoor’s objective is to help Syrian children adapt to Lebanese schools, but the children were
 confronted with many difficulties, including the language barrier and violence and mistreatment
 at school. The fact that many abandoned the Lebanese school was a compelling question that
 this pilot study tried to address.




		                                                         EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   15
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                           		


      II. Theoretical Background
      This chapter is dedicated to a brief presentation of the theoretical foundations of the ERA
      framework and its main parts. The content is directly inspired (and in some parts, quoted) from
      different publications of the World Bank series: Education Resilience Approaches, and mainly
      Reyes (2013).

      Violence, conflict and other contexts of adversity present significant challenges to education
      systems in countries facing adversity. The impacts of pervasive violence and conflict are especially
      felt by the poor and traditionally vulnerable communities. However, research and practice in
      situations of adversity have also highlighted that education can protect vulnerable children and
      youth by providing them with an appropriate environment to nurture their psychosocial well-
      being and ensure them a better future. The ERA framework, applied in this study, focuses on the
      education system level features that can support the pursuit of positive learning outcomes in
      adversity.

      For more than 40 years, resilience studies tried to understand the capacity of human beings (and
      the social ecology circles that surround them, such as families, communities and institutions)
      to recover from crises, to continue to perform in spite of adversities and to transform positively
      (Ungar, Ghazinour and Richte 2013).

      Ungar (M. Ungar 2011) defines resilience as both the individual’s capacity to navigate to needed
      resources (such as food, education or health care), and the capacity of the individual’s social
      ecology (family, community and institutions, see Figure 1) to provide these resources in culturally
      meaningful ways. Hence resilience is no longer seen as a special trait of only few distinguished
      individuals. Resilience occurs ordinarily in the interactions between people facing adversity as the
      need to develop competence and skills to overcome the negative effects of adversity appears,
      and to find access to needed resources.

      Studies (Martin-Breen and Marty Anderies 2011) also show that the development of a resilient
      behaviour of individuals facing acute adversity needs proper programs and actions. Leaving
      people in need of help without any support will perpetrate their suffering and exaggerate the
      impacts of adversity.

      From this perspective, to design programs and actions to help at-risk populations, it is of great
      importance to consider a specific positive outcome, (such as learning, health, community
      cohesion, etc.), a proper understanding both of the risks that face a specific population at risk, and
      of the assets that help to protect from the effect of these risks and develop a resilient behaviour.

      Certainly, many studies (Reyes 2013) identify schools and teachers as important contributors to
      resilience in children, adolescents and youth. Resilience can be further promoted through the
      provision of relevant and quality services that foster the interactions among students, teachers
      and parents to address both learning and well-being.




 16   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                          Figure 1
                          Social Ecology Circles that Surround Youth




 While the forms of adversities—especially of violence and conflict—differ greatly from one country
 to another, by applying resilience theory, the ERA framework focuses on learning outcomes and
 on the relevance and quality of education services in situations of pervasive adversity across
 varied contexts. ERA offers a flexible diagnostic and research tools, firstly to gather evidence of
 this process within a particular context (specifically risks and assets) and then to furnish general
 lessons learned and grounded meaningful recommendations.

 II.I Objectives of the framework
 The ERA framework employs a resilience lens to understand learning in contexts of adversity.
 It does so by identifying the risks as well as assets present in education communities through a
 process of data collection and analysis at a local level on the relevance of education services in
 contexts of adversity. The aim is to align those assets with existing education services and support
 on different socio ecology levels: institutional, community, family and individual.

 II.II Framework methodology
 To effectively capture the complexity of the resilience processes, ERA relies on the collection
 of qualitative and quantitative data, known as mixed-method data. A well designed and well
 implemented mixed-method approach offers the advantages of combining the strengths of
 qualitative and quantitative data approaches to provide more comprehensive and contextualized
 evidence. Notably, qualitative phases help to understand the context and setting where the
 research takes place; probe into the complexity of factors, processes and inter-relations; and,
 give voice to the participants. Quantitative phases allow for larger generalizable samples and
 identifying, isolating and correlating factors and determinants related to a particular phenomenon
 (Creswell 2009).

		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     17
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      Mixed methods research is usually designed into sequential, concurrent or cyclical patterns:
          •	 A sequential design can be a sequence of a qualitative phase followed by a quantitative
             phase (or vice versa)
          •	 A concurrent design arranges to conduct qualitative and quantitative methods at the
             same time
          •	 Cyclical designs reiterate cycles of mixed-method research (MMR) studies across time to
             deepen knowledge and evidence.

      This pilot study represents a first qualitative. A second quantitative phase is recommended to
      measure the extent of the different risks and assets discovered through the first phase.

      II.III Design steps of a Mixed-Method Research study
      MMR study should go through the following steps:
          •	 Define a central research question
          •	 Ask a limited number of operational questions related to the framework
          •	 Decide on the phases (qualitative/quantitative) and the pattern of the study
          •	 Design the sampling scheme for each phase
          •	 Create a local advisory committee (LAC)
          •	 Select the samples and conduct the study with the LAC’s help
          •	 Apply relevant tools for analysis and interpretation
          •	 Offer conclusions, proposals and feedback to the community
          •	 Disseminate the findings and the recommendations


      III. Design of the Study
      III.I Population at risk
      The study focuses on Syrian refugee children in Lebanon who frequent a non-formal education
      centre, who had access to Lebanese public schools and who have continued to attend school or
      dropped out.

      III.II Research questions
      After discussions, Jusoor’s team agreed with the necessity of exploring the factors and processes
      that help Syrian students receiving non-formal education make the transition to (public or private)
      Lebanese schools, and the role of the non-formal education center in the academic success of
      these students in the Lebanese schools.
      The Research Sub-Questions that are induced from this target question are:
          •	 What processes and factors help Syrian refugee students adapt better to living and
             studying in Lebanon and its schools?
          •	 What difficulties do Syrian students experience in Lebanese schools?

 18   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


      •	 How can refugee education programs (or specifically non-formal education programs)
         support Syrian children and youth to adapt and perform well in Lebanese schools?
 Initially, the stakeholders of this study were aware of few factors and outcomes depicted in Table
 1, showing the researcher’s assumptions. Nevertheless, the theoretical foundations of the ERA
 framework, specifically the “transformative paradigm” (Mertens 2009), recommend to design
 the study in order to discover the real context as lived and expressed by the targeted population
 itself and the social ecology circles in interaction with it. The conceptual framework presented
 in Chapter 4 below includes the main factors as expressed by participants from the population.
 Some factors from Table 1 below appear explicitly in the framework while others seem to have less
 relevance to the participants than initially thought.
                                                   Table 1
                                            Initial assumptions

                                         Population at risk:
          Syrian students studying in Lebanese public schools or who have dropped out
          Risk factors        Protective processes              Assets                   Outcomes
     •	   Language barrier    •	   Teachers’ support    •	   Peer relations /       •	   Learning
                                   to Syrian students        support                     assessment
     •	   Tensions between
                                                                                         outcomes
          Syrians and                                   •	   After school classes
                                                                                         (Lebanese national
          Lebanese                                           for Syrian students
                                                                                         tests)
     •	   Lack of financial                             •	   Extra-curricular
                                                                                    •	   Enrolment rates
          and material                                       activities (e.g.
          means                                              NGOs, religious        •	   Dropout levels
                                                             communities or
     •	   Displacement
                                                             other civil society
          experience
                                                             efforts)


 The following sections detail the selected samples and research methodology employed in this
 study.

 III.III Sample
 This pilot study is limited to qualitative research built on purposeful focus groups and supplemented
 with a few interviews. In order to confirm the findings of this research, a second quantitative phase
 is recommended. A few suggestions for the design of the quantitative phase are discussed in the
 conclusion.
 The study is based on the analysis of discussions with three focus groups and ? interviews with
 school amdministrators, teachers and volunteers:
      •	 A focus group with Syrian students who have transferred to Lebanese Schools and are
         coping well
      •	 A focus group with Syrian Students who entered Lebanese schools but have returned to
         non-formal programs
      •	 A focus group with teachers or facilitators at a non-formal education centre
      •	 Interviews with a few Lebanese teachers working with Syrian children.

		                                                                 EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      19
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                          		

      The interviews with both Syrian volunteers and Lebanese teachers revealed that the Syrian
      family itself experiences important risks that limit its support to their children’s education; that
      is, families in adversity present an important source of risks. A focus group with the parents of
      children who abandoned the Lebanese schools could reveal their point of view and better help
      estimate the gravity of the risks noted by the teachers. Time limitations prevented from enriching
      this qualitative study with such an important source of information. An additional qualitative
      phase could be conducted in order to include parents in the research. Nevertheless, the present
      study includes some information extracted from informal discussions with few Syrian parents.
      These discussions were mainly useful to reveal the extent of discomfort in the interaction with
      the Lebanese school staff.

      III.IV Data collection methods
      Focus groups were run at Jusoor’s school. The school coordinator selected the children for both
      focus groups. Children who attend Lebanese schools continue going to Jusoor’s school for extra-
      curriculum support and potential help with homework on Fridays. Surprisingly, the participants in
      this focus group included mostly girls (ten girls out of twelve children).

      Most of the children who abandoned the Lebanese schools continue their education at Jusoor’s
      school four days a week. This focus group included mostly boys (ten boys out of twelve children).

      The discussion with the first children’s focus group lasted approximately 50 minutes and the
      children were well-disciplined and answered the questions in a well-behaved manner. The
      discussion with the second focus group lasted only 30 minutes, after which the children were
      no longer able to sit still. They were excited and all talking at the same time. They showed more
      emotive expressions especially when the discussion led to talk about mistreatment and physical
      punishment at school.

      A focus group was also run with the volunteers at Jusoor’s school. The coordinator invited the
      persons who knew the children for the longest period. The group was formed of six women of
      different ages and one young man. Only one teacher had been an English teacher in Syria, while
      the others had no prior teaching experience.

      The coordinator and an external person attended the discussions at Jusoor and took notes on the
      most important points. Intuitive discussions with the school coordinator and Jusoor’s educational
      program coordinator in Lebanon were also recorded and analyzed by the researcher. In addition,
      an interview with a Syrian teacher who taught older students at a Syrian school in Beirut was also
      recorded and analyzed. Related information to the context of this study was included in the codes
      and in the conceptual framework.

      The interview with the Lebanese school coordinator was held at a public school in the suburbs
      near Beirut. In the mornings the school hosts a high percentage of Syrian students since the
      beginning of the crisis in Syria, and in the afternoon the same school staff run a non-formal
      education program, funded by UNICEF, for out-of-school Syrian children. This interview was
      preceded by an informal discussion with a kindergarten assistant from the school to explain the
      purpose of the research and ask for contact with the school staff, as Lebanese school principals
      seemed to be skeptical and not keen to receive interviewers.

 20   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Annex A includes the interview guides for the different focus groups and interviews.

 III.V Analysis stages
 This study is built on open coding of the transcripts of all the recorded interviews and discussions
 (with the prior consent of the participants). A full listing of distinct concepts and categories were
 identified in the data. Initial codes were in Arabic as this language was more appropriate for
 expressing the different concepts. The codes were then classified, according to resilience theory,
 as risks, assets, positive and negative outcomes, and identified processes.

 During the classification process some relationships were detected and the most important ones
 are discussed in Chapter 4.

 Constructive discussions with the World Bank ERA team led to a conceptual framework that
 classifies the codes according to the concepts of the theory of resilience and according to different
 levels of the social ecology that surround the child: individual, family, Syrian community, and the
 different educational systems that a Syrian student interacts with: the Syrian education system,
 the Lebanese education system, and the non-formal education system.

 III.VI Participation and ethics
 The ERA framework promotes the forming of a local advisory committee. The different interview
 guides were discussed with the educational advisor and two volunteers at Jusoor’s school. The
 guides for the children’s focus groups were translated into Arabic and pre-tested with two children
 selected from the school for validation.

 Participants at Jusoor’s school, both adults and children, were very welcoming, answered the
 questions freely, and were ready to share their experiences.

 Some of the transcripts were shared with Jusoor’s young coordinator for a parallel coding.
 However she was too busy to code them and instead gave a few general comments.

 As explained earlier, access to the Lebanese school was more challenging, as there is a preconceived
 idea that Lebanese schools will not be open to such studies. This is due to circulating information
 that Syrian children suffer from mistreatment in some schools.

 At the end of the analysis, the framework and the complete list of initial codes were presented to
 volunteers from Jusoor for discussion and to stimulate grounded recommendations. The findings
 were also shared with the inter-agency information gathering initiative REACH (Reach Initiative
 2014) and influenced the design of a survey that was to be conducted in June 2014, in order to
 profile out-of-school Syrian children in Lebanon.




		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     21
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                          		


      IV. Findings and Analysis
      As mentioned above, the analysis of the transcripts followed an open coding approach. Multiple
      phases of classification followed, first according to the theory of resilience and then according to
      the ecological model presented by Ungar, Ghazinour and Richte 2013. The following framework is
      the final result. The exhaustive list of codes is attached in Annex B, which shows the original codes
      in Arabic as they better reflect the transcripts and are more meaningful to the main targeted
      readers.

      The final conceptual framework is separated into four tables summarizing the most important
      codes of risks, assets, outcomes and promotive processes. Each table classifies the items according
      to different levels of the social ecology surrounding the Syrian refugee children.

      Since Syrian refugees suffer from acute adversity, it is not surprising to discover that risks
      outnumber assets in the conceptual framework. Nevertheless, resilience theory indicates that
      there are always assets in the community that can be built upon to overcome the risks and help
      the community of interest to be more resilient and better performing to achieve the desired
      outcomes. Specifically, important assets exist in the non-formal education structures and other
      support programs run by Syrian volunteers. Subsection 4.13 discusses the socio-emotional
      support role of volunteers in contact with refugee children. This study reveals that the Syrian
      diaspora plays an important role in refugee relief and more specifically in education as they are
      more culturally aware of the social background of the refugees and are more committed to offer
      help and support. A dedicated study could be conducted to discover all these assets that the
      present pilot study could not reveal because of its numerous limitations.




 22   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                     		                     RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                                     Table 2
                                                 Code book - Risks

                                                    Pillar 1. Risks
               Level
                                          Type of risks                         Most recurrent risks
     (Social ecology sub-system)
      Individual                   Personal perceptions              Lack of confidence, introversion, fragility,
                                                                     lack of hope (no expectation for the future),
                                                                     personal wish to abandon school
                                   Maladaptive behaviours            Violence, asocial behaviour
                                   Adaptation difficulties           Girls adapt better than boys, young
                                                                     children adapt better than older peers,
                                                                     deep nostalgia, stigmatisation because of
                                                                     downgrading and grade repetition (two
                                                                     common practices in the Lebanese system
                                                                     rarely practiced in Syrian schools)
      Social (Family)6                                                  Pre-crisis
                                   Educational background            Uneducated parents /mothers
                                   Relations within the family       Violence in the family, lack of social and
                                                                     behavioural education

                                   Expectations of education         Low expectations of education, slackness
                                                                     about school, bad influence on the education
                                                                     of the children, student anxiety due to parent
                                                                     pressure
                                                                 Aggravated by the crisis
                                   Relations within the family       Lack of care and affection
                                   Resources                         Lack of resources, lower standard of living,
                                                                     child labour
                                                                     No long-term vision, permanent hope of an
                                   Instability
                                                                     imminent return

                                   Expectations from school          A place only to play, no big expectations as
                                                                     the situation is “temporary”
      Social (Community)                                                Pre-crisis
                                   Socio-economic status             Socio-economically disadvantaged groups
                                   Relations within the              Old social problems, no respect for women
                                   community                         (hence women teachers), early marriage (for
                                                                     both genders)

                                   Relations with the outside        The main social unit is the (extended) family,
                                                                     closed homogeneous communities (ethnic,
                                                                     religious, rural, and even urban…)




		                                                                         EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      23
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                    		


                                                       Pillar 1. Risks
                 Level
                                           Type of risks                         Most recurrent risks
       (Social ecology sub-system)
                                                                  Aggravated by the crisis
                                     Relations with the outside       Transition from closed Syrian society to more
                                                                      open Lebanese society, transition shock,
                                                                      “freedom is returned into chaos” (interview
                                                                      quote), circumscription and wariness against
                                                                      the Lebanese people7, hate, “I wish [the war]
                                                                      stops in Syria and starts here [in Lebanon]”,
                                                                      “I wish I could go back to Syria, and when
                                                                      Lebanese people come as refugees I could
                                                                      mistreat them” (interview quotes)
        Education system             Teaching methods                 Arabic is the language of instruction,
        (Syria)                                                       limited English language teaching,
                                                                      recitation, memorization, no critical thinking
                                                                      development; Non-skilled teachers
                                     Learning difficulties            Poor English teaching, children lack the basics

                                     Slack educational system         Tolerance for absenteeism, “automatic
                                                                      promotion”, lack of teacher commitment
                                                                      and accountability, insufficient training of
                                                                      teachers, big gap between urban and rural
                                                                      regions
        Education system                                            School environment
        (Lebanon)                    Personal perceptions at          Feeling of rejection and hate, mistreatment,
                                     school                           attachment to Syrians
                                     Peer perception at school        Arrogance, violence, rejection, lack of
                                                                      confidence due to political polarization
                                     Relations with adults at         Verbal and physical violence, mistreatment,
                                     school                           neglect, lack of confidence due to political
                                                                      polarization, staff weariness
                                                        Risks related to educating Syrian children
                                     Pre-existing problems            Lack of resources and interest, public
                                                                      school is mainly for vulnerable communities
                                                                      (schools only 30 percent Lebanese
                                                                      children), insufficiently trained teachers, low
                                                                      qualifications, high grade repetition rate,
                                                                      high dropout rates even among Lebanese
                                                                      students8
                                     Organization difficulties
                                                                      Same teachers for both shifts (exhausted
                                                                      teachers)
                                     Learning difficulties
                                                                      Language barrier, interruption of schooling,
                                                                      disappointment due to downgrading,
                                                                      absenteeism
                                     Classroom environment
                                                                      Overcrowded classes, different ages and skills
                                                                      gathered
                                     Non-adaptive teaching
                                     methods                          Different language of instruction, no special
                                                                      training for teachers9


 24   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                      		                       RES-RESEARCH | 2014


                                                       Pillar 1. Risks
               Level
                                         Type of risks                           Most recurrent risks
     (Social ecology sub-system)
                                   Teaching difficulties             Big differences in curricula, difficulties of
                                                                     mixed classes of Lebanese and Syrians,
                                                                     no commitment to teach classes with
                                                                     Syrian majority, fed up with the different
                                                                     expectations of Syrians
                                   Non-formal education              Overcrowded classrooms, children come
                                   programs                          from the most disadvantaged communities,
                                                                     misuse of resources, uncommitted teachers



      Non-formal Education         Classroom related                 Overcrowded classrooms with many different
      Run by Volunteers                                              levels and different ages, children come
                                                                     mainly from disadvantaged communities,
                                                                     lack of discipline, violence among peers

                                   Teacher related                   Insufficient number of inexperienced
                                                                     teachers, no long-term commitment, too
                                                                     many staffing changes, need for educational
                                                                     adviser
                                   Education-system related          Differences between Syrian and Lebanese
                                                                     systems, lack of knowledge about the
                                                                     Lebanese curriculum, no follow up of children
                                                                     in the Lebanese schools


                                                       Table 3
                                                  Code book - Assets

                                                    Pillar 2. Assets
               Level
                                        Type of assets                         Most recurrent assets
     (Social ecology sub-system)
      Individual                   Intelligence                      Mature children, clever and full of enthusiasm,
                                                                     eager to go to school, autonomous, tailored
                                                                     attention is fruitful, children are responsive to
                                                                     encouragement and stimulation, individual
                                                                     attention improves outcomes

                                   School purpose                    A student with a clear goal struggles more, a
                                                                     student who is aware of the challenges better
                                                                     withstands pressure and mistreatment
                                   Adaptation skills                 Taking the first step towards Lebanese peers,
                                                                     responsiveness to the change
                                   Gender                            Girls cope better than boys10
                                   Younger age                       Young children cope better than older ones




		                                                                          EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)        25
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                    		


                                                        Pillar 2. Assets
                 Level
                                         Type of assets                        Most recurrent assets
       (Social ecology sub-system)
        Social (Family)              Parents’ relationship with       Eager to communicate with the school
                                     school
                                     Parents’ support of learning     Willing to educate their children, understand
                                                                      the reasons behind downgrading, help the
                                                                      children, provide private lessons
        Social (Community)           Relations with the outside       Openness and adaptability accelerate
                                                                      evolution
        Education (Syria)            Diaspora efforts                 Syrian-run schools in Lebanon, Syrian teachers
                                                                      more familiar with the needs of Syrian children

                                     Interaction with teachers        Some Lebanese teachers have sympathy
                                                                      and understanding for the Syrian children
                                     Curriculum                       Impression of better teaching in Lebanon
        Non-formal education         Children’s perceptions           Children are emotionally attached to their
        based on volunteers                                           teachers; children prefer the non-formal
                                                                      education school to the Lebanese school, a
                                                                      strong feeling of belonging

                                     Volunteers’ perceptions          Volunteers and children help each other
                                                                      to withstand and overcome difficulties, the
                                                                      feeling of responsibility makes the volunteers
                                                                      do their best, volunteers are ready to follow
                                                                      up with the children in the Lebanese schools
                                                                      Positive thinking (they hope education in Syria
                                                                      will benefit from the crisis)

                                                   Table 4
                                       Code book - Desirable Outocomes

                                              Pillar 3. Desirable Outcomes
                 Level
                                       Type of outcome                                 Example
       (Social ecology sub-system)
        Lebanon education            Access                           Staying at the Lebanese school
        system                       Well-being                       Adapting to school and the Lebanese society
                                     Learning                         Achieving progress at school, learn English
                                                                      better

        Syrian education             Continuation of studies          Understand why children must not be
        system                       (upon return)                    upgraded automatically
                                     Education system quality         Learning from the Lebanese experience
                                     Minimize clientelism             Changing the expectations from the
                                                                      educational system




 26   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                             		                         RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                                      Table 5678910
                                                 Code book - Processes

                    Pillar 4. Assets that Promote Desirable Educational Outcomes
               Level
                                    Type of process                    Example
     (Social ecology sub-system)
      Individual                     Peer-to-peer learning                 Jusoor teachers solicit peers’ help in class;
                                                                           Siblings help at home

                                     Language skills                       Summer courses

                                     Parents’ support                      Parents help with homework, Parents pay
                                                                           private lessons
                                     Lebanese education                    After-school support sessions, teachers offer
                                     system’s support                      extra help at school
      Social (Family)                School-community                      Set regular communication with parents
                                     structures
                                     Training of parents (parent           Define awareness programs for parents;
                                     schools)                              Language courses for parents
      Social (Community)             Family services                       Inform parents about the school’s
                                                                           expectations

                                     Volunteerism by displaced             Private lessons (free or at low cost) and after-
                                     upper class Syrians                   school support are offered by Lebanese and
                                                                           Syrian people in the community
      Education system               Diaspora                              Opening of schools for Syrians with Syrian
      (Syria)                                                              teachers
                                                                           Training of Syrian teachers
                                                                           Language courses for teachers
      Education system               Transitional programs                 Second shift open and dedicated to Syrians
      (Lebanon)                                                            (Arabic is the language of instruction);
                                                                           Adaptation classes
                                     Language courses                      Summer courses
      Non-formal education                                                 Jusoor offers English, math and Arabic
      run by volunteers                                                    teaching
                                                                           Jusoor volunteers help with homework

 This conceptual framework is only a means to summarize the findings of the different formal
 interviews and focus group discussions as well as many informal discussions with Syrian teachers,
 parents and children. In the following subsections, I try to provide deeper insight into the most

 6	           Note that no clear gender issue was detected through the interviews. In fact, as used to be the case in Syria before the
 crisis, girls could be disadvantaged because of early marriage, but boys could also be disadvantaged due to child labour.
 7	           Harb and Saab 2014.
 8	           The Lebanese MEHE estimates the rate of dropout to be 25 percent among children before grade 9. See, Le Commerce
 du Levant, Décrochage scolaire: l’école à la rue ? (2013).
 9	           As told by the Lebanese school principal and confirmed by an NRC survey conducted in the North of Lebanon (NRC
 2013).
 10	          This observation is explained by the fact that girls are more accustomed to mistreatment, and usually their reaction
 is not violent (low profile). This helps them to withstand it, while boys are more violent and proud, hence they are less ready to
 accept the humiliation, and react with violence.


		                                                                                 EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)                 27
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                          		


      important aspects of the interaction of Syrian refugee children with the different social ecology
      levels or circles that surround them.

      I believe that knowledge of Syrian society and the Syrian education system allows me to recognize
      subtle interactions and helps me understand how some hidden risks influence the navigation of
      Syrian children through the Lebanese education system, and show that some factors could be
      risks or assets depending on how they impact the children. Namely, the role of parents seems to
      be decisive in how many assets the children could accumulate to overcome the risks and be able
      to cope at the Lebanese school.

      The analysis is separated into subsections related to risks or outcomes and considers interactions
      by specific social ecology levels.

      IV.I The harmful mix
      The most compelling finding of this study is a “harmful mix” of risks that could be pushing the
      children to drop out of the Lebanese school:

             Lower socio-economic conditions impact the ability of parents to support and
             prioritize the education of their children. In addition, these children reflect more
             explicitly some lived experience with violence (due to the crisis and potentially
             in their own families), and are more fragile and sensitive to discrimination. This
             combination makes these children less resilient and pushes them to leave school.

      Unfortunately, the poverty experienced by many Syrian families contributes to an accumulation
      of untreated risks and isolation in low-income communities. The crisis pushed them out of their
      country to coexist with Lebanese people, where their structural problems became visible. The
      lack of resources and support to influence the education of their children seem undeniable to the
      stakeholders of this study.

      IV.II Parents’ role: An asset or a risk?
      This study revealed that Syrian parents seem to have a very decisive influence on the education
      of their children, but poverty and other social injustices impacted the direction of such influence,
      sometimes in controversial ways. Several behavioural patterns that are typical of the original pre-
      crisis Syrian society are also observed among refugees:

          •	 Parents with higher education and financial resources send their children to Lebanese
             private schools
          •	 Parents with higher education but with no financial resources send their children to
             Lebanese public schools and try to support them to cope. Sometimes, financial difficulties
             force parents to send their child to work (see Box 2. in Chapter 5).
          •	 Parents with no education and good financial situation might be reluctant to send their
             children to school for security or other social reasons. This reflects their low expectations
             of education.
          •	 Parents with no education and low resources present two different patterns with risks:


 28   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                           		                RES-RESEARCH | 2014


           1) There are parents who do their best to provide quality education to their children.
           For instance, despite financial difficulties, some parents pay for private lessons for their
           children. Oddly, some parents put high pressure on the children and might use verbal
           violence and even corporal punishment to push them to work harder at school. This
           behaviour could also lead the child, mainly teenage boys, to decide to abandon school. 2)
           The second pattern is the same one detailed in the harmful mix, where parents have low
           expectations of education and often decide to make the child work to earn money even
           if it is not really vital for the family. This category also includes families who come from
           communities that value financial earnings more than education.
 From the perspective of the resilience theory, the socio-economic background of parents can
 represent a risk as well as a valuable asset for the education of their children. This is why programs
 or processes that aim to educate children in contexts of adversities will also need to provide
 support to parents and families who are themselves in contexts of adversity. Family and parental
 programs can be part of the protective processes for children by, for example, raising awareness
 about the importance of education.

 IV.III The violence issue
 The violent behaviour of some Syrian children was often raised by Lebanese teachers as well as
 Syrian volunteers. It is obvious that the children lived through trauma that might vary in severity
 depending on what they experienced, because of the war in Syria and because of their situation
 as refugees with very limited resources in Lebanon.

 The relations in the family seem also to have a great influence on children as Syrian parents under
 socio-economic constraints may tend to use more violence to cope with their own adversities,
 redirecting their own frustration towards their children. See Box 1.
                                                           Box 1
                                                     Ali and Ahmad11

     Ali and his brother Ahmad11 are two of the many “trouble makers” who attend Jusoor’s school. They
     are unable to respect any disciplinary rules. Their teachers are drained, and they believe these children
     would never be able to adapt to a Lebanese public school. Ali and Ahmad come from a family of 15
     children. They are from Deir Ezorr, a rural region in Syria. Their father used to be a wealthy landlord;
     he did not used to worry about feeding the big family. Quality education was not one of his concerns.
     Now in Lebanon, the father has no job and no resources. The whole family shares one room. To
     control the situation, the father makes the children sit by the wall quietly. Hence, at the education
     centre, the children externalize violence on the other children verbally and physically.


 As noted earlier, the tensions at home due to the socio-economic impact of the Syrian crisis on
 refugees translates to behavioural problems at school. The lived and reflected violence outside the
 school prevents the children from adapting to the Lebanese school. They are not able to control
 themselves to follow common disciplinary rules and they are less able to tolerate discrimination
 practices than children from more stable environments, and continue to go to school. A private

 11	       Names in almost all case studies have been changed for privacy issues.

		                                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   29
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                          		


      school principal once told the parent of a Syrian student who had newly arrived at her school:
      “You should help your child ‘wear a shield’ at school...” to tolerate the students’ insults against
      Syrians. Unfortunately, vulnerable parents may not have the skills to help their children overcome
      such difficulties.

      Adults’ interaction with violent behaviour
      Adults in contact with children who have experienced violence have great difficulties dealing with
      the children’s excitement and lack of discipline. But the reactions of Lebanese teachers and Syrian
      volunteers differ profoundly.

      Syrian volunteers try to treat the violence with compassion and through appropriate activities to
      channel the children’s energy. Jusoor’s coordinator admits that the mission is not easy but also
      estimates that progress is made gradually.

      On the opposite side, Lebanese teachers who work with the children in the afternoon non-formal
      program let the children express themselves freely and sometimes with aggressiveness towards
      each other, which is seemingly in accordance to INGO’s recommendations. A young Syrian teacher
      who observed the children tried to suggest some activities to channel the children’s energy with
      the help of older Syrian participants but the school staff rejected any proposal that involved the
      participation of Syrians.

      In formal education settings, undisciplined students are rejected from the system as teachers
      lack the proper training and resources to understand or to deal with the reasons behind the
      violent behaviour. “Such kids will not be admitted at our school next year” said the public school
      principal when talking about a 12-year-old boy who had been admitted to Grade 1 as he did not
      know the alphabet. The boy had been continuously attacking his younger peers and damaging
      school equipment.

      IV.IV School dropout issue
      There are many reasons that push students, mainly boys aged 11 and above, to drop out of
      schools. Financial issues are an important factor, and transportation, bullying and the language
      barrier are also factors that keep teenagers and pre-teens from school.

      The majority of the interviewed children who had abandoned school said they took this decision
      themselves. Few were dismissed through a school’s decision. The main reasons were the
      difficulties of studying in English and the mistreatment: “I tried my best to adapt, but I couldn’t”,
      said Hisham.

      The difficult economic situation of the refugee families is also an important reason why parents
      do not send their children to school. Box 2, “Abu Samer and family”, depicts a typical story of a
      small family with two children.

      Another story, in Box 3, reflects the effect of transportation costs and a father’s concerns about
      the differences in Lebanese society, on his decision to keep his three daughters at home.



 30   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                       		                       RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                                    Box 212
                                              Abu Samer and family


     Abu Samer12 used to own a small workshop in Aleppo. He used to have a decent home and a good
     financial situation. In the autumn of 2012, Abu Samer was forced to leave with his small family to
     move to Beirut after a year of displacement and terror in Aleppo.
     During the first few discussions with Abu Samer about how his 13-year-old daughter, Salma, was
     faring at the neighbourhood public school, he never mentioned he also had an older son. Abu Samer
     must have been ashamed to reveal that he could not also send his son to school: “Samer was not
     really willing to go to school here (in Lebanon), I didn’t want him to waste his time. So, he started to
     work… back in Aleppo, and until the end, I was sending my children to private schools, but here…”.
     Abu Samer has a job that does not earn enough (US$ 350) to cover the rent of a modest apartment
     (US$ 400), so he has to rely on the US$ 200 the young Samer is earning to subsidize the family income.
     Samer’s mother used to be an English teacher, but the family left Aleppo in very difficult circumstances
     and she was not able to bring her diploma. Fortunately she was able to offer good support to Salma,
     helping her to adapt to Grade 6 at the Lebanese school after two years spent out of school.
     Next year, a new challenge is confronting Salma: She must move to another school far from home, and
     Abu Samer is not sure he can afford the transportation. He does not know the route to an appropriate
     school as the present school staff is not keen to help and provide the needed information. Even if the
     father is willing to provide education for his children, the lack of resources and information could push
     him to decide differently.
     Abu Samer is not registered as a refugee, he receives no humanitarian aid, and lives with the hope of
     returning soon to his hometown, as is the case for most of the families who are struggling in Lebanon
     and see no future there. “I want to go back. Even if I have to live there in a tent, it doesn’t matter”.
     Abu Samer’s house in Aleppo was destroyed and he has no news about whether his workshop is still
     standing or not.


                                                      Box 3
                                                Abu Hadi and family

     Abu Hadi and his family left the Damascus countryside for the northern suburbs of Beirut about two
     years ago (2012). In Beirut, Abu Hadi has a stable financial situation and a job. When they first arrived,
     Abu Hadi tried to send his three daughters to a private school managed by the Sunni community in
     Western Beirut. Such schools are more conservative and more compatible with the Syrian values.
     However, the school is far from where the family lives, and transportation costs (in addition to school
     tuition) seemed unaffordable to the father. Hence, the three girls stayed at home, and the father did
     not make any further effort to find them a closer school, probably because the family feared sending
     the girls to a different environment. After some encouragement, the father now intends to send his
     daughters to public school next year.



 12	       “Abu Samer” is a nickname. It is a common way to respectfully address men in Syria. The nickname means that the
 man has a son called “Samer”. Equivalently, a mother would be called “Oum Samer”. It is also common in some communities to
 give such nicknames to young boys for endearment.


		                                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)            31
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                            		


      Note that Lebanese public schools already suffer from a high dropout rate, mainly among students
      aged 11 to 14 years. A language barrier in Lebanon’s vulnerable communities is identified as one
      of the reasons behind this, in addition to other socio-economic reasons (Le Commerce du Levant
      2013). Clearly, Syrian students will not be spared as they are struggling with multiple risks. Two
      parents related that their sons, though they have been at school over two years, are now
      considering abandoning school.

      IV.V Girls versus boys
      Remarkably, most of the participants in the focus group of children who abandoned school were
      boys, while the majority of those in the second focus group of children who continued to go to
      school were girls.

      Apparently, Syrian girls are more apt to navigate the risk of violence by keeping a low profile,
      hence they are able to keep going and work hard. Nevertheless, they do view their surroundings
      with a critical eye and they can clearly articulate their experience with discrimination.

      On the other hand, Syrian boys are more open to externalize violent behaviour and they might
      react to mistreatment or pressure with violence, or by deciding to drop out. Boys who are face
      some type of academic risk and a difficult situation at home or at school, especially could quickly
      decide to abandon school.

      IV.VI The effect of nostalgia
      Children and families keep hoping to return to Syria in the near future and do not feel the need to
      adapt to the Lebanese system. Both Lebanese and Syrian teachers have the impression that there
      are parents who send their children to school just to spend time and play or to give the parents
      a time to take a rest.

      This might be due to the difficult living conditions of the refugees, but it is also due to their
      general low expectations of education in Lebanon and to their deep feeling that they will return
      soon to their country.

      On the contrary, more educated parents and volunteers believe that children could greatly benefit
      from their experience in the Lebanese school.

      IV.VII How Lebanese teachers work with Syrian students
      Although mistreatment was not mentioned during the discussions with the Lebanese teachers,
      the weariness of the speakers was easily detectable: “The crisis is almost finished in Syria, ‘Yallah!’
      (Go ahead), go back there, what else are you going to do here [in Lebanon]?”. This weariness is
      confirmed by the testimonials of children from the same school. Later during the meeting, one
      school staff suddenly said: “Why don’t you bring Syrian teachers to teach Syrian children, they are
      very different from our students”, and the coordinator contradicted her by saying that there is no
      need for Syrians to come and share the income of Lebanese teachers.




 32   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                        		                       RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 The fact that the Lebanese public school has its own difficulties13 was not discussed during
 the interviews either. This might be due to the fact that the Syrian volunteers and children are
 overwhelmed with their own difficulties and they cannot yet be critical vis-à-vis the Lebanese
 public school. The Lebanese teachers who were interviewed were not expected to criticize their
 own system while they are presently facing more demanding circumstances due to the massive
 arrival of Syrian children.

 Unexpectedly, both the Lebanese coordinator and other studies, mainly the study conducted
 by the Norwegian Refugee Council in the north of Lebanon (NRC 2013), indicate that most of
 the Lebanese teachers did not receive any training to help them cope with the newcomers.
 Teachers need special training to provide psychosocial support and protection, and to be able to
 address traumatic experiences, as well as training in special needs education and child-centred
 pedagogical practices (World Bank 2013b).

 Syrian parents and children feel that Lebanese teachers are not committed to teaching Syrian
 students. Children feel abandoned in class: “I try to ask the teacher but she doesn’t listen to me”
 said a third grade girl. An older girl who is repeating the fifth grade related that since her class is
 of Syrian majority, teachers do not care about them and do not teach them properly. For instance,
 the girl mentioned that, this year, they were lagging behind on the maths program by four to five
 lessons compared to last year. A young Syrian teacher who attended a few English classes in the
 afternoon non-formal program also confirmed this observation: “The Lebanese English teacher
 was attached to her Whatsapp messenger the whole time”.

 The interviewed children and parents related many stories about mistreatment, verbal abuse and
 corporal punishment at school. It seemed as if corporal punishment was of common use. “Oh!
 This teacher is known to have the longest ruler in the school” said Sama, a 12-year-old girl, in
 reference to the common use of the ruler to slap students.

  Verbal discrimination and insolence are also very present. Sama reported that the school
 coordinator used to repeat that “Syrian students will no longer be welcome at this school”, and,
 “You have to thank us, you will go back to Syria well instructed and free of diseases”, referring
 to the health care provided by UNICEF. One of the teachers used to tell Sama: “You don’t need
 to understand, you are Syrian!”. Another girl who attends the second shift (in a different school)
 reported after seemingly some hesitation that the school principal often insults the Syrians
 students by saying: “You are dirty and you smell bad”, “You are useless and brainless, look at your
 Lebanese peers, they are far better than you” in addition to other harmful insults.

 A boy who attended an UNRWA-run school in Lebanon related that “the verb ‘hit’ is not enough”
 to express the severity of the corporal punishment there. He literally whispered his story about
 when he abandoned the school. He was very affected, describing how the principal hit him; he
 resisted, and then left the school. Another boy who also abandoned the UNRWA-run school
 shared how the school threatened his parents that the whole family would be banned from
 humanitarian aid if he did not go back to school.


 13	      A special edition of a local Middle Eastern economics magazine was devoted to discussing these difficulties (Le Com-
 merce du Levant 2013).


		                                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)              33
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                             		


      In fact, UNRWA schools in Lebanon made great efforts to enroll all the Palestinians fleeing Syria
      (UNRWA 2014), but it seems that, for complex social reasons, violence is far more widespread
      in the Palestinian camp environment than in other neighborhoods. This is why UNRWA schools
      in the camps suffer from higher levels of violence, which is a reflection of the external violence.

      Parents are also hurt by the way the school staff deals with them. They feel hopeless and unable
      to defend their rights and the rights of their children, even though they know that the school is
      receiving important financial support in order to host Syrian children.

      It should be mentioned that during the focus group with the children who continued going
      to the Lebanese schools, only one girl, the oldest, told stories about verbal mistreatment and
      discrimination at school. The others did not seem to suffer from this specific risk. Jusoor’s
      coordinator suspected that these children were probably warned not to talk about any violent
      incidents at their schools. In the past, these children used to complain about what they were
      facing at school. In a later discussion with the coordinator (by the time of the writing of this
      report), she confirmed that the children seemed to adapt well at the Lebanese school and had
      stopped complaining. This observation serves to nuance what the interviewed parents agree on
      and shows that the situation might differ from one school to another. This is where a quantitative
      phase is necessary to evaluate the real extent of the verbal and physical violence at school.

      IV.VIII How Syrian students relate with peers
      During this study, a Syrian teacher and a few students told only stories of discrimination and
      bullying in the surrounding environment of the school. Apparently, Syrian children attending
      public schools with Lebanese students prefer to avoid them and do not try to socialize with
      Lebanese peers, as they find them “arrogant” and “unpleasant”. One interviewed girl said: “I only
      have one nice Lebanese friend; I don’t try to talk to other girls. When I was in Syria, I used to talk
      to everyone in my school”. Her brother who goes to a public college (seventh grade) does not
      even know if there are other Syrians in his school as he only speaks with a few friends he used to
      know in primary school: “I talk to no one! I stay away [from trouble]”.

      Some of Jusoor’s volunteers believe that this introversion and apprehension are transmitted from
      the family and the community, and they are not necessarily justified.14 Another Syrian teacher
      believes the isolation is indeed justified because of the fear of any political liability, especially
      when the children go to a school with clear political polarization or in sensitive regions. For
      example, there were reported cases of teachers who insisted to know if the parents voted in the
      Syrian presidential elections. Often, Lebanese students also embarrass their Syrian peers with
      questions about their political opinions. In such environments, children would feel insecure and
      prefer to retract to protect themselves.

      It is important to recall here the narrow scope of this study. Bullying by peers seems to be an
      issue identified by other studies conducted in other regions of Lebanon or in other contexts (see
      for example, NRC 2013; JENA-Working Education Group forthcoming). This nuance is interesting
      and might need further exploration to discover whether this feeling of discrimination elsewhere
      is due to tangible reasons or mainly a result of the susceptibility of Syrian parents and children.

      14	    Other volunteer teachers expressed clearly that the “Lebanese society is racist against Syrians”.


 34   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 IV.IX Interaction with the Syrian education system
 Syrian children and parents are generally nostalgic for Syrian schooling. They have the feeling that
 once back in their hometown, there will be a means to register the children according to their
 age even if they spent one or two years out of school. Some parents believe that this is the best
 solution for their children, and do not feel that they have to engage seriously in the Lebanese
 school. This explains the impression of some Lebanese and Syrian teachers that some parents
 send their children to school “just to play, and spend a few hours outside, so that the parents can
 take a rest”.

 IV.X Interaction with the Lebanese educational system
 Syrian students at the Lebanese school were confronted with two common practices that are very
 rare in Syria: downgrading to the real level of the student, and grade repetition if the student’s
 academic results are not satisfactory. A World Bank report (World Bank 2013a, 78) informs that
 the failure and dropout rates of Syrian students in Lebanese schools are double the national
 average.

 Students in Syria are accustomed to what could be called “automatic upgrading” except in
 extreme cases. Hence, these two Lebanese practices are discouraging to students and contribute
 to their feelings of discomfort at the public school. (One can see the embarrassment in the eyes
 of a tall 13-year-old boy who is forced to wear the pink and blue overalls assigned to children in
 the primary school).

 IV.XI The lack of interaction between the school and the Syrian
 community
 Many studies concerning the Syrian refugee community in Lebanon (see for example, Harb
 and Saab 2014; NRC 2013) note the lack of constructive communication between Syrian and
 Lebanese people. Concerning the education of Syrian children, the Lebanese system excludes any
 participation of Syrian teachers. They are in fact not allowed to practice in Lebanon.

 During the discussion with the Lebanese school coordinator, Syrian teachers were clearly
 identified as a threat to Lebanese teachers. “We don’t need Syrian teachers to help with the
 education of the Syrian children. Why would Syrians come and share the income of Lebanese
 teachers?” As mentioned earlier, the coordinator also rejected proposals from a Syrian teacher
 to introduce activities in the playground led by a Syrian adult volunteer to channel the energy
 and aggressiveness of the children in the afternoon non-formal program. According to the Syrian
 teacher, the coordinator declared: “There are no apt Syrian teachers in Lebanon”.

 Jusoor’s experience shows, on the contrary, that Syrian teachers are a source of reassurance and
 emotional support to children. This support is essential for them to navigate the new education
 system.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     35
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                		


      IV.XII A major asset: The socio-emotional support role of Jusoor
      and other Syrian-run centres
      Apparently, Lebanese schools do not offer the feeling of safety that Syrian-run schools and centres
      provide. Vulnerable children, who could not withstand the pressure of the Lebanese system,
      decided with their parents to leave the system and preferred to stay with Syrian peers at a non-
      formal education centre that responded better to their emotional needs.

      Ungar 2006 qualifies this type of decision as a hidden or uncommon pattern of resilience in which
      reluctance to engage with the mainstream may be protective. Specifically here, the rejection of
      the Lebanese school seems a protective process adopted by some Syrian refugee parents and
      children.
                                                      Box 4
                                                  Judy and Jana

        Among the many stories discovered through this study, there was the case of 6-year-old twin girls,
        Judy and Jana who chose to drop out of the highly renowned International School of Choueifat.
        Instead, they attend a non-formal program run by the NGO “Basmeh & Zeitooneh” (a smile and an
        olive) where their mother works as the educational program coordinator (basmeh-zeitooneh, 2012).
        At the Lebanese private school, the girls felt like strangers and different from the other children, and
        they were not happy. The researcher observed that at the non-formal education centre, Judy and Jana
        were shining with positive energy stimulated by the caring environment of a Syrian-run community
        centre.


      Basmeh & Zeitouneh is a community centre that looks like a beehive. It offers many services to
      Syrians and Syrian Palestinians in the heart of a Palestinian camp in Beirut (and in two other sites).
      Volunteers and modestly-paid Syrians and Palestinians (and even a French teacher) run a non-
      formal education centre, a cultural centre and even a sport club for children. It also runs social
      development projects that train women to become productive and cover their financial needs.
      Although the NGO building is very modest and narrow, children move around with confidence.
      Their educators are present to educate them and to provide them with affection.

      Similarly, the same atmosphere of affection and confidence is present at Jusoor’s school. During
      my several visits to the school, Maryam (a former psychology student in Damascus who had to
      interrupt her studies) was almost always with the kids. She was present to support them. She was
      with them in class or out in the yard, showing care for them, and sitting on the ground listening
      to them.

      Rana, a loving volunteer in her forties, is a second mother and a confidant to the children, as
      well as a devoted teacher at Jusoor’s school. Children whisper their little sweet secrets in her ear.
      Rana and her colleagues work hard to gather anonymous in-kind and financial assistance for the
      children and their families.

      Through the focus group and the different individual discussions with the volunteering teachers, it
      was visible that the volunteers care about their students’ lives and about their problems at home.

 36   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                              		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 They always try to help with the simple means they have. This support has a very positive impact
 on the progress of the children (see Box 5). Although volunteers complain about the high number
 of students in their classes, it was clear during the focus group that they know the academic
 needs of almost every child and try to respond to them.
                                                    Box 5
                                                    Iman

     Maryam shared the story of Iman, a teenage girl who was suffering from negative pressure and insults
     from her mother concerning her studies. Volunteer teachers met with the mother and tried to explain
     that Iman needs encouragement and that verbal violence will affect the teenager’s self-esteem and
     will not help her make any progress. Iman’s mother insisted that this was the way she raised her
     daughter. Following this, Maryam decided to balance the negative influence of her upbringing at
     home by continuously telling Iman that she is clever enough and that she can succeed regardless of
     what her mother tells her. Finally the girl was able to bypass the negative effects of her mother and
     started improving her results at school.


 The story of Iman shows the affective and psychological support role of Jusoor’s volunteers (and
 more generally the young Syrian diaspora). They are more committed to help Syrian children
 than Lebanese teachers, and they understand better the mentality of Syrian parents even if they
 come from different socio-economic classes. In fact, Iman’s mother has great willingness to offer
 education to her daughter but she does not have the right means to support her, and can benefit
 from the role of the Syrian volunteers who can offer a proper help. Logically, Lebanese teachers
 are not expected to have the same affection and care regarding Syrian students as the Syrian
 volunteers. They already have their own professional and social problems that the Syrian crisis
 aggravates severely.

 Sometimes the inexperienced volunteers find themselves in unexpected positions (see Box 6).
                                                    Box 6
                                                    Layla

     Six-year-old Layla is very attached to Hiba, the coordinator of Jusoor’s school. Hiba used to be her
     teacher until she became the coordinator. When this happened, the little girl became overwhelmed
     and unwilling to go to class with another teacher. Hiba thinks that Layla lacks affection at home
     because of unique family circumstances that are unrelated to financial difficulties. Layla fulfils her
     affective needs by frequently asking Hiba for hugs and kisses.


 Jusoor volunteers raised an issue related to child labour that they feel unprepared to deal with:
 Some children who work are stigmatized by their peers, although they are all refugees. Teachers
 want to protect these children from psychosocial stress caused by their peers even though they
 know that these children should not work. Teachers also try a different approach with children
 who work, as they have no time to work on their homework, and often come sleepy to school.

 In addition to playing an affective role Jusoor also provides some financial aid to parents through
 donor funding, to help them keep their children in school. Transportation and breakfast are also

		                                                                  EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     37
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                 		


      provided to all the children. At the beginning of the school year, also Jusoor arranged placements
      for students in private schools through scholarships and tuition waivers.

      IV.XIII Negative outcomes to be treated
      Resilience theory is mostly concerned with the achievement of positive outcomes, but in situations
      of acute adversity, negative outcomes can occur if no action is taken to prevent them.

      During the analysis, some negative outcomes were detected. Programs should be designed to
      counter such outcomes that are observed at present:
                                                   Table 6
                                       Undesirable negative outcomes

                                               Negative outcomes
                    School dropout
                    School’s decision to expel the student because of his/her low academic level
                    Student’s desire to leave school
                    Hatred for the Lebanese school/people
                    Lack of integration at school (introversion or aggressiveness)
                    A sense of helplessness: “Trying to cope without success” (interview quote)




 38   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 V. Recommendations for Practice and Policy
 Resilience theory aims to detect positive factors and processes that support the resilience of
 populations at-risk, in addition to the risks they face. This study revealed more risks than assets.
 Nevertheless, this first research phase contributes to a better understanding of the situation
 in order to design appropriate programs. At first glance, the main problems for Syrian refugee
 children seemed to be mainly the language barrier and mistreatment at the Lebanese school, but
 the study revealed that children who had proper support could successfully manage studying in
 English, could feel strongly a purpose in going to school, and could protect themselves from the
 negative effects of mistreatment. Children who lack parents’ support are the most vulnerable
 to dropout, in term of the objective to keeping them in the Lebanese school to get a quality
 education.

 These findings are crucial to future programming. They indicate that successful programs should
 take into account the reality of the social and familial background of the targeted children and
 provide more holistic support. The stakeholders of this research have a strong conviction that
 programs must be designed to include parents in order to raise their awareness of the importance
 of education for their children, and to inform them about what to expect from the school and
 their role in supporting the children.

 According to the theory of the social ecology of resilience (Ungar 2011), changes in the children’s
 social ecologies can foster their resilience. In the case of the Syrian refugee children, although
 programs oriented towards teachers and parents do not seem directly oriented to children,
 theory indicates that taking this kind of action, through the social ecology, could have a positive
 impact on their engagement at school as well as decrease their exposure to other risks.

 Hence, the following set of recommendations is the result of the discussions with the Syrian and
 the Lebanese teachers. They are not restricted to actions to take with children but also concern
 the other social ecologies around them, namely the parents and the Syrian volunteers.

 Other ecologies such as the Lebanese education system are also of great importance, but because
 of the limitations of this study and the fact that recommendations concerning an education
 system are of a higher level of programming that involves policies and governmental institutions,
 the recommendations are limited to what could be done with the children and with the closest
 social ecologies surrounding them, and where assets are detected: their parents and their Syrian
 teachers.

 V.I Immediate actions to help children
     •	 Provide psychological and emotional support
     •	 Provide after-school and summer support sessions, mainly in English
     •	 Provide behavioural and social education to make up for the lack of education at home.
        This is estimated to be of great importance in helping the children adapt to the Lebanese
        school
     •	 Help the children have hope and perspective
     •	 Organize activities to allow positive interactions between Syrian and Lebanese peers

		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     39
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                    		


          •	 Design programs that aim to channel the violence of the children through appropriate
             means of expression

      V.II Immediate actions to help parents
      Design programs to involve parents in the education of their children. Specifically:
          •	 Raise awareness of the importance of education, primarily to improve the refugee
             experience but also to prepare the children for a better future.
          •	 Explain the role of the Lebanese school and explain the differences between it and Syrian
             school.
          •	 Clarify the risk of Syria’s “automatic upgrading” practice, which allows students to pass
             to the next the grade regardless of school attendance, and explain the justifications
             of downgrading a child to a grade corresponding to his real academic level, which is a
             common practice in Lebanon.
          •	 Provide English and French language courses to help parents follow and support their
             children in learning the language and consider specially designed courses that integrate
             implicit guidance and awareness activities.15

      V.III Immediate actions to help Syrian volunteer teachers
          •	 Provide advice about the special psychosocial needs of the children such as child labour,
             violence, radicalisation and trauma, and provide pedagogical training to align their
             teaching with the Lebanese curriculum.
          •	 Offer language courses to enable them to practice and teach English (and potentially
             French) at an adequate level compared with the Lebanese schools.
          •	 Create frameworks that allow Syrian teachers to follow up with Syrian children at the
             Lebanese School, “hand in hand” with their parents.
          •	 Provide more resources in order to create more homogeneous groups of children in terms
             of different ages and different levels.
          •	 Develop learning strategies based on peer-to-peer learning as other resilience research
             (World Bank 2013b) shows that peer support is very beneficial.
          •	 Train teachers to deal with the sensitivities of Syrian child labour
          •	 Provide more instructional materials
          •	 Provide training on how to teach the Lebanese curriculum and provide a teacher’s guide
          •	 Enrich the non-formal program to more closely resemble formal school and all its school
             subjects

      After several discussions with Jusoor’s coordinators on the issues raised by their volunteer
      teachers during this study, the NGO started to hire additional teachers to overcome the risks
      induced by basing the full teaching responsibilities on volunteers.

      15	      See for example the MOM project run by the NGO Unite Lebanon Youth, http://www.unitelebanonyouth.org/web/
      ourprograms.php


 40   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 V.IV A resilience-fostering school operates with both Syrian and
 Lebanese teachers
 At the beginning of the study, Syrian stakeholders were interested in solutions that copy the
 UNRWA schools for Palestinians, i.e. establishing schools for Syrian students run by Syrian teachers
 but teaching the Lebanese curriculum which would lead to Lebanese certifications. Besides
 the fact that such solutions are very expensive and difficult to set up and finance, as they need
 political support and a high level of programming, the main drawback is that such schools will
 perpetrate the division between the Syrian and Lebanese communities. This separation would
 prevent Syrian children from adapting to Lebanese society. Jusoor’s volunteers believe they have
 to continue their efforts to prepare children to go to the Lebanese school.

 A “politically accepted” educational program might be a program run and supervised by
 Lebanese teachers who master the Lebanese curriculum, with the assistance of Syrian teachers
 or young volunteers who are more able to emotionally engage with the children and support
 their development. Such solutions would prevent Lebanese teachers from feeling threatened by
 competition from Syrians and would help create a welcoming environment where the children
 could easily adapt, which helps foster children’s resilience and improves learning outcomes.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     41
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                      		


      VI. Conclusion
      According to the study, the difficulties that Syrian children face in Lebanese schools are not simply
      due to the language of instruction and discrimination as it seemed to be at a first glance. The
      difficulties also have to do with structural reasons related to the distinct characteristics of Syrian
      society and their differences with Lebanese society.

      Mainly, the study reveals the critical role of parents in their children’s education. The experience
      of acute adversity can drive parents to become a risk to the education of their children. In fact,
      many stories from this research showed that Syrian parents do have the will to provide education
      to their children but do not necessarily have the right means of support. Hence, programs should
      include parents through offering awareness programs about child development needs, and about
      the importance of education to prepare for a better future. Social support and even education
      (e.g. language courses) specifically designed for parents would also empower them to give the
      right support to their children on their educational journey.

      Important assets were also discovered in the non-formal education centres run by Syrian
      volunteers. A subsequent study should be conducted to better analyse these assets (and
      eventually discover others). Meaningful programs could be designed to benefit from the social
      cohesion and the cultural understanding of the educated Syrian diaspora to enhance the existing
      refugee education programs.

      Some of these research findings are similar to findings from other field studies, for instance,
      the Joint Education Needs Assessment (JENA) for Syrian refugee children conducted by UNHCR
      (2013).16 Nevertheless, this study offers an insightful opinion that connects some risks to the
      original Syrian social ecology. A better understanding of these relationships would allow for
      better program design in the future, as “Interventions to facilitate optimal human development
      and well-being in contexts where children face adversity are most effective when they reflect the
      complexity of a multisystemic view of human development and resilience” (Ungar, Ghazinour and
      Richte 2013).

      It was interesting to see how the application of the ERA framework allowed the research to
      detect the deep impact of the social structure on the education of refugee children. Although the
      findings could be judged intuitive once discovered, they clearly explain the gap between children
      who are coping brilliantly and others who are struggling unsuccessfully, despite the fact that all
      the adults working with Syrian children confirm that they are all smart and mature.
      In order to support these findings, I recommend conducting a quantitative phase. The World
      Bank’s Education Resilience team has published a rapid resilience assessment tool called the
      RES-360° (World Bank 2013c) which is accompanied by a tool kit (World Bank 2013d). The tool
      allows for the design of a rapid assessment plan to identify the main risks and assets available for
      children, schools, communities and education systems.

      Annex C is a questionnaire template taken from the associated RES-360° tool kit. The questionnaire
      could easily be adapted to each social ecology level as suggested by the conceptual framework

      16	    The Joint Education Needs Assessment was launched in mid 2013 (UNHCR 2013, 5).


 42   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 presented in Chapter 4.

 Hopefully this study, despite its limited scope, provides a better understanding of the struggle of
 Syrian students in Lebanese schools. This understanding should lead to well-designed, effective
 programs that offer these disadvantaged children a quality education and a better future.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    43
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                           		


      References
      basmeh-zeitooneh. 2012. “NGO profile”. http://daleelmadani.org/profile/basmeh-zeitooneh.

      Benard, B. 1995. “Fostering resilience in children.” ERIC Digest: EDO-PS-95-9.

      Creswell, J. W. 2009. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods Approaches.
      	     Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

      Harb, C., and R. Saab. 2014. Social Cohesion and Intergroup Relations: Syrian Refugees and 	
      	      Lebanese Nationals in the Bekaa and Akkar. American University of Beirut, Save The 		
      	      Children.

      JENA-Working Education Group. forthcoming. “Joint Education Needs Assessment for Syrian 		
      	     refugee children.” Beirut.

      Jusoor. 2014. “Jusoor’s Refugee Education Program”. http://www.jusoor-sy.org/programs/		
      	       academic-programs/jusoors-refugee-education-program/ (accessed June 22, 2014).

      Le Commerce du Levant. 2013. “Education: une réputation d’excellence entachée par de 			
      	     nombreuses ombres au tableau.” Le Commerce du Levant, April: 50-54.

      Lebanon, Ministry of Education and Higher Education (MEHE). 2010. “Education Sector 			
      	     Development Plan.”

      Martin-Breen, P., and J. Marty Anderies. 2011. “Resilience: A Literature Review.” Bellagio Initiative,
      	      Brighton: IDS.

      Mertens, D.M. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The 		
      	     Guildford Press.

      Mertens, D. M. 2010. “Philosophy in mixed methods teaching: The transformative paradigm as 		
      	     illustration.” International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, no. 4: 9–18.

      Norwegian Refugee Coouncil (NRC). 2013. “Rapid assessment of the education situation of 		
      	     Syrian	 refugee students attending Lebanese public schools in north Lebanon (excluding 		
      	     Akkar).” NRC -UNHCR.

      Reach Initiative. 2014. “About Reach”. http://www.reach-initiative.org/reach/about-reach 		
      	      (accessed 2014).

      Reyes, J. 2013. What Matters Resilience Most for Education Resilience: A Framework Paper. 		
      	       Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better Education 		
      	       Results (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.

      World Bank. 2013a. “Lebanon: Economic and social impact assessment of the Syrian conflict.” 	
      	      Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/09/
      	      18292074/lebanon-economic-social-impact-assessment-syrian-conflict



 44   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 World Bank. 2013b. High Achievement in a Context of Protracted Displacement: What Helps 	
 	      UNRWA Students Learn under Adversity? Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program,
 	      Case Report Series; Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER). Washington, 	
 	      DC: World Bank.

 World Bank. 2013c. “Resilience in Education Systems (RES-360°): Rapid Assessment Manual.” 		
 	      Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better Education 		
 	      Results (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.

 World Bank. 2013d. “Resilience in Education Systems (RES-360°) Tool Kit: Rapid Assessment 		
 	      Manual.” Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better 		
 	      Education Results (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.

 Ungar, M. 2011. “The social ecology of resilience: addressing contextual and cultural ambiguity of
 	      a nascent construct.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 81, no. 1: 1-17.

 Ungar, M., M. Ghazinour, and J. Richte. 2013. “Annual research review: what is resilience within 		
 	      the social ecology of human development?” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 		
 	      54(4): 348–366.

 UNHCR. 2013. “Lebanon inter-agency response: Syrian refugees.” Monthly report. March.

 UNHCR-UK. 2014. “10 Shocking Facts On the Syrian Refugee Crisis In Lebanon.” April 8. http://	
 	    www.unhcr.org.uk/. http://www.unhcr.org.uk/news-and-views/news-list/news-detail/
 	    article/10-shocking-facts-on-the-syrian-refugee-crisis-in-lebanon.html.

 UNRWA. 2014. “UNRWA’s response and services to Palestine refugees from Syria (PRS) in 		
 	    Lebanon.” Bi-weekly Briefing. February 10. www.unrwa.org.

 Van Vliet, S., and G. Hourani. 2014. “Regional differences in the conditions of Syrian refugees in 		
 	      Lebanon.” The Civil Society Knowledge Centre.

 Zakharia, Z. 2004. “How schools cope with war: a case study of Lebanon.” In D. Burde, T. Arnstein,
 	      C. Pagen, and Z. Zakharia (eds), Education in emergencies and post-conflict situations: 		
 	      Problems, responses, and possibilities. New York: Society for International Education, 		
 	      Teachers College.

 Zimmerman, M., S. Stoddard, A. Eisman, C. Caldwell, S. Aiyer, and A. Miller. 2013. “Adolescent 		
 	     resilience: promotive factors that inform prevention.” Child Development Perspectives 		
 	     7(4): 215-220.




		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     45
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                     		


      Annex A. Interview guides
      Interview guide for students attending the Lebanese school
      The interview started with a small ice-breaker activity. The children were asked to write their
      names in Arabic and in English on a sheet of paper that the coordinator pinned on the desk in
      front of every child. The children were clearly informed that they were free not to participate or
      not to answer specific questions.

      Questions to get to know the children:
         1.	 Where do you come from? ‫من أين أنت يف سورية‬
         2.	 For how long have you been in Lebanon and in Beirut? ‫كم مىض لك من الوقت يف لبنان‬
         3.	 How old are you? ‫ما عمرك‬
         4.	 In what grade were you in Syria and in Lebanon? How do you feel about being downgraded
             and do you understand why? ‫ ويف أي صف أنت اآلن؟ وملاذا تغري صفك؟ ما إحساسك تجاه تغيري صفك‬،‫بأي صف كنت يف سورية‬
      Questions that relate to the research questions:
         1.	 Why do you go to school? Who decided that you should go to this school? ‫ملاذا تذهب إىل املدرسة‬
             ‫ ومدرستك الحالية بالذات؟‬،‫من قرر أنك ستذهب إىل املدرسة‬
         2.	 Tell me about your experience at the Lebanese school: about teachers, peers, language,
             books, playground… ‫ والبناء واملالعب‬،‫ ولغة الدراسة‬،‫ عن األساتذة والطالب والكتب‬،‫احك يل عن تجربتك يف املدرسة‬
                                                                                                                    ِ
         3.	 What did you like when you began studying in the Lebanese school? ‫ما الذي تحبه يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
         4.	 What was difficult when you began studying in the Lebanese school? ‫ما الذي كان صعبا عندما بدأت‬
             ‫الدراسة يف املدرسة البنانية؟‬
         5.	 What helped you with those difficult situations? ‫ما الذي ساعدك عىل تجاوز الصعوبات‬
         6.	 Who looks after your studies at home? ‫من الذي يتابع دراستك‬
         7.	 Who do you ask for help with your school work? (peers, family members, teachers, extra
             classes, etc.) ‫ممن كنت تطلب املساعدة مبا يتعلق بالدراسة‬
         8.	 Who do you play with at school? ‫مع من تلعب يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
         9.	 Which school do you feel benefits you more? Why? ‫ وملاذا‬،‫يف أي مدرسة تحس انك تستفيد أكرث‬
         10.	Tell me about your experience learning in a new language? ‫احك يل عن تجربتك يف الدراسة بلغة تعليم‬
                                                                                                          ِ
             ‫مختلفة عن العريب‬
         11.	How did Jusoor’s support help you in the Lebanese school? ‫كيف ساعدتك جسور يف الدراسة باملدرسة‬
             ‫اللبنانية‬
         12.	How are you now compared to when you first started school? ‫هل تحس انك تطورت عن بدايتك يف‬
             ‫املدرسة؟ كيف تجد نفسك اآلن‬
         13.	What do you think would be helpful for you and your fellow Syrians to cope in the Lebanese
             school? ‫ما الذي باعتقادك ميكن أن يساعدك ورفاقك عىل النجاح يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
         14.	Tell me a story about a Lebanese teacher you thought was good for you and your fellow


 46   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                       		                       RES-RESEARCH | 2014

         Syrians? Do you have a good one? ‫ هل تعرف مثل هذا األستاذ‬،‫احك يل عن أستاذ لبناين جيد لتعليم السوريني‬
                                                                                                          ِ
     15.	Describe a good school for you and your fellow Syrians? Is yours a good one? ‫ما هي برايك املدرسة‬
         ‫ هل تعتبر مدرستك جيدة‬.‫اجليدة لتعليم السوريني‬
     16.	What are your expectations for your education and your future? ‫ما هي أحالمك املستقبلية فيام يخص‬
         ‫املدرسة‬

 Interview guide for students who had dropped out of the
 Lebanese school
 The interview started with a small ice-breaker activity. The children were asked to write their
 names in Arabic and in English on a sheet of paper that the coordinator pinned on the desk in
 front of every child. The children were clearly informed that they were free not to participate or
 not to answer specific questions.

 Questions to get to know the children:
     1.	 Where do you come from? ‫من أين أنت يف سورية‬
     2.	 For how long have you been in Lebanon and in Beirut? ‫كم مىض لك من الوقت يف لبنان‬
     3.	 How old are you? ‫ما عمرك‬
     4.	 What grade were you in Syria and in Lebanon? How do you feel about being downgraded
         and do you understand why? ‫ ويف أي صف أنت اآلن؟ وملاذا تغري صفك؟ ما إحساسك تجاه تغيري‬،‫بأي صف كنت يف سورية‬
         ‫صفك هل تتفهم السبب؟‬

 Questions that relate to the research questions:
 Note: The questions were only partially discussed, as the children were unable to sit still for very
 long.
     1.	 Why do you go to school? Who decided which school you go to? ‫ملاذا تذهب إىل املدرسة؟ من قرر أنك‬
         ‫ ومدرستك الحالية بالذات‬،‫ستذهب إىل املدرسة‬
     2.	 Tell me about your experience at the Lebanese school: about teachers, peers, language,
         books, playground… ‫ والبناء واملالعب‬،‫ ولغة الدراسة‬،‫ عن األساتذة والطالب والكتب‬،‫احك يل عن تجربتك يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
     3.	 Why did you leave the Lebanese school? What was difficult when you began studying
         there? ‫ ما الذي كان صعبا عندما بدأت الدراسة فيها‬،‫ملاذا تركت املدرسة اللبنانية‬
     4.	 Who did you ask for help with your schoolwork? ‫ممن كنت تطلب املساعدة مبا يتعلق بالدراسة‬
     5.	 Who looks after your studies at home? ‫من الذي يتابع دراستك‬
     6.	 How was your attendance at the Lebanese school? Why? ‫كيف كان دوامك وحضورك يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
     7.	 Why did you leave that Lebanese school? ‫ملاذا تركت املدرسة اللبنانية‬
     8.	 Who did you play with at the Lebanese school? ‫مع من كنت تلعب يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
     9.	 If you could change something in the Lebanese school, what would it be? Would you go
         back if this changed? ‫ ماهو؟ وإذا تغري فهل تعود إىل هذه املدرسة‬،‫إذا كان بإمكانك تغيري يشء يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
     10.	What do you think would be helpful for you and your fellow Syrians to cope in the Lebanese


		                                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)              47
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                           		

              school? ‫ما الذي باعتقادك ميكن أن يساعدك ورفاقك عىل النجاح يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
          11.	What do you think makes a good teacher for you and your fellow Syrians here in Lebanon?
              ‫من هو برايك األستاذ الجيد لتعليم السوريني؟‬
          12.	What do you think makes a good school for you and your fellow Syrians here in Lebanon?
              ‫صف يل املدرسة الجيدة برأيك لتعليم السوريني؟‬
          13.	What do you like about Jusoor School? ‫ ما الذي تحبه فيها وما الذي ال تحبه‬،‫ما رايك مبدرسة جسور‬
          14.	What are your expectations for your education and your future? ‫ما هي أحالمك املستقبلية فيام يخص‬
              ‫املدرسة‬

      Interview guide for Jusoor’s volunteer teachers
      Introduction: The purpose of the research/ voluntary nature of participation and freedom to not
      answer/ privacy and confidentiality issues.

          1.	 Did you already have teaching experience before working at Jusoor? For how long?
          2.	 How are the children selected for the Lebanese school and how do you assess their
              cognitive levels? What do you think about these processes (selection and level evaluation)?
          3.	 Tell me about your experience teaching Syrian refugee children in general? What are the
              difficulties? What are the strengths of these children?
          4.	 How do you help them cope with the difficulties in the non-formal program?
          5.	 Describe your perception of how the children are progressing.
          6.	 Do you keep in contact with children transferred to Lebanese schools? How?
          7.	 What do you think are the challenges and difficulties in Lebanese schools (that you have
              no control over)?
          8.	 What do the Syrian children need to be successful in a Lebanese school? How are you
              helping them with those needs?
          9.	 How can you or others help children fill those needs successfully? (What are the needs of
              a school like Jusoor?)
          10.	What is the most important step to take if you rank your responses to the previous
              question?
          11.	For you as a volunteer teacher, what do you need to better help the children? (money,
              experience, pedagogical training, psychosocial training, stability, etc.)




 48   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                      		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Interview guide for the Lebanese school coordinator and
 teachers
 Introduction: The purpose of the research/ voluntary nature of participation and freedom to not
 answer/ privacy and confidentiality issues.

     1.	 Are you living in the same neighbourhood as the Syrian children? Do you have contact
         with the children outside school?
     2.	 How are the children selected to attend the Lebanese school and how do you assess
         their cognitive levels? What do you think about these processes (selection and level
         evaluation)? Record the answer for both morning and afternoon shifts.
     3.	 Tell me about your experience teaching Syrian refugee children in general. What are the
         difficulties? What are the strengths of these children?
     4.	 Are the majority of the children from the same neighbourhood? Do you feel they are
         different from the Lebanese children? How? Can you tell me how and why they are dif-
         ferent?
     5.	 How do you help them cope with difficulties in the non-formal program?
     6.	 Describe your perception of how the children are progressing.
     7.	 Tell me about your interaction with Syrian parents and about their level of involvement
         in their children’s education. Record the answer for both morning and afternoon shifts.
     8.	 What do you think are the challenges and difficulties in Lebanese schools (that you have
         no control over)?
     9.	 What do the Syrian children need to be successful in a Lebanese school? How are you
         helping them with those needs?
     10.	How can you or others help children fill those needs successfully? (What are the needs
         of a school like yours?)
     11.	What is the most important step to take if you rank your responses to the previous ques-
         tion?
     12.	For you as a public school teacher, what do you need to better help the children? (mon-
         ey, experience, pedagogical training, psychosocial training, stability, etc.)




		                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   49
‫			‪SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE‬‬                               ‫		‬


      ‫‪Annex B. Complete list of original codes‬‬
      ‫‪I include here the full list of original codes as extracted and categorized in the first cycle of analysis.‬‬
      ‫‪The codes are kept in Arabic as it is the original language of the participants and I considered that‬‬
      ‫‪translation would reduce their meaningfulness.‬‬

                                                   ‫‪Table A1‬‬
                                      ‫‪Original codes representing the risks‬‬

             ‫‪Categories‬‬                 ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬                         ‫‪Original codes‬‬
        ‫‪Individual risks‬‬            ‫‪Personal perception‬‬                                                               ‫عدم ثقة بالنفس‬
                                                                                                                       ‫إحساس بالعجز‬
        ‫‪(Behavioural, mainly‬‬
                                                                                                          ‫عدم خجل من عدم املعرفة‬
        ‫)‪crisis-related‬‬
                                                                                            ‫إحساس بالنقص وحاجة للمزيد من الدعم‬
                                                                                                    ‫خوف األوالد من املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                          ‫إحساس بالحاجة إىل عدم االبتعاد عن األخوة‬
                                                                                                                          ‫رفض القيود‬
                                                                                                               ‫مفهوم الزمن غري سليم‬
                                                                                                                      ‫خجل من العمل‬
                                                                                                                 ‫اللبنانيون متعجرفون‬
                                    ‫‪Maladaptive reactions‬‬                                   ‫مشاكل نفسية‪ :‬رشود ‪ /‬تشتت‪ /‬تأتأة‪ /‬عنف‬
                                                                                                                     ‫عنف مع األقران‬
                                                                                         ‫التعبري العنيف انعكاس للعنف بسبب الحرب‬
                                                                                                      ‫العنف أكرث لدى القادمني الجدد‬
                                                                                                 ‫عدم قدرة عىل الرتكيز بسبب املعاناة‬
                                                                                      ‫رغبة الطفل يف ترك املدرسة والعمل لكسب املال‬
                                                                                                             ‫تعزيز الشخصية بالعمل‬
                                    ‫‪Adaptation difficulties‬‬                                                           ‫الحنني إىل البلد‬
                                                                                                                         ‫انعدام األمل‬
                                                                                                        ‫تعلق بفكرة العودة الرسيعة‬
                                                                                                      ‫عدم تخطيط عىل املدى البعيد‬
                                                                                                   ‫البنات يتأقلمن أفضل من الصبيان‬
                                                                                                           ‫التأقلم اسهل لألصغر عمرا‬
                                                                                                                ‫حاجة للوقت للتأقلم‬
                                                                                                  ‫املعاناة الناتجة عن ظروف االنتقال‬
                                                                                                              ‫الحاجة للدعم املعنوي‬
                                                                                                          ‫حدود لطاقة األوالد‪ :‬إرهاق‬
                                                                                                      ‫انطواء شديد وانغالق اجتامعي‬
        ‫‪Relational (social) risks‬‬   ‫‪Familial risks‬‬
                                                                                                  ‫تساهل يف تغيب الطفل عن املدرسة‬
                                    ‫‪a. Pre-crisis (and‬‬
                                                                                                                     ‫عدم وعي األهل‬
                                    ‫)‪aggravated by the crisis‬‬
                                                                                                                 ‫أمهات غري متعلامت‬
                                                                                                          ‫عدم اهتامم االهل واالهامل‬
                                                                                                      ‫عدم معرفة الهدف من املدرسة‬
                                                                                           ‫املدرسة فقط لريتاح األهل قليال من االوالد‬
                                                                                                                  ‫البيئة األصلية سيئة‬
                                                                                                                       ‫انعدام العطف‬
                                                                                                     ‫“ يف مشكلة متابعة من البيت “‬
                                                                                                                          ‫عنف أرسي‬
                                                                                                                     ‫الرصاخ يف البيت‬
                                                                                      ‫التعبري العنيف انعكاس للعنف يف البيت‬

 ‫‪50‬‬   ‫)‪	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA‬‬
‫									‬                                                ‫		‬                                  ‫‪RES-RESEARCH | 2014‬‬


         ‫‪Categories‬‬           ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬                 ‫‪Original codes‬‬
                          ‫‪b. Crisis-related‬‬                                                 ‫إهامل بسبب الظروف الصعبة‬
                                                                                                   ‫ضغوط كثرية عىل األهل‬
                                                                     ‫احتياجات عديدة لألطفال‪ :‬مادية وعاطفية وتعليمية‬
                                                                                               ‫إهامل وعدم مباالة باملدرسة‬
                                                                                            ‫عدم دعم املراهقني يف الدراسة‬
                                                                                                ‫عاملة األطفال متنع املدرسة‬
                                                                                              ‫عاملة األطفال تعيق الدراسة‬
                                                                                           ‫انخفاض القدرات املادية لألرسة‬
                                                                                                               ‫عدم استقرار‬
                                                                                       ‫األهل ينقلون عدم االستقرار لألوالد‬
                                                                                                      ‫”‪.‬الولد مراية البيت “‬
                                                                     ‫ضغط األهل ذو التأثري السلبي عىل الطالب واملدرسة‬
                                                                     ‫سلوك األهل االجتامعي السلبي معيق لدراسة األوالد‬
                                                                                   ‫احساس االهل برفض املدرسة الوالدهم‬
                                                                      ‫إحساس بعدم االمان يف العالقة مع املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                              ‫احساس إدارة املدرسة برغبة األهل باستغالل موارد املدرسة‬
                          ‫‪Community-related risks‬‬
                                                                                               ‫مشاكل اجتامعية موروثة‬
                          ‫‪a. Pre-crisis‬‬
                                                                                                           ‫بيئة غري واعية‬
                                                                                   ‫اختالف البيئة السورية عن اللبنانية‬
                                                                                        ‫البيئة السورية األصلية منغلقة‬
                                                                                     ‫رسة‬‫عدم احرتام املرأة وبالتايل املد ّ‬
                          ‫‪b. Crisis-related‬‬                                                  ‫الزواج املبكر لكال الجنسني‬
                                                                                  ‫تغيري البيئة من منغلقة إىل مفتوحة‬
                                                                                    ‫تشنج السوريني يف املجتمع اللبناين‬
                                                                                                 ‫صدمة اختالف املجتمع‬
                                                                                   ‫”صاروا يستخدموا الحرية كفوىض“‬
                                                                                  ‫تعيري الطالب لبعضهم بسبب العمل‬
                                                                                                ‫بيئة األطفال غري طبيعية‬
                                                                    ‫)فقدان عزة النفس (عدم الحرج من طلب املساعدات‬
     ‫‪School environment‬‬   ‫‪Personal perception‬‬
                                                                                                     ‫”إحساس بوجود “حقد‬
                          ‫‪a. Rejection by school and‬‬
                                                                    ‫“ املعاملة يف املدرسة اللبنانية كثري سيئة وفيها إذالل “‬
                          ‫‪peers‬‬
                                                                                             ‫ظروف التعليم للسوريني سيئة‬
                                                                                   ‫خوف من الذهاب إىل املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                      ‫إحساس بالغربة يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                                      ‫رفض األوالد اللبنانيني‬
                                                                                           ‫عدم االعجاب باملدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                                      ‫رفض املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                                        ‫املدرسة فقط للعب‬
                          ‫‪b. Attachment to Syrians‬‬
                                                                                                ‫تفضيل البقاء بني السوريني‬
                                                                         ‫)التمسك باملدرس السوري (رفض املدرس اللبناين‬
                                                                                      ‫سهولة التعامل مع األقران السوريني‬
                          ‫‪Relations with peers‬‬                                           ‫سوء معاملة من األقران اللبنانيني‬
                                                                                                 ‫عنف من األقران اللبنانيني‬
                                                                                                            ‫فوىض يف الصف‬
                                                                                                    ‫عنف يف محيط املدرسة‬
                                                                                         ‫التاثري السلبي للعنارص املضطربة‬




‫		‬                                                     ‫)‪EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA‬‬                                   ‫‪51‬‬
‫			‪SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE‬‬                    ‫		‬


             ‫‪Categories‬‬               ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬            ‫‪Original codes‬‬
                                  ‫‪Relations with adults‬‬
                                                                                                     ‫عنف من املدرسني اللبنانيني‬
                                  ‫‪a. With teachers‬‬
                                                                                             ‫رسني اللبنانيني‬‫سوء معاملة من املد ّ‬
                                                                                                        ‫عنف كالمي من املدرسني‬
                                                                                               ‫عدم التواصل مع املدرس اللبناين‬
                                                                ‫)عصبية املدرس اللبناين غري املوجهة بالرضورة للطالب السوري(‬
                                                                                     ‫شعور باالهامل (عدم تجاوب) من املدرس‬
                                                                                                         ‫رصاخ املدرسني اللبنانيني‬
                                                                               ‫عدم تحمل املدرسني اللبنانيني للطالب السوريني‬
                                                                                        ‫قناعة بأنه لبنان متطور أكرث من سورية‬
                                  ‫‪b. With principal & staff‬‬                                                        ‫عنف من املدير‬
                                                                                                           ‫عنف كالمي من املدير‬
                                                                                                     ‫سوء معاملة اإلدارة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                                    ‫تجريح الطالب أمام أهاليهم‬
                                                                                                         ‫تهديد من إدارة املدرسة‬
                                                                                                                 ‫اإلهانة من اإلدارة‬
                                                                                                                      ‫سلبية اإلدارة‬
                                                              ‫متلمل واضح من السوريني تعبري غري مبارش عن امللل من السوريني‬
                                                                                ‫خوف من منافسة املدرسني السوريني للبنانيني‬
        ‫‪Education related risks‬‬   ‫‪Learning difficulties‬‬
                                                                                                                 ‫صعوبة اللغة‬
                                  ‫‪a. Pre-crisis‬‬
                                                                                         ‫إحساس بالعجز أمام اللغة االنجليزية‬
                                                                                                               ‫صعوبة الدراسة‬
                                                                                                          ‫أساس علمي ضعيف‬
                                  ‫‪b. Crisis related‬‬
                                                                                                ‫الفجوة واالنقطاع عن املدرسة‬
                                                                                                          ‫مشكلة تنزيل الصف‬
                                                                                                ‫عدم وعي لسبب تأخري الصف‬
                                                                                         ‫احساس بالضياع للكبري يف صف اصغر‬
                                                                                                     ‫عدم قناعة بتأخري الصف‬
                                  ‫‪c. Maladaptive reactions‬‬
                                                                            ‫تشبث باللغة العربية‪ /‬عدم قناعة بأهمية االنجليزي‬
                                                                                                 ‫تغيب بسبب إحساس بالعجز‬
                                  ‫‪Non-adaptive teaching‬‬                   ‫عدم مالءمة التدريس مع احتياجات ومستوى الطالب‬
                                  ‫‪methods‬‬                                            ‫عدم إمكانية املعاملة الخاصة لكل طالب‬
                                                                                            ‫عقاب يف املدرسة بسبب الوظائف‬
                                                                                                    ‫عدد طالب كبري بالصف‬
                                                                           ‫عدم وجود برامج خاصة للمدارس التي فيها سوريني‬
                                  ‫‪Risks related to the‬‬
                                  ‫‪Lebanese education‬‬
                                  ‫‪system‬‬
                                                                                                                 ‫التعليم سيئ‬
                                  ‫‪a. Pre-crisis‬‬
                                                                                                     ‫حاجة ملوارد تعليمية أكرث‬
                                                                           ‫حاجة لدعم النشاطات الالصفية‪ ،‬والرحالت التعليمية‬


                                  ‫‪b. Crisis-related‬‬                                             ‫عوائق إدارية لتسجيل السوريني‬
                                                                               ‫اهامل يف تدريس الصفوف ذات الغالبية السورية‬
                                                                                       ‫فروق كبرية بني املنهاج اللبناين والسوري‬
                                                                                          ‫”مستوى اللبناين أحسن من السوري“‬
                                                                                   ‫خلط السوريني مع اللبنانيني متعب للمدرس‬
                                                                                    ‫سوء استغالل لربنامج دعم تعليم السوريني‬




 ‫‪52‬‬   ‫)‪	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA‬‬
‫									‬                                       ‫		‬                                  ‫‪RES-RESEARCH | 2014‬‬


     ‫‪Categories‬‬       ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬                 ‫‪Original codes‬‬
                  ‫‪Risks related to the‬‬
                  ‫‪Lebanese education‬‬
                  ‫‪system‬‬
                                                                                    ‫سوء النظام التعليمي يف سورية‬
                  ‫‪a. Pre-crisis‬‬
                                                                                            ‫فساد املدرسة يف سورية‬
                                                                                         ‫سوء تدريس اللغة بسورية‬
                                                                ‫”متسك الالجئني بالنظام التعليمي السوري “الفاسد‬
                                                              ‫اختالف ظروف التعليم يف سورية بني املدينة والقرية‬
                                                                                     ‫فساد املدرسة يف سورية‪ :‬الغش‬
                                                                              ‫”االسلوب الدارج بسورية هو االلقاء“‬
                                                                                     ‫أسلوب اإللقاء التلقني والحفظ‬
                                                                ‫فقدان ثقة املدرس السوري بنظام التعليم السوري‬
                  ‫‪b. Crisis-related‬‬                      ‫)نظرة مشوهة للنظام اللبناين بشكل مشابه للسوري (فساد‬
                                                                            ‫ترسب الطالب بسبب العوائق االدارية‬
                  ‫‪Risks related to the‬‬
                  ‫‪volunteer-based education‬‬
                  ‫‪a. Class-related‬‬                                                   ‫عدة مستويات بنفس الصف‬
                                                                                         ‫اختالف األعامر يف الصف‬
                                                                                     ‫عدد الطالب الكبري يف الصف‬
                                                                      ‫الطالب قادمون من بيئات فقرية ومحرومة‬
                                                 ‫)األثر السلبي لألطفال ذوي املشاكل عىل اآلخرين (عنف وفرط حركة‬
                                                                     ‫قلة النظام وحركة الطالب املفرطة يف الصف‬
                  ‫‪b. Teacher-related‬‬                              ‫نقص بعدد املتطوعني‪-‬ضغط كبري عىل املتطوع‬
                                                                                              ‫متطوعني غري مدربني‬
                                                                                              ‫حاجة إلرشاف تربوي‬
                                                                  ‫عجزاملدرس املتطوع عن دعم الطالب املراهق‬
                                                                                         ‫عدم التزام كل املتطوعني‬
                                                                        ‫عدم التزام املتطوعني باألنظمة والقواعد‬
                                                                                              ‫حاجة لوسائل إيضاح‬
                                                                 ‫تعلق األطفال الشديد (املريض) باملدرس السوري‬
                                                                          ‫عدم احرتام املدرس بسبب كرثة التغيري‬
                                                                   ‫كرثة تغيري املدرسني تعطي انطباع بعدم جدية‬
                  ‫‪c. Education system-‬‬                                     ‫عدم معرفة املتطوعني باملنهاج اللبناين‬
                  ‫‪related‬‬                                              ‫عدم وجود تخاطب وتواصل مع اللبنانيني‬
                                                                       ‫انقطاع متابعة الطفل يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                              ‫اختالف املنهاج اللبناين عن السوري‬
                  ‫‪Non-formal education‬‬                                       ‫)استغالل يسء للموارد املقدمة (رسقة‬
                  ‫)‪program (run by UNICEF‬‬                                                      ‫عدد الطالب الكبري‬
                                                                                             ‫عدم جدية املدرسني‬
                                                                         ‫الطالب قادمون من بيئات فقرية ومحرومة‬




‫		‬                                            ‫)‪EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA‬‬                                 ‫‪53‬‬
‫			‪SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE‬‬                       ‫		‬

                                                ‫‪Table A2‬‬
                                  ‫‪Original codes representing the assets‬‬

             ‫‪Categories‬‬              ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬                  ‫‪Original codes‬‬
        ‫‪Individual assets‬‬                                                                              ‫رغبة األوالد بالتعلم‬
                                                                                                                     ‫اإلرادة‬
                                                                                                                     ‫الوعي‬
                                                                                               ‫تجاوب ممتاز لبعض الطالب‬
                                                                                    ‫تجاوب الصغار مع التعليم غري الرسمي‬
                                                                                           ‫مطالبة املعلمة مبزيد من الرشح‬
                                                                                                                ‫ذكاء ولطف‬
                                                                                                            ‫حامس للمدرسة‬
                                                                                            ‫)إحساس باالستقاللية (بالدراسة‬
                                                                                                ‫التأقلم اسهل لألصغر عمرا‬
                                                                                         ‫تعاطف مع ظروف األهل الصعبة‬
                                                                                           ‫الطالب الذي لديه هدف يستمر‬
                                                                                    ‫”وعي الطالب لتحمل الضغط واإلذالل“‬
                                                                                                       ‫اندماج مع اللبنانيني‬
                                                                            ‫معرفة أنه يجب املبادرة بالتفاعل مع اللبنانيني‬
        ‫)‪Relational (social‬‬      ‫‪Family‬‬                                                 ‫اهتامم األهل مبتابعة تعليم األوالد‬
        ‫‪assets‬‬                                                                                                 ‫دعم األهل‬
                                                                                                 ‫االنفتاح يساعد عىل لتطور‬
                                                                                                  ‫متابعة األهل مع املدرسة‬
                                                                                         ‫تفهم األهل لرضورة تنزيل الصف‬
                                                                                        ‫حامس األهل للتواصل مع املدرسة‬
                                 ‫‪Informal education‬‬                                      ‫تعاطف املتطوعني مع األطفال‬
                                 ‫‪environment‬‬                                  ‫تفهم االستاذ السوري لوضع الطالب السوري‬
                                                                                                           ‫حب جسور‬
                                 ‫‪a. Children-related‬‬
                                                                                            ‫إحساس باالنتامء إىل جسور‬
                                                                                            ‫جسور مصدر إضايف للتعلم‬
                                                                                           ‫العناية الفردية مجدية للولد‬
                                                                                          ‫تجاوب مع التحفيز واالهتامم‬
                                 ‫‪b. Volunteer-related‬‬                                ‫إيجابية‪ :‬أمل باالستفادة من الصدمة‬
                                                                             ‫”احساس االنتامء بيخليك تعطي كل جهدك“‬
                                                                              ‫استعداد ملتابعة الطفل يف املدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                            ‫املدرسني ياخدوا طاقتهم من الطالب وبالعكس‬
                                 ‫‪Lebanese school‬‬                                         ‫تعاطف بعض املدرسني اللبنانيني‬
                                                                                            ‫تفهم بعض املدرسني اللبنانيني‬
                                                                                              ‫انطباع تعليم أفضل يف لبنان‬




 ‫‪54‬‬   ‫)‪	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA‬‬
‫									‬                                                             ‫		‬                                        ‫‪RES-RESEARCH | 2014‬‬

                                             ‫‪Table A3‬‬
                            ‫‪Original codes representing the outcomes‬‬

          ‫‪Categories‬‬             ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬                                ‫‪Original codes‬‬
     ‫‪Positive outcomes‬‬                                     ‫إحساس بالتقدم‪ :‬انطباع ايجايب بأن االوالد يحرزون تقدما يف بيئة التعليم غري الرسمي‬
                                                                                                                       ‫تجاوب إيجايب مع اللغة‬
                                                                                                                      ‫إعجاب باملدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                                                                  ‫تعلق بجسور‬
                                                                                                                   ‫التأقلم مع املجتمع اللبناين‬
                                                                                         ‫االستفادة من التعرف عىل التجربة التعليمية اللبنانية‬
     ‫‪Negative outcomes‬‬                                                                                                          ‫ترك املدرسة‬
                                                                                            ‫قرار املدرسة برصف الطالب بسبب ضعف مستواه‬
                                                                                                                  ‫قرار الطالب برتك املدرسة‬
                                                                                                             ‫عدم إعجاب باملدرسة اللبنانية‬
                                                                                                                     ‫عدم اندماج يف املدرسة‬
                                                                                                  ‫إحساس بالعجز‪ :‬محاولة التأقلم دون نتيجة‬



                                           ‫‪Table A4‬‬
             ‫‪Original codes representing the promotive and protective processes‬‬

         ‫‪Categories‬‬             ‫‪Sub-categories‬‬                                 ‫‪Original codes‬‬
     ‫‪Promotive processes‬‬                                                                               ‫االستفادة من نظام التعليم اللبناين‬
                                                                    ‫أثر إيجايب للخلط بني طالب التعليم الرسمي مع طالب التعليم غري الرسمي‬
                                                                                                            ‫دورات لغة للطالب واملدرسني‬
                                                                                                                         ‫تدريب للمدرسني‬
                             ‫‪Support for learning in the‬‬                                                             ‫مساعدة املدرس يف الصف‬
                             ‫‪formal education system‬‬                                                                           ‫دروس خصوصية‬
                                                                                                                     ‫مساعدة األهل يف الدراسة‬
                                                                                                                      ‫مساعدة األقران (األخوة)‏‬
                                                                                                                           ‫مساعدة بعد الظهر‬
                                                                                                                            ‫دورة تقوية صيفية‬
                                                                                                                   ‫دوام ثان مخصص للسوريني‬
                                                                                                        ‫مساعدة يف حل الوظائف اثناء االسبوع‬
                                                                                                                                  ‫صفوف تأقلم‬
                             ‫‪Role of volunteers‬‬                                                        ‫معاملة خاصة لألوالد حسب احتياجاتهم‬
                                                                                                                        ‫تشجيع وتحفيز لألوالد‬
                                                                                                                          ‫دور جسور التعليمي‬
                                                                                                                 ‫دور جسور بتعليم االنجليزي‬
                                                                                                       ‫متابعة وضع الطالب يف املدرسة الرسمية‬
                                                                                                                 ‫جعل االوالد يدرسون بعضهم‬
                                                                                               ‫تدريب املتطوعني عىل أسلوب التدريس اللبناين‬
     ‫‪Protective processes‬‬    ‫‪Adult (external) support‬‬                                                               ‫توجيه اجتامعي وصحي‬
                                                                                                                     ‫إرشاف نفيس وعاطفي‬
                                                                                                                 ‫“ مهمتي هي زرع طموح “‬
                                                                                                         ‫نقل فكرة البدء بحياة جديدة للطالب‬
                                                                                                                       ‫دور جسور العاطفي‬
                             ‫‪Family support‬‬                                                   ‫“ إذا الوضع بالبيت مأمن بيتحملوا الضغط برا “‬
                             ‫‪Raising family’s awareness‬‬                                                           ‫برامج توعية وتوجيه لألهل‬
                                                                                                                 ‫تعريف بدور املدرسة الفعيل‬




‫		‬                                                               ‫)‪EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA‬‬                                           ‫‪55‬‬
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN LEBANON | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			          		


             Categories              Sub-categories        Original codes
                                 Unconscious adaptive                     ‫تعلم االنجليزي‬-‫حلم قصري املدى‬
                                 processes (children’s              ‫معلم أو مدير أو طبيب‬-‫حلم بعيد املدى‬
                                 dreams)                                          ‫حلم – الحنني إىل الوطن‬
                                                                               ‫حلم – تغري تعامل اللبنانيني‬
                                 Unconscious maladaptive                   ‫ رغبة باالنتقام من اللبنانيني‬-‫حلم‬
                                 processes (children’s
                                 dreams)




 56   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           		                    RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Annex C. Questionnaire template
 Source: Based on questionnaire in World Bank, Resilience in Education Systems (RES-360°): Tool
 Kit (2013d).

                                              SECTION A: RISKS


                                        SECTION A1: RISK PREVALENCE
       How prevalent are the following risks in your home, school, community, or neighborhood?
                                             Non-existent   Low      Somewhat     Frequent       Often
     1. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     2. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     3. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     4. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     5. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     6. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     7. Risk-related question here                O         O           O            O             O
     8. ...                                       O         O           O            O             O




                                         SECTION A2: RISK LOCATION
                                     Where do you experience these risks?
                                                                      School       Home       In the street
     1. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     2. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     3. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     4. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     5. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     6. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     7. Risk-related question here                                      O            O             O
     8. ...                                                             O            O             O




		                                                                EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)       57
                                          SECTION B: ASSETS


                                    SECTION B1: ASSET PREVALENCE
How prevalent are the following assets in your home, school, community, or neighborhood?
                                          Non-existent   Low    Somewhat   Frequent      Often
1. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
2. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
3. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
4. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
5. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
6. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
7. Asset-related question here                 O         O          O         O            O
8. ...                                         O         O          O         O            O




                                     SECTION B2: ASSET LOCATION
                                 Where do you experience these assets?
                                                                  School    Home      In the street
1. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
2. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
3. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
4. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
5. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
6. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
7. Asset-related question here                                      O         O            O
8. ...                                                              O         O            O
                     The World Bank
                    1818 H Street, NW
           Washington DC 20433 USA
www.worldbank.org/education/resilience
   educationresilience@worldbank.org
