                                                                             93352




    Cooperation in International Waters in Africa




             Proposal for Development Partners
                                    March 2014


Prepared by: Sustainable Development Department, Africa Region, World Bank

Contact: Gustavo Saltiel
CIWA Program Manager
Email: gsaltiel@worldbank.org
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................. 4
SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................6
SECTION 3: RATIONALE ............................................................................................................................................... 7
  AFRICA’S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES : THE CENTRALITY OF WATER ...................................................................... 7
  IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT .................................................................................. 7
  THE REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE: A FRICA’S INTERNATIONAL WATERS ......................................................................... 8
  THE WORLD BANK AS CIWA’S HOST INSTITUTION ............................................................................................. 9
SECTION 4: OBJECTIVE AND EXPECTED RESULTS.................................................................................................... 11
  IMPACT ....................................................................................................................................................... 11
  PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE .............................................................................................................. 11
  INTERMEDIATE RESULTS ................................................................................................................................ 12
SECTION 5: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ....................................................................................................................... 19
  MODES OF ENGAGEMENT ............................................................................................................................... 19
  ENTRY POINTS FOR ENGAGEMENT .................................................................................................................. 20
  PROGRAM STRUCTURE .................................................................................................................................. 21
        The Basin Engagement Sub-Program ..................................................................................................................................... 21
        CIWA’s Priority Basins and Regions ....................................................................................................................................... 24
        The Catalytic Sub-Program..................................................................................................................................................... 27
        Linkages between the Sub-Programs ................................................................................................................................... 30
    MAINSTREAMING GENDER ............................................................................................................................ 30
SECTION 6: CIWA PROGRAM MANAGEMENT .......................................................................................................... 32
  CIWA PROGRAM MANAGEMENT UNIT ............................................................................................................ 32
  PANEL OF EXPERTS ...................................................................................................................................... 32
  MONITORING , EVALUATION AND REPORTING ................................................................................................... 33
  COMMUNICATIONS AND OUTREACH ................................................................................................................ 33
SECTION 7: PARTNER INVOLVEMENT ....................................................................................................................... 35
  CIWA CONSULTATIVE GROUP ....................................................................................................................... 35
  CIWA ADVISORY COMMITTEE ....................................................................................................................... 35
  CIWA BASIN STEERING COMMITTEE .............................................................................................................. 36
  DEVELOPMENT PARTNER ENGAGEMENT IN THE PROGRAM CYCLE .......................................................................... 37
  CIWA’S BROADER PARTNERSHIPS ................................................................................................................. 38
SECTION 8: FINANCING REQUIREMENTS AND STATUS.......................................................................................... 40
ANNEXES.....................................................................................................................................................................42
  ANNEX 1: MAP OF TRANSBOUNDARY BASINS IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA ................................................................ 42
  ANNEX 2: CIWA RISK ANALYSIS .................................................................................................................... 43
  ANNEX 3: ALIGNING WITH THE WORLD BANK’S REGIONAL AND SECTOR STRATEGIES .............................................. 45
  ANNEX 4: EXPLANATION OF RECIPIENT AND BANK EXECUTED PROJECTS .............................................................. 50
  ANNEX 5. INTENDED IMPACT D ICTATES THE ENTRY POINTS FOR ENGAGEMENT ...................................................... 51




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                                                                                   Page 2
LIST OF ACRONYMS

AC             Advisory Committee
AU             African Union
AfDB           African Development Bank
AMCOW          African Ministers' Council on Water
ANBO           African Network of Basin Organizations
AWF            African Water Facility
BSC            Basin Steering Committee
CG             Consultative Group
CIWA           Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
CSP            CIWA Support Plan
ESIA           Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
EU             European Union
GDP            Gross Domestic Product
GEF            Global Environment Facility
ICA            Infrastructure Consortium for Africa
IDA            International Development Association
MDTF           Multi-Donor Trust Fund
NBTF           Nile Basin Trust Fund
NEPAD          New Partnership for Africa’s Development
NGO            Non-Governmental Organization
OMVS           Senegal River Development Organization
PDO            Program Development Objective
PIDA           Program for Infrastructure Development in Africa
PMU            Program Management Unit
RBO            River Basin Organization
REC            Regional Economic Community
SAWI           South Asia Water Initiative
SWP            Shared Waters Partnership
WPP            Water Partnership Program




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa        Page 3
SECTION 1: EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Climate resilient growth and poverty reduction in Africa depend on the sustainable management and
development of its international waters. The key sectors that contribute to growth depend on water;
however two or more countries share all of the major water sources in Africa. The transboundary
nature of Africa’s rivers, lakes and aquifers adds considerable political, technical, environmental, and
financial complexity to their sustainable development. This additional complexity has often resulted
in stalled investments or the adoption of sub-optimal development choices that have real and
significant costs. Cooperative action is necessary to optimize benefits regionally and mitigate shared
risks including those of climate variability and change.

The Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) program supports riparian governments to
unlock the potential for sustainable and climate resilient growth by addressing constraints to
cooperative management and development of international waters. CIWA’s focus on water-related
growth reflects the desire of riparian governments engaged in cooperative management of water
resources to accelerate development in support of economic growth and poverty reduction. It also
leverages the comparative advantage of the program’s host institution, the World Bank, to bring
knowledge and experience of investment in infrastructure, institutions and information systems
across the water-related sectors in Africa.

The objective of the program is to strengthen cooperative management and development of
international waters in Sub-Saharan Africa to facilitate sustainable climate resilient growth. The
expected results are:
1. Strengthened regional cooperation and integration - This aims to foster cooperative
    transboundary institutions for greater regional stability and creation of an enabling environment
    for shared sustainable growth.
2. Strengthened water resources management - This aims to underpin the evidence-based
    knowledge for planning and decision-making to maximize development opportunities and
    minimize climate variability risks.
3. Strengthened water resources development - This aims to support investments that improve
    resilience to climate variability and change, enhance food and energy security, and enable
    countries to follow a lower carbon growth path.
4. Strengthened stakeholder engagement and coordination - This aims to enable greater voice in
    decision-making processes of civil society, private sector and academia in the cooperative
    management and development of shared basin resources.

The 10-year targets for the program are:
 $10 billion of investment financing mobilized for implementation of projects influenced by CIWA
 50 million direct beneficiaries of projects influenced by CIWA
 5 basins with strengthened institutions
 5 basins with improved analytic tools, data and capacity
 10 investment opportunities with regional benefits progressed in the project cycle

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                       Page 4
   5 basins with improved engagement with civil society, private sector and academia

These targets reflect the high level of ambition for the program by the potential recipients,
contributing partners and the World Bank. CIWA is a long-term program reflecting the need for long-
term engagement when working in international waters and as such it aims to attract funds in the
range of US$200 million over ten years. The scale of financing proposed reflects the significant
requirements to achieve the ambitious targets.

The World Bank and a group of development partners established the CIWA program in 2011. The
financing mechanism is a multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) administered by the World Bank with an
initial contribution from the UK and subsequent contributions from Denmark, the Netherlands,
Norway and Sweden. A number of other donors have expressed interest in supporting the program.

CIWA can respond to demand from interested transboundary institutions (basin-institutions, regional
economic communities (RECs), and other relevant organizations) through the “Basin Engagement
Sub-Program”. Basins and RECs will be selected according to alignment with CIWA’s objective,
potential to contribute to one or more of CIWA’s results, relative needs of the people and countries
in the basin, and the expressed interest by basin countries. CIWA will work with priority basins by
establishing a long-term partnership with objectives defined in a “CIWA Support Plan” (CSP). This
plan will be developed with participating institutions and will be aligned with existing strategic plans.
Current priority basins include Nile, Zambezi, Volta, and Niger. All projects financed by CIWA will
contribute to the broader program results framework as well as the basin objectives outlined in the
CSP.

CIWA, through the “Catalytic Sub-Program”, will use opportunistic engagement, strategic analyses,
technical assistance, and capacity building to promote cooperative water resources management
and development. This sub-program will finance analyses on strategic issues relevant to basins
where sustained engagement is not in place or to the wider African continent. The sub-program also
will build capacity among key stakeholders and promote the application of tools to better
understand and implement cooperation in international waters. It will increase knowledge of the
strategic importance of international waters in Africa and the political economy, as well as the
economic and financial implications of cooperation (or lack thereof) that contribute to climate
resilience and inclusive growth. The sub-program will demonstrate the tangible benefits of unlocking
the potential of cooperation on joint investments.

CIWA’s design has been informed by lessons from World Bank involvement in transboundary water
issues in the Nile, Niger, Zambezi and Senegal River Basins in Africa, international waters in other
regions, as well as other programs supported by MDTFs such as the Nile Basin Trust Fund (NBTF), the
African Water Resources Management Initiative (AWRMI), the Water Partnership Program (WPP)
and the South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI).

CIWA employs a harmonized approach to all its activities and strives to complement other African
water and development programs by focusing on cooperation that leads to investments and growth.

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                        Page 5
SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this document is to provide development partners with an overview of the CIWA
program for consideration of financial support. It is complementary to the CIWA Operational
Guidelines that provides more specific information on CIWA procedures and the CIWA Strategic
Framework that provides more information on the how CIWA plans to deliver results.

This proposal outlines the challenges of managing and developing international waters in Africa in
order to provide a clear rationale for the CIWA program and its management by the World Bank.

CIWA’s objective, expected results and targets for the ten-year program are presented, followed by
a description of the two main program components: the “Basin Engagement Sub-Program” and the
“Catalytic Sub-Program.”

The proposal outlines how the CIWA program is managed and describes its operational structures
and methods. Brief descriptions of how CIWA engages with basin institutions and what role
development partners play are given.

Finally, the current level and future requirements for financing are given.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                 Page 6
SECTION 3: RATIONALE

AFRICA’S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES: THE CENTRALITY OF WATER
Africa has an unprecedented opportunity for transformation and sustained growth. Until the onset
of the global economic crisis, growth had averaged 5 percent a year for a decade. Even though
growth declined as a consequence of the crisis, it rebounded in 2010 due to prudent macroeconomic
policies and financial support from multilateral agencies. Despite these gains, African countries
continue to face persistent, long-term development challenges. Among them are food shortages,
low human capital, weak governance, state fragility, lack of women’s empowerment, youth
unemployment and climate variability and change.

Water is a vital development component for nearly every sector in Africa, including urban services
and industry, land management, energy, agriculture, environmental services, and fisheries. Lack of
reliable water availability of adequate quality undermines public health, restricts industrial growth,
limits energy production, constrains agricultural productivity and food production and threatens
important environmental services, including fisheries. All of which are critical to the livelihoods of
the African people.

Water management is critical for meeting Africa’s development challenges. Though water is vital for
agriculture, only 5 percent of Africa’s cultivated land is irrigated. Water for people and animals is
critical for health and livelihoods, yet only 58 percent of Africans have access to safe drinking water.
In the face of extremely limited access to modern energy (585 million people do not have electricity),
Africa has a vast but largely untapped potential for clean energy production, including hydropower.
For example, Africa's economically feasible hydropower is estimated at 45 gigawatts, nearly one-
tenth of the world's total. Less than 10 percent of this potential is currently being used.

IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
Climate change is a major challenge for Africa and it threatens to undermine the continent’s hard -
won development progress. Climate variability has always been a major constraint on Africa's
growth and it is estimated to cause an annual loss of 1-2 % of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Climate
change threatens to exacerbate these impacts with additional GDP losses estimated, and in the case
of Ghana, Ethiopia and Mozambique to be in the range of 0.5% to 9% on average for the coming four
decades. With low-lying coastal areas, a heavy dependence on agriculture and inadequate
infrastructure, Africa is the most vulnerable and least prepared to cope with the impacts of global
warming. By 2020, it is projected that between 75 million and 250 million people in Africa will be
exposed to increased water stress. Increased frequency and severity of extreme events (floods and
droughts) and sea level rise of some 20 to 50 centimeters by 2050 threaten the many large cities
located in vulnerable coastal areas, thereby jeopardizing their ability to generate growth and
employment.



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                       Page 7
Hydrological variability causes significant economic loss and constrains growth. Africa lacks the
capacity to buffer the shocks of frequent droughts and floods. Water storage is vital to guard against
the effects of high climate volatility and ensure that water is available where and when it is needed.
In most of Sub-Saharan Africa, precipitation occurs in just one season lasting four to six months and
the seasonal and inter-annual variation in the timing and volume of precipitation is high. Africa
(excluding South Africa) has the world’s lowest surface water storage capacity, at about 43 cubic
meters per person per year compared to a water storage capacity in North America of 6,150 cubic
meters per person per year.

If water becomes scarcer, difficult trade-offs will need to be made among competing uses,
particularly between water for food and water for energy, but it will also affect the increasing water
needs required by rapid urbanization and industrialization. In these increasingly challenging
situations, new robust decision-making paradigms for water allocation and management will need to
be adopted.

Existing World Bank estimates on the cost of adaptation – which suggest an average of $17-18 billion
per year in the period 2010 - 2050 – are built on the assumption of a 2°C warming. But given slow
progress on climate negotiations and rapid increase of emissions, there is a growing consensus that
the world is headed towards a more rapid and more severe warming (possibly in excess of 4°C),
which implies much larger financial needs to enhance Africa’s climate resilience. This highlights the
importance of supporting cooperative water resources management and development in order to
optimize development potential and use of relatively limited financial resources.

Although possibly the biggest development threat to Africa, climate change could also be an
opportunity. Sustainable water resources development and management must properly address
adaptation including immediate and future needs for storage and improving irrigation practices. This
adaptation response to climate change could spur development-oriented interventions. Climate-
triggered collective action could also improve soil and coastal management, which according to one
estimate could be worth about US$1.47 billion a year. Also, sustainable hydropower development can
be a major contributor to climate mitigation.

THE REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE: AFRICA’S INTERNATIONAL WATERS
Africa’s development agenda is inherently regional due to the large number of landlocked countries
and transboundary water systems, as well as an uneven distribution of energy resources and load
centers. Though Africa is endowed with a generous supply of water resources, most of its rivers,
lakes and aquifers cross country borders, highlighting the importance of effective institutions that
help to ensure shared benefits from cooperation. Africa has estimated annual runoff of 63,736 cubic
kilometers, more than 90 percent of which results from eight large transboundary river basins:
Congo, Nile, Zambezi, Niger, Ogooue, Lake Chad and the Volta. A total of 63 transboundary river
basins accounts for 90 percent of Africa’s surface water resources , 63 percent of its surface area, 83
percent of its precipitation, and 92 percent of its annual discharge. In addition to rivers, international



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                        Page 8
basins contain more than 330 lakes, twelve of which are characterized as major perennial surface
water bodies.

Water resources shared by countries pose complex political and management challenges. Virtually all
the region’s rivers flow through multiple countries: the Nile flows through 11, the Niger 9, Lake Chad
8, Congo 10, and the Zambezi 8. While it is widely acknowledged that international waters have
created some opportunities for fostering regional economic cooperation and political integration
through cooperative development, the added complexity can also lead to tension and less than
optimum development of common resources. These challenges can be accentuated by increasing
competition between different sectors within riparian states and the prospects of climate related
risks. Cooperative river basin planning and management can overcome some of these challenges.
However, water management institutions needed to address these tensions in many African
countries are often weak and fragmented. Agencies with authority over a particular economic sector
can make uncoordinated decisions about water allocation and use, which lead to inefficiency and
degradation of the resource. The cost of noncooperation is high, including the economic cost of
negative environmental impacts, suboptimal water resource development, political tensions over
shared resources, and the forgone benefits of joint water resource development.

A multi-purpose, integrated and cooperative approach has the clear potential not only to help
countries build economic resilience to climate change, but more importantly, to diversify their
economies. Multi-purpose cooperative water resource development has the potential to offer
significant benefits to the countries of Africa, provided that appropriate water governance
institutions manage the complex dynamics of multi-country development. Countries around the
Senegal and Niger Rivers have started to reap the benefits of a cooperative and a joint approach to
managing their shared waters.

THE WORLD BANK AS CIWA’S HOST INSTITUTION
The World Bank is uniquely positioned to administer the CIWA trust fund. As a trustee of more than
$25 billion dollars annually, the World Bank can ensure systematic and prudent management
oversight of entrusted funds. Additionally, the World Bank has vast experience in program delivery
with the highest level of technical capacity, deep partnerships with recipient countries and a global
operational platform. Specific to water resource management and development, the Bank’s team is
recognized for its world-class expertise as well as its extensive experience in project design and
implementation in all water-related sectors. This technical capacity and broad experience enables the
Bank to play a catalytic role in fostering cooperative water resources management and
development. This is the primary rationale for the World Bank to lead and host the CIWA program.

The following expands upon this rationale detailing the Bank’s suitability as host institution for CIWA:

      The Bank’s primary function and one of its major strengths is as a provider of investment
       financing to support economic growth which corresponds directly with the objectives of
       CIWA.


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                       Page 9
     The Bank has a multi-sectoral presence in most African countries and is engaged with
      governments at a strategic level in the promotion of growth and poverty reduction. It is thus
      uniquely placed to provide strategic input and guidance to transboundary water programs.
     The Bank has an established reputation in international rivers work in several African river
      basins and is also engaged in supporting the water sector at a national level in many
      countries.
     The Bank has an established and highly regarded role as a neutral mediator in supporting and
      bringing together parties to collaborate on international waters development.
     The Bank is experienced in acting as a convener to bring together riparian governments,
      donors, investors, and other interested parties.
     The Bank places a great deal of emphasis on regional economic development in Africa
      through the formulation and implementation of its Regional Assistance Strategy. CIWA
      brings riparian countries together within regional contexts in ways that can strengthen
      regional development in a range of sectors.
     The Bank has extensive multi-sectoral technical expertise that it can deploy to support
      detailed analytical assessment of strategic and investment options as well as the design,
      development and oversight of projects.
     The Bank has tried and tested fiduciary and operational instruments and procedures,
      including extensive safeguards. The Multi-donor Trust Fund instrument was specifically
      designed as a mechanism to make best use of these procedures.

In addition, the establishment of CIWA and its supporting MDTF represents a rationalization of
previous Bank managed instruments, incorporating the lessons learned from for example the NBTF,
SAWI and the WPP. This brings together the experience that has been gained in different basins and
regions into a focused initiative to both continue to support basins where the World Bank is already
engaged and to extend support to other basins.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                  Page 10
SECTION 4: OBJECTIVE AND EXPECTED RESULTS
The CIWA results framework is organized as a hierarchy of impact, objective and results.

IMPACT
CIWA’s intended impact is to strengthen sustainable climate-resilient growth in Sub-Saharan Africa.
CIWA seeks to support riparian governments to unlock the potential for sustainable and climate
resilient growth by addressing the constraints to cooperative management and development of
international waters. CIWA’s focus on water-related growth reflects the desire of riparian
governments engaged in cooperative management to accelerate water resources development in
support of economic growth and poverty reduction. The program’s focus also leverages the
comparative advantage of its host institution, the World Bank, to bring extensive experience with,
and ability to mobilize, infrastructure investment in many water-related sectors in Africa.

PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE
The program development objective is to strengthen cooperative management and development of
international waters in Sub-Saharan Africa to facilitate sustainable climate resilient growth. There are
two Program Development Objective (PDO)-level indicators identified:

Indicator: US$ financing mobilized for cooperative management and development of international
waters resources projects supported by CIWA

10-year Target: $10 billion
 This indicator reflects the intended impact of enabling growth through investments in
    cooperative water resources management and development projects.
 The project development cycle will follow best practice to ensure that investments are
    sustainable and climate-resilient.
 This indicator aggregates the mobilized financing of all projects which CIWA has influenced
    during one or more stages of project preparation including, but not restricted to, support for
    facilitation of investment dialogue, project identification, pre-feasibility, environmental and social
    impact assessments (ESIAs), feasibility, transaction negotiation and resource mobilization.
    Financing from all sources will be included.
 Mobilized financing is considered to be planned and/or actual investment financing, where
    planned financing includes any project that has been included in a formal plan or planning
    process. All funding sources will be considered.

Indicator: Number of people directly benefiting from improved water resources management and
development in target basins through projects supported by CIWA

10-year Target: 50 million people




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                        Page 11
   This indicator will aggregate the planned and actual direct beneficiaries of projects influenced by
    CIWA and will be disaggregated by gender where possible. (Indirect beneficiaries are assumed to
    be all the people living within the basins that CIWA is supporting.)

INTERMEDIATE RESULTS
The intermediate results capture the progress towards strengthening cooperation, water resources
management and development, as well as stakeholder engagement in target basins. Given that
participating transboundary institutions have different roles and responsibilities, are at different
stages of maturity, and that each will have to address distinct challenges to strengthen themselves,
it will be difficult to aggregate all meaningful results across all of CIWA’s engagements and p rojects.
A CSP will be developed for the priority basins which will provide a definition for what constitutes
successful strengthening in each of the relevant result areas. Each priority basin will have its own
results framework and will use specific indicators that identify how the project contributes to the
relevant results areas. For engagement outside of the priority basins and on multiple-basin or Africa-
wide projects, CIWA will provide a detailed results framework and a definition for what successful
strengthening entails in the project documentation.

CIWA recognizes that multiple entry points are required to achieve sustainable cooperative water
resources management and development and that not every relevant organization operates at the
basin-scale. To account for relevant engagement on multiples scales, several indicators aggregate
results according to relevant institutions strengthened which includes RBOs, RECs, stakeholder
organizations, academic groups and others relevant to cooperative water resources management
and development. In addition, CIWA will undertake important knowledge management and capacity
building work on a multiple-basin or Africa-wide scale that contributes to the four results areas.
Indicators which aggregate these results are included in the Results Framework.

CIWA progress reporting will provide information on how program-wide targets have been met as
well as a narrative of how specific basin engagements and projects contribute to the program-level
indicators. It is expected that this combination of reporting will enable overall quantitative tracking
of key indicators and will tell the story behind the numbers in illustrative cases.

The expected intermediate results and their associated indicators are defined next.

Intermediate Result #1: Regional Cooperation and Integration Strengthened

This result area quantifies how CIWA support fosters cooperative transboundary institutions for
greater regional stability, establishes the evidence base for cooperation, and creates an enabling
environment for shared sustainable growth.

Indicator: Number of relevant transboundary institutions strengthened to improve regional
cooperation

10-year Target: 8 transboundary institutions in at least 5 basins


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                      Page 12
   This indicator is based on the assumption that strong transboundary institutions with a water
    resources mandate are a good indicator of strong regional cooperation.
   The progress towards strengthening transboundary institutions will be assessed on parameters
    unique to each organization, such as: extent of data-sharing, extent of public access to
    information, facilitation of prior notification, clarity of and ability to communicate the evidence
    for benefits of cooperation, quality of institutional legal and policy frameworks, effectiveness of
    national/regional linkages and sustainability of core financing. The set of indicators to be
    measured with corresponding baselines and targets will be unique to each project, defined in the
    project documentation and/or the CSP.

Indicator: Number of strategic analyses conducted and knowledge products developed to illustrate
the evidence base for cooperation needs and challenges

10-year Target: 10 strategic analyses conducted
 This indicator is based on the assumption that a solid understanding of the benefits of
    cooperation, based on knowledge and evidence, will engender and strengthen cooperation.
 It is expected that this will capture how the analytical work is helping reach out indicate the
    practical need for transboundary cooperation to high-level decision makers at the national and
    regional level. The topics are expected to cover issues such as political economy, benefits of
    cooperation and costs of inaction, implications for poverty reduction and shared prosperity,
    implications for climate resilience, specific illustrative case studies, etc. Efforts will be made for
    innovative packaging and dissemination of such knowledge products to stimulate discussion and
    cooperative action.
 Results are aggregated for basin-specific knowledge management and strategic analyses
    supported by CIWA, as well as Africa-wide or multiple basin works that contribute to
    strengthened regional cooperation.

Intermediate Result #2: Water Resources Management Strengthened

This result aims to quantify how CIWA supports the evidence-based knowledge for planning and
decision-making to maximize development opportunities, minimize climate variability risk, and
improve coordination of investment operation.

Indicator: Number of relevant institutions with improved analytical tools, knowledge products, data,
forecasting, and/or capacity for improved water and climate risk management or investment
operation coordination

10-year Target: 5 transboundary institutions in at least 4 basins
 The indicator is based on the assumption that if a basin institution has improved analytic tools,
    knowledge products, data, forecasting, and/or capacity it will be better able to assess and
    monitor water resource management status, challenges and opportunities and inform key basin
    officials and decision-makers and to better coordinate investment operation. This in turn will



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                        Page 13
    enable stronger, and potentially more coordinated, management of water resources and will
    minimize risk from climate variability.
   For priority basins, progress will be assessed on parameters unique to each basin as defined in
    the CSP. For other institutions where CIWA strengthens water resources management,
    indicators for how progress will be achieved under this result area will be clearly delineated in
    the project results framework.
   Improved analytic tools, knowledge products, data, forecasting, and/or capacity could include,
    but are not limited to, enhancing the quality of decision support systems, extent of monitoring
    systems (hydro-met) and data collection, quality of disaster risk management systems, quality
    and timely implementation of the basin management plans, monitoring of the state of the basin
    and quality of policy at national level relating to international waters.

Intermediate Result #3: Water Resources Development Strengthened

This result aims to quantify how CIWA supports sustainable water-related investments with regional
benefits that contribute to climate resilient growth.

Indicator: Number of investment opportunities with regional benefits that have been advanced
through CIWA support

10-year Target: 10 opportunities
 The indicator is based on the assumption that advancing investments with regional benefits
    increases growth, shared prosperity and builds climate resilience.
 Regional benefits are often at the heart of what countries seek from transboundary cooperation.
    There are investments that require regional cooperation to materialize in a regionally-acceptable
    manner, as well as investments that are then enabled by cooperation or regionally-agreed
    investments. The cooperation relating to these investments in a transboundary context could
    range from notification and meaningful information sharing to generate consensus required for
    implementation by a country all the way to joint investments across countries (e.g. the case of
    the Senegal Basin) depending on the level of cooperation and the maturity and strength of basin
    institutions. The support at a regional level could be to facilitate preparation, financing,
    implementation, and operations of key transformative investments.
 Investments are likely to include, but are not limited to, water-related investments that improve
    resilience to climate related shocks, reduce poverty, enhance food security, and enable countries
    to follow a lower carbon growth path. Examples include, but are not limited to, water storage,
    irrigation, water management, institution building, hydro-meteorological data collection and
    other information systems, hydroelectric schemes, multipurpose systems, hydroelectric
    schemes, and natural infrastructure.
 This indicator will aggregate the number of steps in the project cycle of relevant investments
    that CIWA has directly influenced, where steps in the project cycle could include, but are not
    limited to: i) Scoping/Pre-identification studies (Unlocking Potential) ii) Identification, iii) Pre-
    feasibility, iv) Feasibility, v) Investment Financing facilitation, vi) Detailed Design, vii)


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                       Page 14
   Construction, viii) Commissioning, ix) On-going Operations and Maintenance. This indicator will
   also include program identification through multi-sector investment opportunities analyses.


Indicator: Number of relevant transboundary institutions with an improved approach to sustainable
investment planning and bankable investment preparation

10-year Target: 5 institutions
 This indicator aims to capture CIWA’s support to strengthen the basin organizations and other
    relevant institutions ability to improve the sustainability of regional investments by incorporating
    social and environmental considerations into investment planning and preparation.
 The indicator is based on the understanding that including long-term climate change, ecosystem
    services information and social considerations (such as gender equity, inclusion and shared
    prosperity) during the investment planning and preparation will improve the sustainability of the
    investment. This is expected to complement work that is often done on the technical, economic,
    financial, and institutional elements of proposed investments, all of which are required for
    building a well-developed pipeline of “bankable” projects in each basin to be considered for
    financing and implementation.
 This indicator will aggregate a number of separate lines of work that contribute to improving the
    approach to sustainable investment planning which may include, but are not limited to:

       (i) Capacity building on how consideration of climate change, environmental, gender, and/or
       poverty issues can improve sustainability of investments;
       (ii) Development of gender, poverty, environmental, and/or climate change-relevant
       indicators or standards against which they can assess progress in building climate resilience,
       shared prosperity and/or social inclusion;
       (iii) Incorporation of social and/or environmental and climate change considerations in
       strategic planning or other institutional modalities (e.g. through strategic or cumulative
       Environmental and Social Assessments and integration of these considerations into basin
       planning);
       (iv) Inclusion of social, environmental or climate-change considerations in development of
       analytic tools, knowledge products, data, and/or forecasting;
       (v) Undertaking a specific analysis of environmental or social considerations in order to
       advance a regional investment opportunity, such as an ESIA or similar instruments.
Intermediate Result #4: Stakeholder Engagement and Coordination Strengthened

This result area measures how CIWA enables greater voice of civil society, private sector or academia
in the decision making processes related to cooperative management and development of shared
basin resources with a particular focus on empowering women and the poor.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                      Page 15
Indicator: Number of basins with improved engagement with civil society, private sector or
academia; Sub-Indicator: Percentage of basins with improved engagement of organizations
representing the interests of women and/or the poor

10-year targets: 5 basins; 60 percent with improved women/poor engagement

   This indicator is based on the assumption that improving engagement with civil society increases
    public accountability, demonstrates best practice for inclusion of environmental and social issues
    (including safeguards) and provides a mechanism for addressing grievances. Engagement with
    the private sector aims to improve competiveness in procurement and increase the potential for
    investment financing. Finally, engaging with academia seeks to enhance the long-term
    development of local professional capacity. The development of internship/young professional
    programs in basin organizations to improve outreach, in-sourcing of cutting-edge talent, and
    building capacity of the next generation of water-related multi-disciplinary professionals and the
    development of MOUs or other meaningful working arrangements with academia, CSOs,
    research institutes, and other professional entities is also expected to be enhanced.
   Progress towards improving engagement with civil society, private sector and academia will be
    assessed on parameters unique to each basin such as: clarity of plans and process of
    engagement, extent of participation in the project development cycle (including investment
    reviews, identification of opportunities, pre-feasibility and feasibility activities, project
    implementation) and extent of public access to information. The set of indicators to be
    measured with corresponding baselines and targets will be unique to each project and/or as
    defined in the CSP.
   The sub-indicator is intended to capture support which targets empowerment of women and the
    poor.
   The sub-indicator is based on the assumption that empowering women and the poor will
    increase the sustainability of water investments, improve water management, promote growth
    and ensure that benefits are shared.

Indicator: Number of basins with increased water resources management and development
information in the public domain

10-year target: 5 basins
 The indicator is based on the assumption that increasing information in the public domain
    enables stakeholders to more effectively engage in water resources management and
    development decision making.
 This indicator will track progress on what has been identified as a critical issue in African
    transboundary basins – availability of meaningful data, tools, and analytical insights in the public
    domain to stimulate awareness and better inform broad-based decision support for cooperative
    approaches to realize system benefits and manage risks.
 This is expected to include activities in each basin related to availability of public-domain data
    (e.g. basin characteristics, monitoring data, etc. through online portals, mobile Apps, data
    services), analytical tools (e.g. simple models, scenario visualization tools), knowledge products

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                      Page 16
    (e.g. newsletters, bulletins, analytical reports), and forums (e.g. to facilitate knowledge sharing
    and stakeholder information sharing and discussions).
   Progress towards increasing water resources management and development information in the
    public domain will be assessed based on the efforts of relevant institutions to display
    information, promote access to information or increase stakeholder awareness of relevant
    information in the public domain. The set of indicators to be measured with corresponding
    baselines and targets will be unique to each project and/or as defined in the CSP.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                     Page 17
                                        Table 1: CIWA Results Framework

                                                         Impact
              Sustainable climate resilient growth in Sub-Saharan Africa strengthened
                                           Program Development Objective
         Strengthen cooperative management and development of international waters
             in Sub-Saharan Africa to facilitate sustainable climate resilient growth
Indicator 1: US$ financing mobilized for cooperative management and development of international
waters resources projects supported by CIWA
10-year target: $10 billion
Indicator 2: Number of people directly benefiting from improved water resources management and
development in target basins through projects supported by CIWA
10-year target: 50 million
                                                  Intermediate Results
1. Regional cooperation and integration strengthened
   Indicator 1: Number of relevant transboundary institutions strengthened to improve regional cooperation
   10-year target: 8 transboundary institutions in at least 5 basins
   Indicator 2: Number of strategic analyses conducted and knowledge products developed to illustrate the
   evidence base for cooperation needs and challenges
   10-year target: 10 strategic analyses conducted
2. Water resources management strengthened
   Indicator: Number of relevant transboundary institutions with improved analytical tools, knowledge products,
   data, forecasting, and/or capacity for improved water and climate risk management or investment operation
   coordination
   10-year target: 5 institutions in at least 4 basins
3. Water resources development strengthened
   Indicator 1: Number of investment opportunities with regional benefits that have been advanced through CIWA
   support
   10-year target: 10 opportunities
   Indicator 2: Number of relevant transboundary institutions with an improved approach to sustainable investment
   planning and bankable investment preparation
   10-year target: 5 transboundary institutions
4. Stakeholder engagement and coordination strengthened
   Indicator 1: Number of basins with improved engagement with civil society, private sector and academia; Sub-
   indicator: Percentage of basins with improved engagement of organizations representing the interests of
   women and/or the poor
   10-year targets: 5 basins, 60% of engagements with women/poor organizations
   Indicator 2: Number of basins with increased water resources management and development information in the
   public domain
   10-year target: 5 basins


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                          Page 18
SECTION 5: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
Transboundary waters development is complex and demanding. Most major river basins, lakes and
aquifers are not contained within the boundaries of a single country. Depending on many different
social, developmental, geopolitical factors, the needs of various basins and regions can vary greatly.
The CIWA program must maintain flexibility in its approach to engagement (i.e., modes of
engagement, entry points for engagement, and program structure) in order to address the needs of
basins across Africa while maximizing impact.

MODES OF ENGAGEMENT
International lessons learned and our experience with NBTF and CIWA to date suggest that steady
progress towards international cooperation can be made through long-term sustained support to a
given basin with weak institutional capacity. Experience has also shown that given the event-driven
nature of many opportunities for impact, shorter-term, opportunistic support (analytical work,
capacity building, technical assistance, etc.) can often propel cooperation in a given basin forward.
Given the varying basin needs and opportunities across Africa, CIWA is designed to support a few
long-term programs, but also to be flexible enough to address strategic opportunities as they arise.
CIWA is designed around three primary modes of engagement, outlined in Figure 1.

Figure 1. CIWA: Modes of Engagement


                         CIWA: Modes of Engagement
       A. Sustained Basin                 B. Opportunistic                   C. Knowledge
          Engagement:                      Engagement:                   Management/Capacity
 long-term engagement in a           shorter-term engagement                     Building:
    finite number of priority       that explores collaborative,          discrete activities to
      basins to strengthen             potential high impact              generate, share and
   information, institutions,       investment opportunities in         manage knowledge that
         and investments             basins other than priority         can facilitate cooperative
                                               basins                      development and
                                                                            management of
                                                                          international waters

                     Analytical Work Cuts Across All Modes of Engagement


The bulk of CIWA resources will be dedicated to the sustained engagement in CIWA priority basins
(entry point can be a basin or region). CIWA priority basins are established using the program’s
criteria for selection including need, demand, linkages and CIWA’s value added (see below). The
analysis contained in “International Waters in Africa: A Strategic Overview” provides objective
criteria to assess basin and regional needs as an input to defining CIWA’s priority basins. Criteria such


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                       Page 19
as population, GDP, poverty, total discharge, surface area, potential for conflict over water,
infrastructure potential, environmental considerations, hydrological variability, anticipated effects of
climate change are delineated. Basins may move on and off of the priority list given performance,
needs, and demands. Sustained basin engagement will primarily be recipient-executed and will be
part of the Basin Sub-Program as described below. An explanation of recipient and Bank-executed is
provided in Annex 4.

CIWA supported opportunistic work will be demand driven, bounded engagements that unlock
potential for investment in basins other than priority basins. Entry points for engagement can be a
basin or a region and activity selection will be made using CIWA’s criteria for selection (see below).
In some cases, opportunistic work will be used to evaluate the suitability of long-term engagement
with a given entry point. Opportunistic work will respond to high-priority, high-stake issues and will
primarily be Bank-executed (description in Annex 4) and will be a part of the Catalytic Sub-Program
(detailed below).

The Knowledge Management and Capacity Building mode of engagement will broker knowledge on
cross-cutting issues to create shared understanding that can facilitate cooperative development and
management of international waters. Knowledge Management and Capacity Building window will
have multiple entry points for engagement including multiple basins, regions, Africa-wide, and other
relevant scales. Knowledge generated services will be relevant to multiple basins, regions, and
stakeholders capitalizing on economies of scale and this mode of engagement will cover four
thematic pillars:
            1) Analytical Work for Catalyzing Cooperation
            2) Exploring Collaborative Investment Opportunities
            3) Improving Access to and Improving the Use of Climate Change Data, information,
                and Models to Build Resilience
            4) Capacity Building and Knowledge Management

The Knowledge Management/Capacity Building window will be primarily Bank-executed (description
of Bank-executed in Annex 4) and will fall largely within the Catalytic Sub-Program (detailed below).

ENTRY POINTS FOR ENGAGEMENT
Experience suggests that transboundary cooperation between multiple riparian countries is best
developed at the level of the river basin where the shared resources of the basin is a unifying
concept. In this regard, many riparians have formed River Basin Organizations (RBOs) or similar
initiatives with the function of supporting riparians in the task of cooperative management and
development of their shared water resources. While the term basin primarily refers to river systems,
the scope of CIWA includes lakes and groundwater.

Lessons in promoting cooperative management and development of international waters have
shown that multiple entry points with various types of institutions are often required to promote


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                     Page 20
effective cooperation. Regional Economic Communities (RECs) are generally mandated with the
promotion of economic cooperation across all sectors in their regions which often include matters
related to water. The engagement with RECs will:
     Expand CIWA’s reach beyond the water sector organizations to include water’s role in food
        and energy security issues for which there often are regionally policies that extend beyond a
        basin’s boundary;
     Engage finance and planning ministries to legitimize and endorse water-related decisions;
        and to
     Facilitate cross-basin exchange and perform knowledge management functions.

More detail on why and how CIWA engages through various entry points is provided in Annex 5.

PROGRAM STRUCTURE
The CIWA program is organized around two complementary and interlinked sub-programs (Figure 2):

       1.   Basin Engagement Sub-Program: providing multi-sectoral support to develop and
            implement cooperative water resources management and development in international
            waters including basins, aquifers, lakes and regions through sustained engagement in
            priority basins and regions.

       2. Catalytic Sub-program: providing knowledge and analysis to underpin CIWAs
          engagement in international waters through the Opportunistic window and the
          Knowledge Management and Capacity Building window as described below.

THE BASIN ENGAGEMENT SUB-PROGRAM
The experience of the World Bank has been that engaging with and supporting riparian countries in
the development of international waters is a complex undertaking which often requires long-term
committed interaction. CIWA’s plan for activities and outcomes of sustained engagement in a basin
is outlined through a CSP that is developed by participating stakeholders (RBOs, RECs, bilaterals,
development partners, etc.) in a given basin in collaboration with the World Bank. This support plan
will state the objectives of the partnership and the expected results for each of the projects CIWA
will support, as well as their inter-linkages. The plan will be aligned with all participating basin
organizations’ strategic plans. CSPs are generally 5-10 years in duration and include a variety of
different projects and a complex partnership with different donors, financiers, international
development agencies as well as the client countries. These arrangements bring together support
from different sources, each of which has their own interests and areas of comparative advantage.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 21
                                                                       Figure 2: CIWA Program Structure

               Basin Sub-Program                                                                  Catalytic Sub-Program
     Objective: Strengthen the                              Objective: Create shared understanding and explore opportunities, risks, costs, and benefits of
     institutional structure in a                           cooperative development and management of international waters among stakeholders
     basin/region, provide relevant
     information, catalyze investments,
     and create linkages between                                       Knowledge Management & Capacity                       Opportunistic Window
     information, institutions and                                               Building Window                      Respond to demand for exploring
     investments.              Provide experiences and other            Generate, tailor, and share                   potential high impact collaborative
                              lessons useful for wider sharing          knowledge and capacity building               investment opportunities
                                    through KM efforts
                                                                        that can facilitate cooperative               Geographic scope: Services
                                                                        development and management of                 additional basin(s) or geographic
                                                                        international waters                          area(s) in Africa identified and
                                 Provide KM products and capacity       Geographic scope: Services basins             selected against pre-agreed criteria
                                  building that can help accelerate
                                   Basin program implementation
                                                                        and aquifers  throughout  Africa

                                                                                               Provide useful methodologies, tools, best
                                                                                                    practice, and capacity building
     Geographic scope: A finite number
     of priority basins
                                                                                                  Provide experiences and lessons useful for
     Duration: Sustained engagement                                                                   wider sharing through KM efforts
     for extended timeframe
     Implementation arrangements:
     Predominantly recipient-executed                  Duration: Discrete engagement over a shorter, defined timeframe
     Expected results: Strengthened                    Implementation arrangements: Predominantly Bank-executed
     cooperative management and                        Expected results: Increased evidence base and understanding of benefits from
     development of international                      cooperation, increased capacity, platforms for dialogue, greater coordination
     waters in priority basins


                       Identify need for sustained engagement in a basin. CIWA follow-up engagement is subject to resource availability, strategic significance, and
                                assurance that further engagement that will not compromise the programs strategic focus on the identified priority basins.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                                                                             Page 22
S ELECTING P RIORITY B ASINS
With 63 international rivers across the African continent (53 of which are located in Sub-Saharan
Africa) as well as numerous shared aquifers and lakes, there is substantial potential and opportunity
for CIWA’s engagement. However, as the resources of CIWA are limited, prioritization is necessary,
and a transparent basis for selection is required. CIWA aims to engage in basins where the emphasis
of riparian governments is investment and growth-oriented and the main principles for CIWA’s
engagement will be how opportunities in a given basin or region align with CIWA’s objective and
results areas and where, given limited resources, CIWA can add value for stakeholders.

There are many factors to consider in identifying how opportunities align with CIWA’s objectives and
results focused agenda, including:
    • Linkages: Significance of current plans for investment in a basin; Feasibility of cooperation
         and potential limitations by political economy or instability;
    • Need: Population, GDP, poverty, environmental considerations, total discharge, surface area,
         potential for conflict over water, infrastructure potential, hydrological variability, anticipated
         effects of climate change; (Data for the needs criteria are delineated in Strategic Overview)
    • Demand: Articulated demand for CIWA or Bank assistance in the basin, region or for the
         analytical work; (by riparians, regional organizations, international organization, Consultative
         Group (CG), etc.)

Therefore, the main criteria that CIWA uses to select priority basins in which to work are:
   • Alignment: The project must align with the CIWA objective and contribute significantly to
       one or more of CIWAs results;
   • Strategic importance: The extent to which basin engagement addresses critical issues must
       be significant;
   • International River Basin Benefits: Engagement should promote the optimization of basin-
       wide and regional benefits, and build cooperation and trust amongst stakeholders;
   • Strong Regional Interest and/or Country Commitment: Engagement should be demand driven
       and in line with the strategic direction and the needs of the basin; and
   • Complementarity and Additionality: Engagement should complement ongoing Bank and/or
       partner programs and continue or build on existing work

Specific proposals within a basin program are also assessed on:
   • Implementation Capacity and Readiness: In the case of recipient-executed projects,
        demonstrated capacity of RBO/REC to implement proposed work; readiness of institution to
        move quickly and implement in timely fashion;
   • Technical Merit: Strength of intended proposals, including the technical soundness of
        proposed work, the potential for the proposal to deliver results, and realistic work plan,
        budget, procurement plan and project timeline;
   • Risk: Risks to success of the project
   • Sustainability: Elements in the project proposed that will ensure sustainability of results after
     CIWA’s engagement is finished
   • Minimum value for recipient-executed projects: The minimum value for recipient-executed
     projects is $1,500,000

CIWA’ S PRIORITY BASINS AND REGIONS
Using the criteria outlined above, CIWA has selected five priority basins for engagement. In
consultation with basin counterparts, CIWA has developed strategies for sustained engagement and
support to the Nile, Zambezi, and Volta Basins (CSPs) and has recipient-executed grants under or
nearing implementation with multiple organizations in these basins and complimentary Bank-
executed support programs. CIWA also conducted initial scoping work to develop sustained
engagements in the Niger River Basin and in the Lake Chad Basin. Through further engagement with
basin counterparts, CIWA will develop CSPs for the Niger Basins, as well as relevant recipient-
executed grants and a Bank-executed support program.

CIWA has also identified two priority regional engagements and a basin engagement that may
develop into priorities for sustained engagement. Currently planned as opportunistic work through
the Catalytic Sub-Program, CIWA will support ECOWAS through a Bank-executed project and will
initiate activity in the Sahel (also Bank-executed). CIWA will also engage in an opportunistic recipient
activity in the Lake Chad Basin. If these initial projects indicate that further gains could be made
through sustained engagement and recipient-executed projects, CIWA will consider developing
sustained-engagement programs with ECOWAS and/or institutions in the Sahel.

CIWA S USTAINED B ASIN E NGAGEMENT P ROCESS
The key steps for engaging in a basin are:
         1. Initial engagement: initiation either by basin organization/s or by the World Bank based
            on an initial concept, and review of the justification to engage in relation to CIWA’s
            engagement criteria.
         2. Scoping: exploration of mutual objectives between CIWA and the basin/regional
            organization/s to outline the objectives and a possible program of support.
         3. Formalization: commitment to establishing a strategic partnership with CIWA based on
            an exchange of letters or inclusion in formal minutes from the basin/regional
            organization/s stating this commitment and the broad objectives of the partnership.
         4. Program/project preparation: taking forward engagement with the drafting of project
            documentation and if relevant, a CSP.
         5. Implementation: signing of a grant agreement and commencement of the project/s.
         6. Review and reporting: timely assessments of progress (annually, or as needed) and
            updating of the CSP as required. This will contribute to the results and reporting for the
            overall CIWA program.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                     Page 24
T YPICAL A CTIVITIES TO BE U NDERTAKEN (B ASIN S UB -P ROGRAM )
Indicative activities that could be implemented with CIWA support for each result area are presented
below.

Intermediate Result #1: Regional Cooperation and Integration Strengthened
Typical activities include:
    • Building of the evidence base, awareness, and understanding of the financial, social,
        environmental, and economic benefits of cooperation over water resources, resulting in
        greater political commitment and broad based public support, reduced tensions over water
        resources and limited risk of future conflict.
    • Institutional strengthening and building the capacity of nascent and existing RBOs and in
        some instances extending this to the strengthening of national institutions to enable
        engagement between riparian states on a ‘level playing field’.
    • Water resources management policy development and harmonization across shared
        international waters to provide a common platform for the development of transboundary
        waters, together with the building of specific skills such as negotiation skills and the
        development of expertise in international water law.
    • Support for preparation of cooperative agreements and legal frameworks where appropriate
        and explicitly requested by the respective RECs or RBOs.
    • In-depth analytical studies of the economic, social, political and historical factors that affect
        the current relationships and perspectives in international waters, which are important for
        building knowledge and promoting understanding and cooperation between all riparian
        parties. Studies which reflect the implications for poverty reduction and shared prosperity,
        climate resilience, and equity and empowerment, where relevant to promoting cooperation
        will be included. Efforts will be made for innovative packaging and dissemination of such
        knowledge products to stimulate discussion and cooperative action.
    • Convening of high-level meetings of political principals and senior officials; thematic
        workshops and conferences; training programs; technical placements and study tours, etc.

Intermediate Result #2: Water Resources Management Strengthened
Typical activities include:
    • The promotion of the sustainable development of transboundary water resources to meet
        the growth needs of national and regional economies, particularly in water - dependent
        growth sectors including among others power, irrigation, urban/industrial growth and rural
        development; the development of strategic basin development plans which are harmonized
        with regional and national strategic development plans.
    • Developing and improving analytic tools, knowledge products, data, forecasting, and/or
        capacity so that stakeholders are better able to coordinate investment operation as well as
        to assess and monitor water resource management status, challenges and opportunities and
        inform key basin officials and decision-makers.
    • Developing and improving decision support systems at river basin levels to enable their
        broad based and strategic application to analyze and inform decision-making.

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                     Page 25
   • Planning for resilience to climate variability and climate change – and will include the conduct
     of climate change impact assessments on transboundary waters and the identification of
     mitigation actions/measures.
   • The identification and assessment of benefit sharing resulting from cooperative
     development of transboundary water resources to clearly determine incentives and drivers
     of growth derived from riparian cooperation in collaborative or joint investments.
   • In-depth specific sector-related economic, financial, and technical analysis of topics such as
     hydrology, climate variability and change, multi-purpose water storage, disaster risk
     management (mainly drought and flood related), environmental services, sectoral water
     requirements (for example energy, irrigation, mining, industrial development, rural
     development etc.)
   • Strengthening and harmonization of international water resources management policies and
     functions is a particular area of focus including such issues as water quality, basin-wide
     hydrological monitoring and modeling, system optimization, catchment management
     including such factors as deforestation, sedimentation, wetland protection, aquatic
     ecosystem monitoring and protection etc.

Intermediate Result #3: Water Resources Development Strengthened
Typical activities include:
    • Program identification through multi-sector investment opportunities analyses.
    • Support to joint or collaborative investments of a transboundary nature which optimize
        benefits, including support to all stages in the project cycle: i) Scoping/pre-identification
        (Unlocking Potential) ii) Identification, iii) Pre-feasibility, iv) Feasibility, v) Investment
        Financing, vi) Detailed Design, vii) Construction, viii) Commissioning, ix) Ongoing Operations
        and Maintenance. The sectors of typical projects supported by CIWA include (but are not
        limited to) irrigation, hydropower generation and interconnection, multi-purpose storage,
        watershed management and flood early warning and preparedness.
    • Support for the development of specific protocols and arrangements for collaboration
        relating to specific projects including for example power purchase agreements.
    • Determination of financing and investment options including support for the identification
        and solicitation of potential investors.
    • Understanding of the contribution of water infrastructure investments in economic growth.
    • Incorporation of uncertainty and risk in the lifetime of water infrastructure investments.
    • Support to strengthen the basin organizations and other relevant institutions ability to
        improve the sustainability of regional investments by incorporating social and environmental
        considerations into investment planning and preparation.

Intermediate Result #4: Stakeholder Engagement and Coordination Strengthened
Typical activities include:
    • Support for civil society to engage in basin cooperation, management and development
        issues. Where relevant, civil society organizations representing the interests of women and
        the poor will be included in efforts to increase engagement.

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                    Page 26
   • Building partnerships in support of targeted engagement in the above three result areas with
     regional organizations, investment mechanisms, private sector, and academia.
   • Stakeholder engagement and consensus building for regional cooperation, of which the
     promotion of communications and knowledge dissemination is key to assisting with
     informing and building ownership and partnerships. This will particularly focus on increasing
     water resources management and development related information in the public domain.
   • Development of the CIWA website including international waters clearing house mechanism,
     stakeholder mapping; opinion surveys; media monitoring; stakeholder dialogues;
     workshop/seminars; communication and outreach; preparation of media and materials;
     dissemination of media, reports, lessons learned, etc.

CIWA will aim to ensure that its activities are complementary to other existing African water
programs by focusing specifically on international waters cooperation and management as a means
to unlock potential investments.

THE CATALYTIC SUB-PROGRAM
In Sub-Saharan Africa, cooperation over transboundary waters is stifled by gaps in technical
knowledge, shortcomings in institutions and policies, knowledge gaps regarding economic
opportunities, socio-political difficulties, and lack of capacity, all of which are subjects of
consideration of the CIWA Catalytic Sub-Program. Effective demand for technical capacity building,
knowledge services on cross cutting issues, understanding of opportunities for high-impact
collaboration, and strategic investment support is widespread. The evidence of this demand is as
follows:

       Consultative meetings have underscored the need for support on strategic analytical
        studies, enhancing the publically available knowledge base and analytical tools relating to
        the planning and management of transboundary waters, strategic communications,
        knowledge partnerships, professional networking, and capacity development among the
        various stakeholders.
       Discussions over the years among CIWA, World Bank teams and regional and national
        organizations in Africa invariably flag the urgent need for capacity-building, training, and
        knowledge in critical areas of transboundary water resources management.
       Experience with other similar trust fund programs has clearly underlined the importance of
        catalytic/analytic activities.
       Analytical reports confirm the importance of knowledge services, technical assistance,
        training, and strategic investment support.
       Discussions with several countries have noted the importance of convincing the Ministries of
        Finance why work on transboundary basins is essential for the economic growth and
        poverty alleviation.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                  Page 27
The Catalytic Sub-Program will contribute to the CIWA PDO through the following sub-program
objectives:

          Generate, share, and manage knowledge that can facilitate cooperative development
           and management of international water;
          Explore potential high impact collaborative investment opportunities in defined basins
           and regions; and
          Create shared understanding of the opportunities, risks, costs, and benefits of
           cooperative development and management of international waters among stakeholders.

The Catalytic Sub-Program will extend the impact of CIWA beyond priority basins and achieve
economies of scale.

C ATALYTIC S UB -P ROGRAM S TRUCTURE
The Catalytic Sub-Program activities will focus on understanding barriers to cooperation, exploring
cooperative investment possibilities in additional areas, building stakeholder capacity, generating
regional public goods, brokering knowledge and developing new models and tools. In an effort to
distinguish the different types of CIWA supported activities, the Catalytic Sub-Program is divided into
two windows - namely (a) Opportunistic and (b) Knowledge Management and Capacity Building
windows. Activities in both windows will aim to generate requisite knowledge, information, and data
and focus on cross-cutting issues with significant economies of scale and will be largely analytic in
nature.

The two windows are different in scope and coverage. The Opportunistic window responds to
demands for exploring collaborative investment opportunities, and involves discrete interventions
(including technical assistance) in specific basins other than the already selected CIWA priority
basins. Activities in the Knowledge Management and Capacity Building window will respond to
demands for knowledge activities and capacity building on themes that are important for unlocking
transboundary cooperation. Activities supported through this window will draw on experiences and
lessons from multiple basins (both in Africa and globally) and the utility of the outputs will not be
limited to any one basin (i.e., having economies of scale).

The procedure for identifying activities to support under the Catalytic Sub-Program will involve
prioritizing among the range of activities that the windows can support. The prioritization process
will result from extensive consultation with key stakeholders (including AC, CG, development
partners, World Bank, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), academics, and others). Upon
prioritizing among the potential activities and key issues, CIWA will invite ideas that respond to these
priorities.

Expanding on the program-wide criteria used to select CIWA engagements, the two main criteria for
prioritizing among the potential activities and issues for consideration under the Catalytic Sub-
Program will be demand and notable contribution to the CIWA program PDO including how
proposed projects contribute to the four results areas.


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                     Page 28
T YPICAL A CTIVITIES TO BE U NDERTAKEN (C ATALYTIC S UB -P ROGRAM )
There are five specific modes of operation (or ‘activity types’) of the Catalytic Sub-Program:

1.   Strategic analytical work1. The aim of strategic analytical work could include:
        Generating knowledge on investment opportunities and informing negotiations for
           cooperation and decision making;
        Analyzing barriers (i.e., technical, economic, socio-cultural, political, institutional, policy,
           etc.) that stifle cooperative development of water resources and suggesting remedial
           actions (for example, environmental-economic accounting);
        Assessing ex-ante the broader environmental, economic, and social impacts of
           investments(for example, upstream analysis of projects with potentially transformative
           regional benefits in basins other than priority basins); and
        Conducting comparative analyses on key issues within the context of Africa’s international
           waters (for example, inter-basin and intra- basin comparative analyses with the purposes of
           (i) identifying policies and institutions that hinder cooperation and collaborative
           investments and (ii) enhancing harmonization of institutions and policies).
2.   Building publicly accessible knowledge bases that can assist in promoting cooperation in Africa’s
     international waters. This could include:
        Facilitating development of databases with relevant data on climate change and variability
           and basic characteristics of Africa’s basins that can assist with planning transboundary
           cooperation in Africa’s international waters;
        Supporting compilation and spatial visualization of currently disperse data and information;
           and
        Disseminating data, information and knowledge generated on the thematic pillars and
           brokering internationally-sourced knowledge (for example on best practices).
3.   Developing tools and frameworks that assist to catalyze cooperation (e.g. tools for
     operationalizing regional guidelines for large infrastructure, tools for mainstreaming gender and
     poverty, frameworks for inclusive planning processes).
4.   Capacity-building. The activities could include:
        Strengthening existing institutions such as RBOs and RECs (e.g. basin-to-basin cross
           learning opportunities);
        Building the capacities of other key stakeholders (e.g. workshops and trainings); and
        Facilitating the creation of new basin organizations.
5.   Creating platforms for stakeholder engagement, dialogue, and multi-way exchange of
     information

1
 Analytical work will be supported in both the Basin Sub-Program and Catalytic Sub-Program. The distinction between the
two is the utility of the output. Analytical work in the Basin Sub-Program will largely be of utility to the specific priority basin
in which it is conducted. Analytical work associated with the Catalytic Sub-Program will primarily be of utility to (i) a basin
other than a priority basin (e.g. ex-ante assessment of investments) or (ii) multiple basins across the continent (e.g. a
comparative study)

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                               Page 29
The Catalytic Sub-Program will generate products that can be of use to a multitude of stakeholders
including RECs, riparians, donors, financial institutions, African Union (AU), the African Network of
Basin Organizations (ANBO), the African Ministers Council on Water (AMCOW), civil society
organizations (CSOs) and others.

LINKAGES BETWEEN THE SUB-PROGRAMS
Each sub-program informs and benefits from the other. As shown in Figure 2, the Knowledge
Management and Capacity Building window of the Catalytic Sub-Program will draw on the Basin Sub-
Program for experiences and lessons useful for wider dissemination. The Basin Sub-Program can also
draw on the Knowledge Management and Capacity Building window for knowledge products (e.g.,
tools, trainings, databases) that can help accelerate implementation of the Basin Sub-Program. It is
through the first linkage that the Knowledge Management and Capacity Building window will also
transfer useful knowledge from Opportunistic Window to the Basin Sub-Program. A similar
relationship exists between the two windows of the Catalytic Sub-Program. Lastly, identification of
opportunities for investment in additional basins through the Opportunistic window could result in
follow-up activities and need for sustained engagement. When activities in the Catalytic Sub-Program
identify the need for sustained engagement in a basin, it is anticipated that resources will be
mobilized from riparian countries themselves, other bilateral and multi-lateral donors, and other
development partners. It will be made clear that CIWA’s further engagement in such basins could
involve another discrete engagement. If there is interest for more sustained engagement through
CIWA, the relevant organization could submit a request to CIWA that would be reviewed against the
criteria for selection in the Basin Sub-Program. Any CIWA follow-up engagement (whether discrete
or sustained), however, would be subject to financial and human resource availability, weighting of
the strategic significance of continued engagement in a way that will not compromise CIWA’s
strategic focus on the identified priority basins.

MAINSTREAMING GENDER
WHY A GENDERED APPROACH IS IMPORTANT FOR CIWA

Women in Africa depend on and manage water resources in their daily lives, for household use, and
in farming, animal husbandry, and natural resource management, all of which are important for food
security. However, there are serious gender gaps in the allocation of water and irrigated and rain-fed
land. Womens’ voices have been very limited in policy decisions regarding water resource
management at all levels – from water user associations to basin management advisory groups.
Womens’ limited access to and control of resources and unequal gender-based power relations
makes them most vulnerable to food insecurity and limits their coping capacity for flooding,
droughts other disasters.

Recent water resource management strategies in Africa address these gender issues. The African
Water Vision 2025 calls for an “equitable and sustainable use and management of water resources,”
including : mainstreaming gender in water resources management, engaging women in key positions
in water issue decision-making, including women and youth in stakeholder involvement in water


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 30
resources management, and 100% gender-sensitive national water policies by 2015. The African
Ministers Council on Water (AMCOW) adopted a Policy and Strategy for Mainstreaming Gender in
the Water Sector in Africa which includes a gender approach to implementation of project
interventions at all levels within the water sector. There is mounting evidence at the country level
that improving gender equality leads to better policy decisions and environmental governance.

GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR MAINSTREAMING GENDER IN CIWA

1. Gender Inclusive Stakeholder Engagement: CIWA will facilitate inclusion of NGOs and/or other
organizations representing the interests and concerns of women and the poor in CIWA supported
stakeholder advisory groups, dialogues with civil society, stakeholder research and efforts to
improve horizontal and bottom up communication among civil society organizations in networks
wherever possible. CIWA will also address gender and water resources related climate variability and
change issues through relevant program-level communications materials, information portals, and
knowledge partnerships.

2. Informed Allocation of Water Providing for Multiple Use: CIWA projects can support informed
allocation and coordination of water allocation, and will include multiple-use water initiatives that
address domestic needs for which women are largely responsible as well as agricultural production
for household consumption wherever relevant.

3. Gender Informed Climate Resilience: CIWA teams recognize that successful implementation of
policies and programs addressing climate change, flooding, drought and other disasters requires an
understanding of the gender-based roles of women and men and the different risks and
vulnerabilities they face. CIWA will also draw on growing evidence that empowering women to
exercise leadership within their communities contributes to climate resilience

4. Gender Inclusive Mitigation of Conflict over Water Resources: While conflict analysis frameworks
provide a macro-level strategic assessment of the drivers of conflict, the inclusion of gendered
perspectives provides a more ‘people-centered’ approach, which enables CIWA to identify critical
elements in society who are resisting conflict. Water commissions, water juries and irrigation
cooperatives and women’s organizations can play important roles to help resolve disputes and
manage water between local stakeholders.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 31
SECTION 6: CIWA PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
The CIWA program and the MDTF and all related activities are managed and administered by the
Sustainable Development Department of the Africa Region of the World Bank. CIWA follows
standard World Bank operational policies and procedures for trust fund management, safeguard
policies, procurement policies and all other operational, fiduciary and legal requirements.

CIWA PROGRAM MANAGEMENT UNIT
Under the Guidance of the Management of the Sustainable Development Department of the Africa
Region of the World Bank, a dedicated Program Management Unit (PMU), led by the Program
Manager, is comprised of both management and technical staff responsible for managing all CIWA
operations. The PMU provides high-level multi-sectoral technical input, oversight and quality
assurance to the CIWA program, and day-to-day management and administration of the CIWA
program and its projects (outlined in Figure 3).

PANEL OF EXPERTS
A Panel of Experts has been established by the CIWA PMU and is mandated to provide CIWA with
strategic guidance as well as independent assessments and reviews related to the implementation of
the CIWA program. The Panel of Experts will act in accordance with the Bank’s policies and
guidelines. Its membership includes recognized internal and external water, energy, agriculture, and
cooperation for development specialists.

          World Bank                                      Program Manager
           Panel of                         Strategic leadership of program including strategy
           Experts                          and business development, technical content and
          (advisory role)                                 fiduciary management


                      Knowledge and Analytical Work                                    Strategic Planning
                             Coordination                                    Strategic leadership support to CIWA Team to
                    Strategic leadership of catalytic program to           expand the program and ensure consistency with
                    inform and develop the basin engagement                                 CIWA objectives
                                     program

                            Monitoring
                                                                   Gender &                             Climate             Water
   Communications              and              Team                               Trust Fund
                                                                    Poverty                             Change            Resources
      Specialist            Evaluation         Support                            Administration
                                                                   Specialist                          Specialist         Specialists
                            Specialist




     Zambezi Basin             Nile Basin           Volta Basin            Opportunistic                              KM Project
                                                                                               KM Project TTL
     Program Team            Program Team         Program Team             Project Team                                 Team




                 Lake Chad                Niger Basin           ECOWAS               SADC Project         Sahel Project
               Program Team              Program Team          Project TTL              TTL                   TTL



Figure 3: CIWA Program Management Unit, Program/Project Teams and Panel of Experts

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                                          Page 32
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING
The World Bank will administer the CIWA Trust Fund in terms of required operational policies that
include monitoring, evaluation and reporting. The World Bank will provide an annual report on the
progress of the activities financed under the MDTF that will draw out key issues and challenges and
include an assessment against the results framework outlined in Section 4. This will be reviewed and
discussed by the CIWA Advisory Committee (AC) on an annual basis.
The CIWA program places high priority on monitoring and evaluation in order to demonstrate the
successful achievement of results, to ensure timely actions in support of achieving results, and to
learn lessons and inform the future program.
The framework outlined in Section 4 will be used for monitoring and reporting the aggregated
results of the CIWA program. Additionally, each of the priority basin’s CSPs will identify annual
targets that define how cooperation, water resource management and development as well as
stakeholder engagement will be strengthened in that basin; targets defined in the CSPs will be
aggregated in the CIWA program’s results framework. In addition, projects supported by CIWA
utilizing all modes of engagement (sustained engagement, opportunistic engagement and
knowledge management/capacity building) will have their own results frameworks that will
aggregate to CIWA’s overall program results framework.
CIWA will produce an annual report that will both aggregate results against the quantitative targets
set in the CIWA Results Framework and will capture the high-level achievements of all programs and
projects. Individual projects will also follow standard World Bank procedures for monitoring and
reporting. These reports will provide greater detailed analysis of progress within the participating
basins. Lessons learned and key issues in all basins will be summarized and elevated to the CIWA
annual report.

The World Bank will undertake a mid-term review of the program before the end of year five,
reviewing the scope and focus to inform the future of the program. It will aim to strengthen the
program’s approaches and will enable cross learning and sharing of lessons with other regional
initiatives. It will draw out achievements and the challenges/barriers and opportunities that have
been encountered. A final evaluation will be conducted at the close of the program after year ten.

COMMUNICATIONS AND OUTREACH
CIWA will continue to position itself as a center of excellence on African transboundary water
resource management and development. As such, CIWA’s communications and outreach strategy
includes interactions with its various audiences including donors (current and potential), African
stakeholders (riparians, basin organizations, RECs, civil society organizations, academics and others
who are involved in water management and development), international organizations, financial
institutions (including World Bank management and staff) and others with a role to play in
transboundary waters. CIWA will engage with and disseminate its messages to these varied
audiences utilizing numerous online, mobile and print vehicles such as a knowledge management



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 33
system, an annual report, analyses and case studies, conferences, speaking engagements, blogs and
corporate identity materials ensuring that they reach their intended audiences in a timely manner.
A knowledge management system will be created to archive CIWA information as well as to promote
the dissemination of new knowledge and to encourage discussion on key issues of relevance to
CIWA. This system will include protocols and tools for internal collection and tracking of program
documentation. Implemented through the CIWA website, a secure document management system
will facilitate the management of program documents and will enable specific classes of users to
share draft documents before they are finalized and made public, and private documents such as
meeting minutes and policy documents. This system will be accessible by any member of the CIWA
Team or partner from any global location. The CIWA website will also house publicly available
documents which will be downloadable by any interested person.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                Page 34
SECTION 7: PARTNER INVOLVEMENT
CIWA will promote the involvement of all partners to gain guidance and support throughout the
program and within the project cycle. A variety of complementary mechanisms will enable this:
    A CG with a wide range of stakeholders interested in international waters to bring broad
      expertise and knowledge to CIWA;
    An AC of the contributing development partners to guide planning and resource allocation;
    Within each basin, a CIWA BSC to guide CIWAs engagement within specific international river
      basins; and
    For the Catalytic Sub-Program, consultations and meetings with development partners, RECs,
      RBOs, other bilateral organizations and key stakeholders in the Bank and in the Africa
      Region.

CIWA CONSULTATIVE GROUP
The function of the CIWA CG brings broad expertise and knowledge to CIWA, providing strategic
guidance in achieving its objective of strengthening cooperative management and development of
international waters in Africa. In this way CIWA will benefit from the insights and experience of key
African water sector professionals.

The CG is made up of CIWA recipient partners (river basins organizations, RECs or other international
water organizations in the cases of international lakes or aquifers); development partners (donors
and other financing agencies which may or may not be contributors to the CIWA Multi-donor Trust
Fund); and other stakeholders (AMCOW, RECs, RBOs, NGOs, etc.). The CG is proposed to meet once
a year or as needed. It is not a decision-making body.

The CIWA CG met in March 2011 in Marseille, France and in September 2013 in Stockholm, Sweden in
order to broaden stakeholder understanding and interest in the program and to provide CIWA with
important guidance on strategic planning and operations.

CIWA ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The function of the CIWA AC is to provide strategic advice and guidance to the World Bank regarding
CIWA’s programs and plans. The Committee has both a consultative and an advisory role and
provides a forum for contributing development partners to meet, exchange information, and consult
on a regular basis. The World Bank as manager of the CIWA MDTF undertakes day-to-day operational
activities and retains the overall decision making authority linked to its fiduciary responsibility,
consistent with all Bank managed trust funds and in terms of the Trust Fund Administration
Agreements entered into with each donor.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 35
The AC consists of the development partners who are contributing to the CIWA Multi-donor Trust
Fund (MDTF) and the World Bank. The AC meets formally once per year but will also convene
virtually on an ad hoc basis as required to enable effective and efficient program delivery.




         CIWA Consultative Group
             CIWA Recipient
                Partners
                                         CIWA Advisory Committee
                                                 Contributing development partners
              Development
                                                            World Bank
                Partners

                                                    CIWA Program Management
            AMCOW, RECs,                                      Unit
             RBOs, NGOs,                                           World Bank
           Other Stakeholders


                     Figure 4: CIWA Consultative Group and Advisory Committee




CIWA BASIN STEERING COMMITTEE
The function of the Basin Steering Committee (BSC) is to provide guidance for CIWA’s projects within
a participating basin and to ensure coordination with other on-going activities in the basin. The BSC
will review and provide feedback on the CSP that will outline the main activities and expected results
for the basin. The BSC will provide an opportunity to discuss the coordination of activities across the
various organizations operating within a participating basin. It will also provide an opportunity for
interested partners to consult and contribute to discussions on basin plans and priorities.

The CIWA BSC will be comprised of representatives of all participating basin organizations as well as
interested CIWA development partners and the World Bank. It will meet formally at least once per
year and on an ad hoc basis as required. Where possible the BSC meetings will be scheduled to
coincide with other basin forums.

The support provided by CIWA to basins will always be within a wider context of regional bodies,
donor partners, and international agencies, many of which will not be contributors to the CIWA
MDTF. The program of CIWA support is prepared and executed within the context of this broader
dialogue as shown in Figure 5. In this way, the CIWA BAC will support donor coordination and aid
effectiveness at the basin level, in line with the Paris Declaration, but will not be primarily responsible
for all coordination in a given basin.

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                        Page 36
                                Figure 5: Context for the CIWA BAC



                                         Regional
                                          Bodies         Collaborative
                                                              Context

               International
                 Agencies                                     CIWA
                                   River Basin

                    Non-CIWA
                      Donor                             Other
                     Partners                       stakeholders
                                                                              CIWA Basin
                                                                         Advisory Committee




DEVELOPMENT PARTNER ENGAGEMENT IN THE PROGRAM CYCLE
Within the basin engagement process outlined in Section 5, the key stages for partner involvement
have been identified. The red boxes in the flowchart below (Figure 6) indicate the points at which
development partners will be consulted. These points recognize that some development partners
may wish to engage at the CIWA program level while others may wish to have specific engagement
with one or more basins as well as at the program level. To ensure all development partners are
informed, the World Bank will provide partners with key documents for their information during the
project cycle.

In summary, CIWA development partners can engage with CIWA in any or all of the following:

      Review and endorsement of the Justification Note which provides the rationale for engaging
       in a basin
      Development and review the CSP for each basin, engaging as part of the CIWA BAC
      Review the World Bank Project Concept Note, feeding comments into the regular World
       Bank review meeting
      Review the World Bank Project Appraisal Document, feeding comments into the regular
       World Bank review process
      Participate in annual reviews of projects
      Participate in CIWA AC meetings



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 37
                     Figure 6: Sustained Basin Engagement Process Flowchart




CIWA’S BROADER PARTNERSHIPS
African countries are taking concrete steps        towards regional integration and closing the
infrastructure gap through, for example, the      recently established Program For Infrastructure
Development in Africa (PIDA), a program of        the African Union Commission (AUC), the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD)      and the African Development Bank (AfDB). In



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                               Page 38
addition there are currently a number of initiatives in Africa specifically related to the management
and development of water. These include:

     The African Water Facility (AWF) which is an initiative led by AMCOW to mobilize resources to
      finance water development activities in Africa. The AfDB hosts the AWF at the request of
      AMCOW.
     The water sector of the Infrastructure Consortium for Africa (ICA)
     The Program for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA)
     The European Union (EU) Water Facility (Second Program)
     The United Nations Development Programme’s Shared Waters Partnership (SWP)
     The Global Environment Facility’s (GEF) International Waters Programme
     The Global Water Partnership’s Strengthening Institutions for Transboundary Waters in Africa
      project (SITWA)

CIWA aims to encourage partnerships to ensure complementarity and coordination with these
programs and initiatives in Africa to maximize the effectiveness of support. This will form a central
component of CIWA’s outreach and communication activities.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 39
SECTION 8: FINANCING REQUIREMENTS AND STATUS
The total financing requirements of CIWA are US$200 million over the ten-year life of the fund.

This amount will enable the successful achievement of CIWA’s objective at a significant scale and it
reflects the high level of ambition for the program by the World Bank, contributing partners and
potential basin partners. The ten-year targets presented in Section 4 are based on CIWA operating
with this total amount of funding.

To date, CIWA has attracted pledges totaling nearly US$71 million (Table 2) from five donor partners:
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, the UK, and the Netherlands. Other donors have expressed interest in
joining CIWA in the near future, citing the rationale of building on the successful partnerships
established through the NBTF and of benefitting from the efficiency of a harmonized mechanism.



Table 2: Partner Pledges Secured

                                      Pledges
                                      Currency Amount in Amount in USD*
         Contributing Partners
                                               Original
                                               Currency
         The Netherlands              USD                                        25,000,000
         Denmark                      DKK            18,700,000                    3,329,423
         Norway                       USD                                            882,746
         Sweden                       SEK           170,000,000                   26,133,625
         United Kingdom               GBP            10,000,000                    15,512,361
         Total Pledges (USD)                                                     70,858,156
                       *as of March, 2014



Currently, 82% of current pledges ($58 million) have been allocated and 16% ($11 million) has been
designated to Niger and Sahel (i.e. 98% of current resources are planned). CIWA has undertaken
initial planning exercises for Phase II projects in the Nile, Zambezi and Lake Chad basins, requiring
additional $56 million. CIWA programs in operation in these basins could be readily scaled up to
achieve additional results and value for money. Based on success of current engagement in Niger
and Volta basins and with ECOWAS, CIWA also plans to expand these engagements. CIWA is
prepared to expand the program envisioned envelope of $200 million.

It must be noted that pledges of financing to CIWA are made to the fund as a whole and not to a
specific project or basin. This is standard practice for World Bank Trust Funds and reflects the
fiduciary role played by the World Bank in the administration of the fund. This helps to ensure that
the fund operates with maximum effectiveness and directs resources to the projects and programs
selected on merit and need. As noted above in the section on “Partner Involvement”, contributing

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                      Page 40
partners will be able to input into the CIWA process at a number of stages to reflect their
development priorities and influence the choice and design of programs. The practice of ‘’soft
earmarking’’ of a donor contribution to a particular program or basin is discouraged and cannot be
formally reflected in the Administration Agreement between the World Bank and the donor.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                Page 41
ANNEXES

ANNEX 1: MAP OF TRANSBOUNDARY BASINS IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa   Page 42
ANNEX 2: CIWA RISK ANALYSIS
             Risk                        Mitigation measure               Impact   Probability

                                        Developmental risks

Challenging political context      An analysis of the political economy
All work in international waters   of the basin will be undertaken to
has an inherent risk that          gain a greater understanding of the
domestic or international          risks and to formulate a strategy to
political issues (either related   minimize the risks to the effective
or unrelated to water issues)      implementation of the CIWA              High      Medium
may negatively impact the          program. The Bank will work with
context in which such projects     Development partners to review
operate. This risk is often        mitigation measures at a regional
beyond the scope of CIWA’s or      and national level.
the RBO’s ability to influence.
Insufficient basin-wide            Diplomacy and confidence
commitment                         building will be necessary to
Some countries within a basin      ensure that progress is achieved.
may not have formal                While it is recognized that it will
membership of the                  not always be possible to have all
                                                                          Medium     Medium
participating basin                riparians formally committing, the
organizations and/or may           CIWA basin engagement process
challenge the basin                does require a formal
organization’s engagement          commitment of all participating
with CIWA.                         basin organizations.
Inadequate stakeholder voice       The program will prioritize the
Stakeholders may not fully         involvement of stakeholders and
engage in the project cycle        indeed, one of CIWA’s four result
resulting in inadequate voice in   areas aims to strengthen
decision-making, raising the       stakeholder engagement in water        Medium      Low
potential of public protest or     resources management and
civil action that could            development.
jeopardize or delay
development projects.


                                          Operational Risks

Inadequate coordination            CIWA will work to encourage and
between participating basin        motivate strong cooperative
organizations                      working relationships. A CSP will
If participating basin             be developed with all participating    Medium      Low
organizations have mutually        basin organizations and will
inconsistent objectives, this      capture how CIWA projects will
may weaken the overall             integrate with the broader
development effectiveness of        objectives of each of the
CIWA’s program.                     organizations. A CIWA BSC will be
                                    established to coordinate all the
                                    projects to be undertaken within
                                    the CSP.
Inadequate implementation           The program will prioritize the
capacity and readiness              capacity needs of basin
Some basin organizations may        organizations to enable them to
have insufficient capacity or       implement their CIWA projects
                                                                           Medium    Low
experience to effectively           effectively. Support for financial
engage in basin management          management, procurement and
and development.                    project management may be
                                    required.
Technical complexity of             CIWA will draw upon global and
international water projects        continental experience to help
can lead to failure or delay        guide program plans and designs.
International water programs        A Panel of Experts has been
are inherently complex and          formed to provide this strategic
                                                                            Low     Low
require seasoned perspective        guidance and oversight.
to avoid pitfalls and errors that   Additionally, the CG will enable
can seriously undermine             CIWA to benefit from the insights
management and development          and experience of key Africa
projects.                           water sector professionals.

                                             Financial risks

CIWA financing available is         Regular and careful management
insufficient to meet demand.        of the pipeline of potential basin
This risks raising expectations     programs is necessary to match
of potential recipient basin        demand to available resources.
partners. Participating donors      There will necessarily be a time lag
may be relatively slower to         between the points when a donor
commit resources relative to        pledges funds to when those
the demand for engagement by        funds can reasonably be                Medium   Medium
recipient basin organizations.      committed to a basin program and
                                    again from when that program
                                    can spend the funds.
                                    Development partner
                                    expectations on the disbursement
                                    of funds must be managed
                                    accordingly.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                           Page 44
ANNEX 3: ALIGNING WITH THE WORLD BANK’S REGIONAL AND SECTOR STRATEGIES

The critical importance of cooperation over transboundary water management and development is
recognized and supported in World Bank sector and regional strategies, as well as key pieces of
analytical work.

Water Resources Agenda

The 2003 Water Resources Sector Strategy highlights the need to support development of water
infrastructure in conjunction with capacity building for river basin management. The improved
management of water is viewed as being critical to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and
the Strategy positions water resource centrally at the core of climate-related interventions. The
Strategy provides a solid foundation for scaling up engagement, including by strengthening the links
between water, environment, and energy and further investing in infrastructure and agriculture. The
Mid Cycle Implementation Progress Report of the 2003 Water Resources Sector Strategy (MCIPR,
2010) reinforces the key need for cooperation in international waters, not only to mitigate water-
related risks (e.g. floods and droughts), competition and even conflict, but also to maximize
development opportunities and synergies. As a regional public good, international waters require
collaborative action in order to generate sustainable win-win benefits.

In line with the Water Resources Sector Strategy, the Water Resources Unit of the Africa Region has
actively developed a strong analytical and knowledge program in order to lay the foundation for
complex water investments. This work responds to the needs of country and regional counterparts,
including preparing and implementing effective high-value investments. At the country level, one key
instrument is the Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy (CWRAS), which provides the
strategy for World Bank engagement in the water sector. At the regional level, the Bank has
undertaken several pieces of analytical work, including in the Nile, Zambezi and Niger River Basins in
order to help the respective governments to better understand the challenges and opportunities
related to water resources management and development and to provide a basis for developing
regional water investment programs.

The complex nature of many water investments, such as multi-purpose dams, necessitates bringing
together diverse areas of expertise and working across World Bank Units, networks and Country
Management Units; managing associated high risks and impacts while effectively consulting with
internal and external parties; and accommodating long time horizons and large costs (including
preparatory) to generate large development rewards. For example, in the Senegal River Basin, the
Senegal River Development Organization‘s (OMVS) joint basin development program aligns with
World Bank’s efforts to support regional integration in Sub-Saharan Africa in that it aims to: (i)
generate economic and social benefits that traverse country boundaries; (ii) build both country and
regional ownership; and (iii) provide a platform for a high level of policy harmonization among
countries. Because of the common objectives, the Integration Department, as well as the Water


Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 45
Resources and Energy Units of the Africa Region are supporting OMVS through the Senegal River
Basin Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development project, as well as preparation of the Gouina
Hydroelectric Project (International Development Association (IDA) US$110 M). This dam project will
add approximately 120MW of power to the grid of the OMVS countries, which are all currently
experiencing huge energy shortfalls. It will be the first regional project in which Guinea will also
participate.

The Water Resources Unit of the World Bank also leads the support to African countries on Disaster
and Risk Management. Over the last three decades, the Bank has established itself as a major
disaster management financier, with the share of disaster related investments reaching 9 percent of
its US$ 627.9 billion portfolio. Since 1984, the Bank has financed 732 disaster related projects,
providing client countries with US$ 56.7 billion in disaster related assistance, of which the Bank
committed US$ 35.42 billion specifically to disaster activities. Since 1984, the Africa Region has had
the largest share of disaster related projects in the World Bank (203 projects representing total
commitments of US$ 8.89 billion). Between 2006 and 2010, the Africa Region financed 25 percent of
the entire Bank disaster lending portfolio (69 projects directly and indirectly addressing natural
disasters with total commitments of US$ 3.56 billion). Recent examples include the Social
Opportunities Project in Ghana, which includes a US$ 4 million disaster response window; and the
Third Productive Safety Net Project in Ethiopia, which provides cash and in-kind transfers to
chronically food insecure households as well as drought risk financing.

African countries have increasingly requested Bank support to respond to disasters. In the last seven
years, the Bank has provided flood assistance to more than 10 countries including Madagascar,
Ghana, Nigeria, Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Benin and Togo. Flood related activities range
from short to long-term and include both ‘’hard’’ and ‘’soft’’ interventions, such as building flood
control structures, developing social protection programs and drainage systems, providing early
warning systems and instituting flood prevention policies. The most recent Bank response is the $2.2
billion Horn of Africa Drought Response package, to assist Somalia, Kenya and Ethiopia in short term
recovery and medium to long term drought resilience to address the structural causes of drought
leading to famine.

Energy Sector Strategy
World Bank engagement on water in Africa is closely aligned with the Energy Sector Strategy. The
Bank's Africa Region energy project portfolio currently carries about 41 projects totaling US$3.8
billion. These projects include support for increasing access to electricity and rehabilitating war-torn,
dilapidated power grids, while ensuring international environmental and social safeguard policies are
strictly followed. In the medium to longer term, the strategic responses supported by the Bank are
expected to lead to commercially and financially viable power generation and distribution and to
broadly shared benefits of energy access. To this end, significant progress has been made in the
formation of regional power pools, and trade is already taking place in western and southern Africa.
Notwithstanding the progress, power pool architecture in other regions is less well developed, and
in all regions investments in regional interconnections and new generation are needed before the

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                      Page 46
benefits of trade can be fully realized. In addition to supporting the energy sector in these areas, the
World Bank Group will continue its advocacy work to foster global support for the responsible
development of hydropower resources for Africa’s benefit, including fully incorporating climate
change and socio-environmental concerns. The Africa Region is committed to engaging proactively
on the Clean Energy and Climate Change agenda.

Lastly, the World Bank Group will continue its advocacy work to foster global support for the
responsible development of hydro resources for Africa’s benefit, while maintaining consistency with
climate change and socio-environmental concerns. The Africa Region is therefore engaging
proactively on the Clean Energy and Climate Change agenda. In this regard, CIWA could play a key
role. As an example, the Regional Rusumo Falls Hydropower and multi-purpose has been prepared
by the Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program of the Nile Basin Initiative with resources
from the NBTF and seeks to provide multi-purpose use of water and energy resources with
investment in sustainable livelihoods in the project area through (i) complementary human
development services (health, education) and (ii) private sector support in the project area through
other national and regional investment projects.

Agriculture and Rural Sector Strategy
The links with the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Strategy are also significant. In
response to rising food prices worldwide, the World Bank has scaled up its support and development
financing for agriculture programs across Africa, providing $1.3 billion in FY 2011. The Bank’s work is
closely aligned with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program, an Africa-owned
and led initiative for increasing productivity in agriculture. The Bank’s Strategy prioritizes land and
water resources management and development of irrigation infrastructure as critical to increase and
sustain growth in the sector.

Attainment of the growth objectives of the region would require significant investment all along the
value chains – particularly with respect to land administration, irrigation, post-harvest management,
transformation and distribution. Preparation of these investments would require feasibility studies,
safeguard analyses, engineering specifications, and preparation of procurement packages, all of
which will require important resources that CIWA could provide when irrigation development is
constrained by international water resources issues.


Strategic Framework on Development and Climate Change (SFDCC)
The Strategic Framework on Development and Climate Change (SFDCC), adopted by the World Bank
Group in 2008, contains six action areas that are aligned with the Bali Action plan and aim to: i)
support climate action in country-led development processes, ii) mobilize additional concessional
and innovative finance, iii) facilitate the development of market-based financing mechanisms, iv)
leverage private sector resources, v) support accelerated development and deployment of new
technologies, and vi) step up policy research, knowledge and capacity building.



Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                     Page 47
Each action area supports both adaptation and measures with mitigation co-benefits, with particular
attention to increasing the availability of analytical tools and financial resources for adaptation.

Particular to Sub-Saharan Africa the SFDCC identifies a series of pillar and CIWA is strategically
aligned with all four of the main pillars:

Pillar 1: Make adaptation and climate risk management a core component of development. While
adaptation is essentially a risk management strategy, it is fundamentally about sound, resilient
development and the need to ensure that disaster risk reduction and adaptation are fully integrated
into growth and poverty reduction strategies.
          CIWA’s role: Promoting sound, resilient water resources development, supporting disaster
          risk reduction, sustainable water management, watershed management and increased
          agricultural productivity through improved irrigation and rain-fed agriculture.

Pillar 2: Take advantage of development opportunities with mitigation co-benefits. Given the huge
energy deficit in the region and the heavy reliance on fuel wood, most of the Sub-Saharan Africa’s
mitigation opportunities are linked to more sustainable land and forest management, energy use and
development, and urban transport systems. By taking advantage of opportunities and new
technologies in these areas, African countries can further development while providing clean energy
access to their populations.
         CIWA’s role: Promoting hydropower production when it replaces carbon-intensive fossil-fuel
         or biomass burning; integrating concerns about additional methane production resulting
         from related submerged vegetation; promoting sustainable agriculture and watershed
         management which are linked to soil carbon credits.

Pillar 3: Focus on knowledge and capacity development. Uncertainties regarding the impacts of
climate change on different sub-regions and sectors make policy decisions more complex and
magnify trade-offs and opportunity costs. To ensure that Africa has access to appropriate
information and technologies, as well as adequate capacity to plan and prepare for projected
changes in climate, the World Bank Group will invest in improving weather forecasting, water
resources monitoring, land use monitoring, disaster preparedness, appropriate technology
development, and strengthening capacity for risk management, planning, and coordination.
         CIWA’s role: Help Africa to build its water-related knowledge and analytical base, as well as
         strengthen the capacity of country and regional institutions for weather forecasting, water
         resources monitoring, as well as watershed-related land-use information, disaster
         preparedness, risk management, and planning and coordination.

Pillar 4: Scale-up financing opportunities. This will be achieved through IDA’s programmatic
financing and incremental financing to build the knowledge base, strengthen institutions, and
climate-proof investments3 will come from both existing and new institutions. Other financing will
include carbon finance (CF) and Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Adaptation Fund of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC); the World Bank Group’s Climate

Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                   Page 48
Investment Funds (Strategic Climate Funds; Clean Technology Fund), the Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility and the Carbon Partnership Facility. A number of these will help to leverage underlying
finance from both public and private sources.
         CIWA’s role: Facilitate investment in climate-smart projects and leverage other public and
         private financing streams for investment in climate-resilience building information,
         institutions and infrastructure and leverage additional sources of funding (above) to build
         the knowledge base, strengthen institutions, and climate-proof investments




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                  Page 49
ANNEX 4: EXPLANATION OF RECIPIENT AND BANK EXECUTED PROJECTS
The important distinction between Bank- and recipient-executed projects/activities is in the modality
of disbursement. The funds for Bank-executed activities are disbursed by the World Bank to pay for
activities implemented by the Bank, whereas the funds for recipient executed activities are
transferred from the Bank to a CIWA recipient institution in the form of a legally binding Grant
Agreement between the Bank and the recipient institution. These funds are therefore ring-fenced
with the understanding that the full amount will be disbursed to and expensed by the recipient by
the end of the grant period; therefore, these funds cannot be double-committed for other purposes.
Specifically, an initial deposit is made to a segregated bank account held by each recipient, and funds
are replenished as and when expenditures are incurred and accounted. This system has built in
controls to ensure that disbursements do not lag and that the funds are used for the purposes
intended.


Explanation of Recipient and Bank Executed Projects
Recipient-executed Projects                                          World Bank Executed Projects

In recipient-executed projects the funds are transferred to the      In Bank Executed Projects funds are
recipient under a grant agreement and the recipient is               retained under the financial management
responsible for all aspects of the execution of the project          and control of the Bank. All accounting,
including financial management, procurement, spending of             financial management, procurement and
funds only on eligible expenses in terms of the Agreement, and       other administrative functions are
the effectiveness of the project in achieving the agreed results.    undertaken by the Bank.

In order to execute a project a recipient must meet a number of      It is often the case however that the project
requirements:-                                                       is overseen and guided by a Steering
a. The recipient must be a legal entity, able to enter in            Committee with representation from the
    agreements including the Grant Agreement.                        client, giving the recipient a high degree of
b. The recipient must be able to open and maintain a special         engagement and ownership of the project.
    bank account to receive and manage the funds.
c. The recipient must have in place financial administration and     The activities of the project may be
    management systems adequate to manage the funds.                 undertaken by the recipient or by other
d. The recipient must have suitably trained and proficient           contracted parties in much the same way
    financial management and accounting staff to adequately          as in recipient-executed projects but the
    manage the funds.                                                World Bank retains responsibility for the
e. The recipient must have staff trained and proficient in           funds.
    ensuring proper procurement procedures.
f. The recipient must have the required managerial and               A “Bank Executed Project” project does not
    technical capacity to ensure the successful and timely           therefore mean that the project is physically
    delivery of the project.                                         undertaken by Bank staff – in most cases
                                                                     the project and the funds are administered
The World Bank will appraise the recipient to establish that it is   by Bank staff while the ‘work’ is done by
able to meet World Bank standards in financial management            the recipients or under contract by firms or
and procurement. The World Bank will monitor the execution of        agencies procured by the Bank in terms of
the project to ensure that standards are maintained. This level of   project documents which have been
oversight means that extra Bank resources are required in the        agreed between the recipients and the
case of recipient-executed projects.                                 Bank.




Proposal for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                       Page 50
ANNEX 5. INTENDED IMPACT DICTATES THE ENTRY POINTS FOR ENGAGEMENT


      Intended Impact Area                Purpose of Engagement                      Institutional Context
                                         (means of affecting change)             (entry points for engagement)
     Development Outcome          – Legitimization and endorsement of – National governments, Ministries of
(Poverty Reduction, Sustainable &   basin level action in line with broad   Finance and Planning
                                    development goals                     – RECs and other regional entities
    Inclusive Growth, Climate
                                  – Providing strategic direction for – National       and regional        NGOs/
            Resilience)             basin action                            stakeholders
                                     –   Facilitating cross-basin exchange
        Basin Framework              –   Basin and investment planning       –   RBOs
                                     –   Dialogue and agreements             –   Regional entities
                                     –   Institutional development           –   Water, Ag, Energy ministries
                                     –   M&E                                 –   Local jurisdictions
                                     –   Knowledge development               –   NGOs
                                     –   Resource mobilization               –   Educational institutions
                                                                             –   Private sector
      Action on the Ground           – Project design and implementation     –   Relevant governments
     (Investment/Activities)         – Fiduciary     and     environmental   –   RBOs
                                       diligence                             –   Local agencies
                                     – M&E                                   –   Implementing entities
                                     – Beneficiary contact                   –   NGOs
                                                                             –   Private sector
