                                                                                                       93443

                       KDP2 MATCHING GRANT STUDY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

During the first phase of KDP, which ran from 1998 to 2002, the program was kept largely
independent of local governments. Although officials played a role in coordination and oversight,
fears of capture and corruption meant that their involvement in day-to-day operations and fund
transfers was circumscribed, and planning, decision-making and implementation were devolved
to communities, aided by independent consultants. As well as offering a viable and cost-effective
means of service delivery, this approach was also intended to support and strengthen community
capacity, which previous government-run projects had tended to neglect and undermine.

In the longer term, however, this relative independence of government was neither sustainable
nor desirable, particularly in light of Indonesia’s rapid democratisation and decentralization
following the demise of President Suharto and the ‘Big Bang’ decentralization of 2001. To some
extent, KDP anticipated this issue, by attempting to showcase the benefits of participatory
approaches to local officials. This strategy met with some success. As noted in the final report for
this phase, many officials displayed signs of ‘buy-in’ to KDP principles, as evidenced by “the
perspective of local officials to view KDP as a model for other development programs.”

Yet, such ‘scaling up’ of KDP principles was still hampered by limitations on the role of officials
and the lack of a direct financial stake on the part of local governments. The second phase of
KDP, which began in 2003, took the first steps to address these issues. Prior to the start of the
program, local governments were invited to participate in a ‘matching grant’ scheme, which
enabled them to fund sub-districts that would not otherwise receive KDP. All other aspects of the
program remained the same: facilitation was still centrally funded and normal KDP rules and
procedures still applied. Nearly half of all districts that would receive the first year of KDP2
opted to participate, providing contributions worth on average just over Rp. 1 billion per district.

This paper seeks to understand what prompted local governments to contribute to KDP and the
process by which they did so. It also attempts to document the impact that this had on oversight
and involvement, as well as some of the administrative issues faced by the program as it works to
integrate with local government procedures. Much of the study focuses on the executive branch
of district governments. Much more than legislators, officials played a key role in deciding
whether to contribute to KDP, and, necessarily, a much larger part in the operational details. The
study is based on a survey of KDP consultants and local planning and empowerment agency
heads in 73 districts, as well as in-depth interviews in 17 districts with over 150 officials,
legislators and consultants. Informants included chairmen and members of local legislatures,
district heads, their deputies and assistants, heads and members of district agencies, sub-district
project managers (PjOK), district consultants and kecamatan facilitators.

A. BUY IN TO KDP

The study provides strong evidence of buy in to KDP aims, principles and procedures among
local government officials, from agency staff involved in the minutiae of the program to more
senior planners and district heads. In general, officials strongly identified with the poverty
alleviation aim of KDP. Many also endorsed its bottom-up ‘empowerment’ approach as a way to
inculcate skills and reduce dependency. This was often seen as a paradigm for development that
stood in contrast to previous ‘top down’ programs, which were said to have created dependency
and were not sustainable.
KDP performance was also generally seen in a very positive light. In particular, planning,
competition and management were valued as a way to bring out aspirations, create ownership, cut
costs and increase contributions and sustainability. However, there were some concerns. Officials
worried that competition would lead to tension. KDP processes were also said to take too long.
Indeed, almost one-third of officials surveyed rated this aspect of the program as poor or very
poor. Finally, although most valued transparency and community management of projects in
KDP, many noted that contractors and corrupt officials or legislators would oppose it.

Buy-in to the program was also evident in the desire of many officials to use it as ‘a model’. This
went beyond aspiration. Over four-fifths of officials surveyed for the study reported that their
district had taken up aspects of KDP in other district-funded programs. The specific procedures
that they were likely to use display a tendency to focus on practical participation, and included
allowing community members to make and prioritise proposals, and play a role in
implementation. There was less emphasis on community decision-making and control, and
districts were unlikely to adopt facilitation, sub-district competition, open-menu proposals or
exclude contractors by adopting full-fledged community management of projects. While this
reflects some of the concerns outlined above, failure to take up some of these aspects of the
program is also likely to be related to desire for more input and control than KDP currently offers.

B. RATIONALE FOR FUNDING

Buy-in to the KDP concept and performance played a key role in officials’ readiness to provide
funds. Some also said funding would facilitate transfer of KDP principles and procedures to other
programs. However, evidence did not support this. District funding rarely boosted monitoring or
stimulated greater interest from members of district administrations. Officials were also swayed
by financial incentives. However, they did not tend to cite the obvious benefit of free technical
assistance. Facilitators were not a cost that they would normally have borne and technical
assistance was likely not often weighed as a financial benefit. Rather, they hoped that they would
be rewarded with more project funding from the central government if they obeyed its request to
contribute. To a degree, participation therefore represented a ‘token effort’ to show willing.

Research also looked at why other districts did not provide funding, and variations in the size of
contributions among those that did. This was puzzling. Failure to contribute was neither
systematically related to limited fiscal capacity nor to the ‘buy-in’ of key officials. The latter
might be explained by the fact that the scheme did not present decision-makers with a
‘significant’ choice about whether they wanted to participate in KDP or not, since failure to
contribute was costless. The former indicates that most districts were not funding the program ‘to
capacity’, providing support for the view that participation was to some extent tokenism. But
failure to provide funds was also sometimes influenced by ‘positive’ factors, including
availability of alternative ‘empowerment’ programs, veto of proposals by other members of the
executive or legislature, and problems with communication within and between district
governments and the centre.

C. BUDGET ALLOCATION PROCESS

During the first two years of the matching grant program, there were numerous problems and
deviations from initial funding commitments in participating districts, including cuts and
reductions in funding. These occurred for two reasons: issues internal to the local budgeting
process, and those at the interface of KDP and district procedures. Budgeting was characterised
by interagency and legislative competition for funds and can be coloured by corruption at every
stage. Although the latter was not a major disincentive to fund KDP, it is likely to become a
bigger issue as the amount of district funding for the program increases in future.

                                                                                                  2
Despite being a multi-sectoral program, local government allocations to KDP are coordinated
through one agency, usually the district empowerment agency (PMD), which is often small and
lacks clout. They were subject to contest by other agencies, though members Bappeda did often
lend their support to allocations. Competition from other agencies for KDP funds might indicate
the limited stake and involvement of other agencies in the program, a phenomenon that was also
noted in monitoring and coordination of the program.

There was very limited scrutiny of allocations to KDP by legislators, partly a result of problems
with the lack of interest or ability of DPRD members in discharging their oversight role, and the
fact that their main personal or political interests in budgeting lay elsewhere. However, although
DPRD were often uninterested in allocations, as the value of the fund allocation increased, so did
their attention. This usually resulted in reductions. However, limited attention was sometimes
related to lack of knowledge about KDP, and there is evidence that some legislators are keen to
learn more and get more involved in the program.

Some of the major problems during budgeting were linked to poor coordination within districts,
and between districts and the centre. First, loss of operational knowledge related to staff turnover
in the coordination team at district level sometimes had a damaging effect on the ability of
officials to negotiate allocations. Second, the provision of clear, timely and reliable information
from the centre was a problem in many districts and led to frustration and missed opportunities.
Third, the lack of clear rules and sanctions also contributed to problems. Shortfalls in local
government funding were not countered by sanctions, such as threats to withdraw technical
assistance.

D. DISBURSALS AND TAXATION

There were many violations of KDP rules and procedures during the first year of the matching
grant program. These were mainly caused by conflicts between the program and district rules and
procedures, which forced officials to choose between the two. There were also more minor
problems with occasionally lengthy (three month or longer) delays due to poor local government
administration, and also with taxation, which tax officials in a few districts insisted on applying in
the face of central government requests not to.

The most pressing problem was a conflict between the district fiscal year and the multi-year, or
‘off-calendar’, implementation of KDP. This led to the majority of breaches of KDP and district
procedures, including the use of informal practices, such as disbursals to non-governmental
accounts or falsification of financial reports. This conflict also caused a great deal of
inconvenience to officials and consultants and may have created a disincentive to fund the
program. Strong efforts should be made to align KDP disbursals with the district budget year.

Further mismatches with district processes were evident in relation to KDP fund request and
disbursal procedures. KDP fund request and authorization procedures were not entirely relevant
to district procedures for authorization of disbursals. As a result, KDP safeguards on disbursals
could be easily ignored. Disbursal of funds direct to kecamatan accounts was also not in line with
district financial procedures, which call for disbursal through agency accounts. There is little
reason to insist that officials deviate from well-established and sound practice.

These problems were exacerbated by a lack of guidance as to how conflicts could be overcome,
for example, by helping consultants and officials to understand which procedures it was essential
to follow, and which not. As one consultant complained, “the centre didn’t provide any clear



                                                                                                    3
direction on this issue.” The lack of guidance meant that there was little forewarning of problems
and increased uncertainties and headaches caused by procedural conflicts.

E. MONITORING & REPORTING

Although use of local government funds might be expected to stimulate increased interest, local
government monitoring of funds and implementation was not normally more intensive in
matching grant locations. Research identified a number of problems that affected monitoring and
reporting of KDP.

The accountability system in local government hardly stimulates good monitoring and reporting.
Researchers never found evidence of significant debate about KDP during the annual
accountability process. Legislators are unlikely to raise significant questions about performance,
and district heads are therefore unlikely to see evidence of success or failure unless they take a
strong personal interest. Despite introduction of ‘performance-based’ budgeting, there is little
stimulus for officials to formulate meaningful performance indicators and monitor systematically.
In only one or two cases, in Sumenep and Sijunjung, did the personal interest of senior members
of the executive, particularly the district head, appear to prompt efforts by Tim Koordinasi
members to develop more systematic monitoring of KDP in general.

As also seen in budgeting, involvement in monitoring was largely limited to members of local
empowerment agencies, who currently ‘own’ local government budget allocations to KDP, and
members of local planning agency, Bappeda, which used to be the ‘leading sector’. Agencies
other than PMD and Bappeda are not often very involved in coordination and monitoring of KDP.
Lack of a clear role and financial stake are likely to be the main reasons. Control and distribution
of operational funding is also a significant issue, though it is unlikely to be easy to resolve.

Problems of understanding are likely to have hampered the effectiveness of monitoring by
members of Tim Koordinasi in some districts. At least in some cases, this was related to staff
turnover, which resulted in limited understanding of KDP processes and procedures among local
coordination team members. It might be worth considering targeted socialization activities for
those that are interested and would benefit. Similar problems likely proved a barrier to effective
monitoring by local legislators. Although lack of will might have been a factor, in three or four
districts visited, there was pent up demand for greater involvement and more information about
the program, and complaints of exclusion by consultants and officials.




                                                                                                  4
                       TABLE OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

BACKGROUND…………………………………………………………………………... p.6

AIMS………………………………………………………………………………………. p.7

METHODOLOGY………………………………………………………………………… p.8


SECTION 1: REASONS FOR FUNDING

PART I: ATTITUDES TO AND PERCEPTIONS OF KDP……………………………… p.11

PART II: SELECTION OF KECAMATAN………………………………………………. p.21

PART III: REASONS FOR FUNDING………..………………………………………….. p.23


SECTION 2: BUDGET ALLOCATIONS, DISBURSALS AND MONITORING

PART I: BUDGET ALLOCATIONS TO KDP…………………………………………… p.31

PART II: DISBURSALS AND TAXATION……………………………………………... p.41

PART III: MONITORING AND REPORTING……………………………………...…… p.49


ANNEXES

ANNEX I: RESEARCH SITES AND SURVEY RETURNS……………………………... p.54

ANNEX II: BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON KDP2 DISTRICTS………………… p.56

ANNEX III: SURVEY RESULTS………………………………………………………… p.58




                                                                 5
                                            INTRODUCTION

From modest beginnings in 1997, when it ran in only 25 villages in three of Indonesia’s 32
provinces, the Kecamatan Development Program (KDP) has undergone a massive physical
scaling up to become one of the largest community driven development programs in the world.
By 2002, the program was running in more than 20,000 villages, and at the end of 2003, when the
second phase of the program began, it covered 28,000 villages in 29 of Indonesia’s 32 provinces.

During this time, Indonesia’s political and administrative structures underwent swift and radical
reform. Following the downfall of President Suharto during the economic crisis, the country saw
its first free elections in 44 years. Meanwhile, sweeping new local autonomy laws, drafted under
Suharto’s successor, Habibie, were implemented in the ‘Big Bang’ decentralization of 2001. This
saw a massive shift of authority, resources and personnel from the centre to district governments,
which had previously only served a de-concentrated function.1 Despite recent revisions to the
laws, political decentralization continues, with direct election of district heads to be implemented
following the country’s first direct presidential election in September 2004.2

Despite these transformations, during the first phase of KDP, decision-making and fund transfers
were relatively independent of local governments. The Local Level Institutions studies that fed
into its design showed that previous government-led initiatives tended to neglect and undermine
local capacity. There were also concerns about the risk of local government takeover of the
program. So, although district and sub-district officials played a part in oversight and sign-off of
funding, the role of local government in day-to-day operations was circumscribed. Technical,
social, and managerial functions were outsourced to firms rather than entrusted to civil servants.
Disbursals were also made direct to sub-district accounts from regional branches of the central
treasury, bypassing provincial and district government coffers.3

These measures enabled KDP to be set up quickly, with less leakage, and to harness and support
local capacity. However, they were also problematic for sustainability. First, they hampered what
has been described as the ‘conceptual scaling up’ of the program, or the promotion of, “an
understanding of and long-term commitment to CDD,” among local governments.4 The limited
role for officials reduced opportunities for the transfer of knowledge of KDP principles and
practices into the government system, a problem that was exacerbated by local governments’ lack
of financial involvement.5 Second, the parallel system of fund transfers would also stand in the
way of integration into routine government budgetary and expenditure systems.6



1
  ‘The Making of the Big Bang and its Aftermath: A Political Economy Perspective’, Hofman and Kaiser, 2002;
‘Decentralizing Indonesia: A Regional Public Expenditure Review’, World Bank East Asia Poverty Reduction and
Management Unit, 2003;
2
  See ‘Lessons Learned on Donor Support for Decentralization and Local Governance’, OECD, 2004 for a useful
typology of different forms of decentralization.
3
  This discussion is based heavily on a number of papers, including: ‘Crises and Contradictions: Understanding the
Origins of a Community Development Project in Indonesia’; ‘Indonesia’s Kecamatan Development Program: A Large-
Scale Use of Community Development to Reduce Poverty’; ‘Learning from the Kecamatan Development Program
(KDP): The first Shanghai Field Visit’
4
  The notion of ‘conceptual scaling up’ is borrowed from ‘Scaling Up Community Driven Development: Theoretical
Underpinnings and Program Design Implications’, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, Hans P. Binswanger
and Swaminathan S.Aiyar, 2003
5
  See also draft, ‘Scaling Up Action Research Project: Phase One Lessons from Six Case Studies’, World Bank,
Deborah Davis
6
  See KDP-2 PAD p.40; MG study TOR; Also draft, ‘Scaling Up Action Research Project: Phase One Lessons from
Six Case Studies’, World Bank, Deborah Davis

                                                                                                                6
In spite of these obstacles, during the first phase of KDP many local officials reportedly showed
signs of ‘ownership’ or ‘buy-in’. These included “the perspective of [some] government officials
to view KDP as a model for other development programs,”7 based on, among other things, their
perception that it offered a more efficient and sustainable delivery mechanism for rural
development.8 They also gained skills and played an increasing role in project monitoring,
supervision, management and handling complaints. Indeed, the KDP1 Final Report noted a
‘virtuous circle’ between involvement in and attitudes to the program, concluding that, “getting
government officials from all levels into the field is the key to changing hearts and minds.”9

Nevertheless, the role of local governments was not optimal. As the Implementation Completion
Report noted, “KDP still depends heavily on its consultants. This is a serious issue in view of the
sustainability of the project as a model for participatory and transparent poverty alleviation.
Therefore steps to improve KDP design … are needed to increase the role of local governments in
concrete ways.”10 Yet there were still concerns about managing this shift, in particular that rapid
transition to on-budget sustainability would provide too much leeway for the exercise of line
agency interests over areas such as procurement and financial management.

As a result, the strategy for generating fiscal sustainability and reinforcing ‘conceptual scaling up’
remained a gradualist one, in which responsibility for grant contributions would be shifted to
local government, while technical assistance would still be financed from the centre.11 This
approach was embodied in a voluntary ‘matching grant’ program, which 79 of the 190 districts
participating in the first year of KDP2 opted to join.12 The program formed part of the strategy to
reinforce ownership by increasing encounters between district organizations and communities,
reinforcing the ‘virtuous circle’ noted during the first phase.13 It also served as a pilot for
integration of KDP into local government budgeting and expenditure systems, prior to the
introduction of a mandatory counterpart funding mechanism under the third phase of the program.

AIMS OF THE STUDY

Based on the experience of the first year of the KDP2 matching grant program, this study aims to
document some of the key issues related to fiscal sustainability and the ‘conceptual scaling up’ of
KDP to district governments. It addresses a cluster of research questions relating to how and why
local governments made contributions to KDP, and the impact that this had on the involvement in
and attitudes of officials and legislators to the program. These questions include:

Why did districts use their limited internal budget resources to join the program?
  • What do officials know about KDP and what is their level of understanding?
  • How do Dinas specifically feel about KDP and the matching grant program?
  • How were the participating kecamatan chosen?
  • What expectations do the Bupati and local parliament have of the program?
  • Why did they choose this program, and not another?
  • What do they anticipate will be the impact or ‘multiplier effect’ of the program?



7
  KDP1 Final Report
8
  See KDP2 PAD, p. 104
9
  KDP1 Final Report
10
   KDP1 Implementation Completion Report
11
   KDP1 Implementation Completion Report
12
   See KDP-2 PAD p.40; MG study TOR; The announcement of this program was also timely. It was followed by the
issue of Ministry of Finance decree KMK-35/2002, which requires districts to provide counterpart funding to
government subsidiary offshore loans – a requirement reflected in the mandatory cost sharing component in KDP3.
13
   See KDP-2 PAD pp.13, 15 and 18

                                                                                                             7
What is the process for budget allocation, disbursals and monitoring of the program?
  • When and by whom are budget allocations approved?
  • When did disbursals take place? How were they processed?
  • Was the contribution taxed? If so, why?
  • How did district governments monitor the use of the funds?
  • Did officials report on the use of the funds? Who scrutinized reports?

METHODOLOGY

Research for this study was carried out between January and May 2004. It used both qualitative
and quantitative approaches. In-depth interviews were carried out with officials, legislators and
consultants in 17 districts in six provinces, selected on the basis of variation in the amount of
allocations and previous participation in KDP. These were augmented by a survey of consultants
and selected officials. The survey, which was conducted in April and May 2004, was sent to all
matching grant districts and to a small, random, selection of non-matching grant locations.14

Key informants
During interviews, research focused on a number of key players in the district executive, line
agencies, and legislature, as well as KDP consultants. These included:

•      Consultants and facilitators. District consultants were invariably the first port of call, and
       played a key role in arranging access to officials and legislators. Sub-district facilitators were
       also a key source of information in every district, particularly in relation to operational issues
       relating to the matching grant program, including disbursals and monitoring of funds.

•      Tim Koordinasi. In all locations, researchers interviewed officials from the cross-sectoral
       team responsible for district coordination with KDP. These included the head and secretary of
       the team, the majority of which were from the local empowerment agency, an agency that
       goes under a variety of aliases, but which for the sake of simplicity is referred to here by its
       most common, PMD. In most districts, researchers also met members of the team from local
       planning agency, Bappeda. Only in a handful did they meet with members of other agencies,
       such as Health, Education, or Public Works.

•      Senior officials. Researchers sought interviews with more senior officials, in particular with
       District Heads (Bupatis). Only in two cases was this possible. More commonly, interviews
       were carried out with members of his office, including the Deputy Bupati, District Secretary
       (Sekda) and Bupati’s Assistants (typically Assistan II, for development). In just under one
       third of sites, interviews were also carried out with the head of the planning agency, Bappeda.

•      Legislators. In almost every district, interviews were carried out with members of the district
       legislature. While in three districts, efforts were made to meet with the DPRD Chairman or
       his Deputies, in many more, researchers met instead with members of relevant commissions,
       or with other members of the institution identified by consultants or officials.

•      Sub-district officials. Interviews were also carried out with sub-district officials, almost
       invariably with project managers (PjOK), the officials directly responsible for coordination
       with KDP at sub-district level. These were the primary official informants at this level,
       although it was also not uncommon for researchers to meet with sub-district heads (Camats).




14
     See Annex 1 for a breakdown of research locations and survey returns

                                                                                                       8
Survey respondents
The survey had three main aims. First, to gather information about implementation of the
matching grant program, including the amount of allocations, reductions, disbursals, taxation and
monitoring. Second, to measure officials’ involvement in and attitudes to KDP. And third, to
measure take-up of KDP principles and procedures.

Surveys were tailored for three respondent types: KDP district consultants, local government
coordination team (Tim Koordinasi) heads and local planning agency (Bappeda) heads. Final
versions of the survey were mailed to consultants in 77 matching grant and 16 non-matching
grant districts.15 Consultants were requested to fill in one survey, and to arrange for the others to
be delivered to the relevant local officials. They were pre-briefed on how to handle surveys
during routine regional coordination meetings.

Responses were received from consultants in 63 matching grant districts, or 80 percent of all
districts participating in the matching grant program. 56 of these mailed-in responses included
surveys from Tim Koordinasi heads and 48 from Bappeda Heads. Ten full sets of surveys were
also returned from consultants and officials in KDP2 districts that did not participate in the
matching grant program, representing nine percent of this group.




15
  Two types of pre-testing were carried out in four locations. In two locations, researchers filled out the survey together
with potential respondents, to test the content of the survey. In two further locations, the viability of the method of
distribution was tested by asking district consultants to conduct and return the survey with no input from researchers.
These latter were excluded from the final list of districts to receive the survey.

                                                                                                                         9
SECTION 1
Reasons for funding




                      10
                 PART I: ATTITUDES TO AND PERCEPTIONS OF KDP

Key findings

•    Buy-in to KDP aims. In general, officials strongly identified with the poverty alleviation aim of
     KDP. Many also endorsed its bottom-up ‘empowerment’ approach as a way to inculcate skills and
     reduce dependency. However, they did not tend to cite community empowerment as a valuable
     outcome.

•    Positive views of KDP performance. Almost 100 percent of officials rated all aspects of KDP as at
     least satisfactory apart from the time efficiency of implementation, which nearly one third rated as
     poor. In particular, planning, competition and management were valued as a way to bring out
     aspirations, create ownership, cut costs and increase contributions and sustainability. However, there
     were some concerns about community planning and management in KDP. Officials worried that
     competition would lead to tension. KDP planning processes were also said to be too long. Contractors
     and corrupt officials or legislators were likely to undermine commitment to community management.

•    Take-up of KDP procedures. Over four fifths of officials surveyed reported that they used aspects
     of KDP in other district-funded projects. The aspects of the program that they were most likely to
     report using displayed a tendency to focus on practical participation, and included allowing
     community members to make and prioritise proposals and play a role in implementation. There was
     less emphasis on community decision-making and facilitation. District governments were quite
     unlikely to adopt facilitation, sub-district competition, open-menu proposals or exclude contractors by
     implementing full community management of projects.


KDP has two fundamental aims: alleviating poverty and improving governance. From the
beginning, these aims were interdependent. The program grew out of studies which showed that
gaps
 .     between government and community organizations and the undermining of these
organizations by New Order programs had led to mismatches between investment and community
priorities. Bureaucratic and elite capture drowned out the voice of communities in planning and
implementation was often plagued by exclusion and corruption. With limited community say,
stake or scrutiny, programs were often expensive, of poor quality and not sustainable.16

In response to concerns about capture and corruption, KDP adopted a bottom up approach to
program delivery. Project planning and implementation were devolved to communities, who were
aided by independent facilitators, and funds were sent direct to projects rather than through local
treasuries. The program focused on building governance reforms from the demand side, by
empowering villagers to participate in decision-making.17 Yet, at the same time it was intended to
serve as a showcase for local governments, “creating ‘facts on the ground’ to show that properly
designed community empowerment programs lead to higher returns, greater benefits for the poor,
and more sustainable outcomes.”18

Research for this study attempted to determine how far KDP is achieving the latter aim by
looking at the judgements of local officials about the program’s performance and the extent to
which they identify with and are likely to take up its principles and procedures in district-funded
programs. Although the focus was on districts that voluntarily provided funding for KDP,


16
   See KDP1 Final Report; see also KDP2 PAD pp.2&3
17
   See KDP2 PAD p.18; Training in procurement and financial management gives villagers, “the skills to become
critical consumers rather than passive recipients”; “the project’s strategy for improving links to the higher levels of
government again builds from the consumer side rather than by introducing new administrative mechanisms.”
18
   See KDP2 Pad p. 3

                                                                                                                    11
something that has often been cited as an indicator of ‘buy-in’ to the program,19 research for this
study indicates that the picture was no different in districts that did not make contributions.

Box: KDP key principles

Participation and empowerment. KDP emphasizes participation, especially of marginal groups such as
women and poor villagers. Communities take ownership of everything from planning to implementation.

Competition for funding. Healthy and open competition is an essential part of the process. Villagers
choose from an open menu and compete for funding in hamlet, village, and inter-village meetings.

Transparency. KDP emphasizes transparency and information sharing throughout the project cycle.
Decision-making and financial management should be open and shared with the entire community.

Simplicity. KDP strives to keep the program simple. There should be no complex rules or procedures;
only simple strategies should be used. This is key to implementation of all other principles.

Sustainability. All program activities should be easily managed and maintained by the entire community,
building on community self-reliance. Broad-based participation enhances sustainability.


1. Buy-in to KDP aims

Most officials saw poverty alleviation as the single most important aspect of KDP. In the survey,
over three-fifths prioritised this aim over any other aspect of the program, including transparency,
community contributions and increasing civic or technical skills. The program was also thought
to perform relatively well in this respect. 47 percent of respondents rated it as satisfactory and the
remaining 53 percent as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. This was also evident from many comments in
which officials professed that KDP was, “very beneficial for poverty alleviation,” “economic
recovery,” “increasing the wealth of poor families,” “the prosperity of the community,” the
“empowerment of businesses,” or, “increasing the people’s economy and their quality of life.”20

Many also expressed support for the aim of empowering villagers. This was valued as a way of
reducing dependency on aid. For example, in Sumenep, the Tim Koordinasi Secretary noted, “in
the past all that villagers wanted was aid. But really, they should be able to plan their own
development,”21 while, in Pasaman, the Sekda noted that, “the concept of KDP is very good
because it empowers the people by letting them participate from the planning process through to
implementation.”22 Such thoughts were also echoed in a handful of comments returned with the
survey, for example, by the Tim Koordinasi Head in Bogor, who wrote that, “KDP is very
beneficial for the community, primarily for increasing its capacity and independence.”23

In particular, officials tended to identify increasing the ‘human resources’ of villagers as the key
to reducing dependency and stimulating development. As one PMD member in Pesisir put it,
“usually, we have very limited quality of human resources in our villages. That’s why our
villages are underdeveloped.”24 Most identified the need for “human resource and capacity
building,” “increasing the quality of human resources,” “educating villagers” or “having people

19
   See KDP1 Final Report p.43; KDP2 PAD p.8; KPD 3 PAD p.32
20
    See i.e. TKPPK, Yapen Waropen, Papua; TKPPK, Pacitan, East Java; TKPPK, Lumajang, East Java; Bappeda,
Jember, East Java; TKPPK, Pacitan, East Java; TKPPK, Ponorogo, East Java; Bappeda, Aceh Singkil, NAD; TKPPK,
Indragiri Hulu, Riau
21
   Idris, Secretaris TKPPK, Sumenep
22
   Sekda, Pasaman
23
   TKPPK, Bogor, West Java
24
   Pimpro, Pesisir

                                                                                                         12
not just as the object but as the subject of a program.”25 They commented that KDP could help by,
“strengthening the capacity of the community,” “enabling the community to learn,” through,
“activities that give knowledge that can help to develop the potential of the community.”26

Box: Top down vs bottom up

KDP was often contrasted favourably with programs in the past, which were sometimes said to have been
‘top down’ and to have led to dependency. In Magelang, for example, the PMD Head contrasted KDP
with old ‘top down’ programs, commenting that, “then, the problem was the mentality of the people, and
of us who help them. Before, people had poor knowledge and poor mentality. If you gave them chickens,
they would just kill and eat them ... There was no facilitation to show people how to make a profit.” The
Bupati in this district turned to aquatic metaphor to make this point, commenting that, “it’s like a sick fish
floating in a pool. Perhaps you give it an injection of vitamins … but the real problem is that the pool is
dirty, and what the fish needed was oxygen. That’s maybe the problem with some of our other programs.”


Taken together, officials’ concern to improve ‘human resources’ and ‘the people’s economy’
appears to reflect a trend to view increasing the capacity of villagers to engage in productive
activities as an appropriate strategy for poverty alleviation. As the Deputy Bupati in Kendari
noted with approval, “if we give people fish, they’ll just ask for more fish. KDP gives them a
fishing rod instead.”27 This might help to explain the priority attached to ‘increasing technical
skills’, the second or third most important aspect of KDP for officials surveyed. Such attitudes
cashed out in a focus on practical involvement in project implementation and sometimes led to an
emphasis on microfinance or ‘economically productive’ activities.

For some, civic empowerment was also a valuable outcome. This was sometimes expressed in
terms of, “enhancing democracy” or “empowering civil society.”28 According to the Tim
Koordinasi Head in Pamekasan, for example, “KDP facilitates the creation of a system of
participative development with the involvement of the community in making decisions and
utilizing local potential and resources. It institutionalizes the participative process in the local
government system and enhances the role of the district to facilitate rural development.”29
Nevertheless, empowerment was not normally seen as a valuable stand-alone aim, and did not
tend to rate among the three most important elements of the program for officials surveyed.

2. Buy-in to KDP principles and procedures

A. Community participation and ownership
Almost without exception, officials expressed support for community participation. Many linked
the ‘empowerment approach’, manifested in participation in planning and implementation, to
community ownership of projects and hence to contributions and maintenance. While such
linkages are easily to be found in project appraisals and reports, it was striking to find them
echoed almost verbatim by local government officials.

The first step in this chain of reasoning was the recognition that participation in planning means
that development is “more in line with the needs and desires of the community,” or that, “KDP is
really based on the desires of the community, because the community participates in contributing



25
    See i.e. Jaheri, Staff Bappeda, Sijunjung; Staff/ TKPPK Member, Sumenep; PMD Head Magelang; Provincial
TKPPK member Sulawesi Tenggara; Wakil Bupati, Kendari
26
   See TKPPK, Lebak, Banten; TKPPK, Jombang, East Java; Bappeda, Aceh Singkil, NAD
27
   Wakil Bupati, Kendari
28
   See TKPPK, Purworejo, Central Java; TKPPK, Sumenep, East Java; TKPPK, Ngada, NTT
29
   TKPPK, Pamekasan, East Java

                                                                                                            13
ideas from the very beginning.”30 Many linked this to ownership of projects. As the Tim
Koordinasi Head in Boalemo noted, for example, “KDP is a good program, because the
empowerment approach, where the community is directly involved in planning and
implementation and benefits from projects, leads to a sense of ownership by the community.”31
     Table: Ratings of KDP performance

     Over nine out of ten officials surveyed rated every aspect of KDP as at least satisfactory, apart from ‘time
     efficiency of implementation’, which three out of ten rated as ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’.

                Consistently/ generally above average                 Consistently/ generally below average
                Aspect of program             Good/ V.Good            Aspect of program             Good/ V.Good
       Transparency/ less corruption               86%       Time efficiency                             18%
       Capacity of consultants*                    84%       Increasing civic skills                     36%
       Efficiency of project (cost)                80%       Meeting implementation targets              41%
       Reports and availability of data            77%       Level of community contributions*           48%
       Satisfactoriness of outputs                 73%
       Satisfaction of community*                  65%
       Increasing technical skills*                60%
       Poverty alleviation*                        53%



Participation and ownership were further linked to the ability of KDP to mobilize contributions.
As one member of Bappeda in Boyolali commented, “you can see the success of the program in
the field. It gets the most contributions from the community, the most participation, good
competition, and good results.”32 Similarly, the Tim Koordinasi Head in Lumajang noted that,
“the direct involvement of the community in planning, implementation and maintenance leads to
an increase in the feeling of responsibility of the community for development, in the shape of
contributions such as land, labour, and materials.”33

Box: The importance of contributions

Community contributions (swadaya) were important for local empowerment and planning agency heads,
and many were impressed with this aspect of KDP. According to the government coordination team head
in Lumajang, for example, “KDP is impressive because levels of swadaya in the program are very high.”
In Boyolali, one of the Bupati’s assistants agreed, noting that, “if the program provides funding for one
kilometre of road, the community is able to provide two.” Others furnished specific examples. In Pasaman
for example, the Tim Koordinasi Head cited contributions of Rp. 173 million to a road-building project.

Yet there was sometimes a sense that the program could perform better. Although 98 percent of survey
respondents felt that contributions were at least ‘satisfactory’, only 48 percent judged them to be ‘good’ or
‘very good’. Similarly, in discussion about the subject, about half of officials noted difficulties with the
ability or will of communities to generate contributions. Swadaya appears to be a key area in which
officials notice the benefits of KDP and improvements would not go unnoticed.


The linkage of participation and ownership also extended to maintenance and sustainability. As
the Head of Bappeda from Aceh Singkil wrote, “KDP is the most effective program because it is
in accordance with peoples’ desires… projects are well maintained and there is a better sense of

30
    TKPPK, Lumajang, East Java; Bappeda, Brebes, Central Java; Winarno, PMD Head, Ponorogo; Pontjo,
Grob_FGD_1903; TKPPK, Sumenep, East Java; Bappeda, Batang Hari, Jambi
31
   TKPPK, Boalemo, Gorontalo
32
   Trie Murnlise, Bappeda Staff, TKPPK Member, Boyolali
33
   TKPPK, Lumajang, East Java

                                                                                                                    14
ownership from the community.”34 Similarly, according to one member of Bappeda in Lumajang,
“we support … community driven development, since it helps to encourage the community to
maintain projects. The people feel that they truly own the program.”35 His superior gave one of
the most glowing of many such reports. “In the field, I saw high community contribution and
gotong royong. There was a lot of enthusiasm about KDP, and the output was very positive. I’m
pretty sure every village wants to receive funding. And the main reason is because villagers put
commitment into the process, which builds trust and makes development sustainable.”

B. Competition
Enthusiasm for empowerment and participation was sometimes accompanied by wariness of
giving communities too much control. Concerns appeared to focus on the competition for
resources in KDP. Some officials worried about capture by community members or lower-level
bureaucrats. However, there was more concern that community members would be ‘startled by’
or were ‘not yet ready for’ competition, and that it could lead to problems such as
disappointment, jealousy and conflict.

Box: Ambiguous attitudes to competition

Officials were ambiguous in their attitudes to competition. Although concerned about capture, jealousy
and tension, some also saw it as a valuable way to discover community aspirations. The question was how
to negotiate potential problems. In nearly one third of districts visited, officials advocated careful
socialization, monitoring and readiness to intervene. In Sumenep, for example, officials argued that KDP
could only run in ‘conducive’ locations and screened sub-districts based on their ability to monitor.

Tellingly, two informants suggested that competition run only to village level. In Sumenep, the Tim
Koordinasi Head wrote that, “it would be enough to have a competition at village level (if each village
were allocated funds from KDP) using ideas or proposals from different hamlets.” Similarly, in Lampung
Timur, officials noted that, “the competition in KDP has the potential for creating conflict, so we plan to
develop a program that adopts the proposal mechanism from KDP, but which will go directly to villages.”


In just under one third of districts, officials expressed concern about elite or bureaucratic capture.
Some worried that certain community members might try to dominate or abuse KDP process. In
Magelang, for example, one member of the Tim Koordinasi remarked that, “the community has to
be monitored carefully. … We put effort into facilitation for marginal groups. But for smarter
groups we also put in extra monitoring so there will be no misuse or problems.” Concern also
focused on lower level bureaucrats. In four districts, Tim Koordinasi members cited problems
with interventions by village heads or Camats.36 In Boyolali, for example, an assistant to the
Bupati reported that, “in the past, the village apparatus tended to dominate the process,” a
phenomenon also noted by one of his colleagues from the planning agency, who felt that village
heads had pushed their preference for infrastructure over microfinance projects.

The potential of competition to create ‘winners and losers’, ‘disappointment,’ and ‘jealousy’ was
of greater concern. As one Bappeda Head wrote, “people are not yet capable of grasping the
system of competition. Communities that make efforts to contribute but lose in the competition
will be disappointed and feel antipathy towards government programs.”37 Most focused on intra-
community tensions. In Magelang, a PMD official noted that, “KDP is a program with a lot of
local dynamics. The government needs to be prepared to intervene to prevent fights.” This point

34
   Bappeda, Aceh Singkil, NAD
35
   Paiman, Bappeda Staff, Lumajang
36
   Districts included Kendari, Sumenep, Magelang and Boyolali. See for example, interviews with consultant in
Magelang; Idris, PMD Staf/TKPPK member, Sumenep; Aksioma, TKPPK Propinsi Sulawesi Tenggara, Kendari.
Sudaryo, Bupati Assistan II, Boyolali
37
   Bappeda, Purbalingga, Central Java; see also Idris, TKPPK, Sumenep, Ridwan, Sijunjung

                                                                                                          15
was also raised by the Tim Koordinasi Head in Sumba Barat who wrote that, “KDP can give rise
to complex community dynamics that need to be handled by the government,”38 Others were
concerned about open conflict, as in Sumenep, where the Tim Koordinasi Head noted, “KDP has
the potential to cause local conflict, especially among communities where the culture and abilities
of the people are not ready for the language of competition.”39

Nevertheless, officials were not unambiguously against the notion of competition. In the majority
of cases cited above, for example, officials noted that competition had its benefits. According to
one member of the Tim Koordinasi in Sumenep, “the process of competition is certainly a good
way for the community to learn democracy, and to consider the needs of others. They can also see
what they really need, plan for those needs, and implement [the project] themselves.”40 Similarly,
in Lumajang, the same planner who was concerned about ‘social tensions’ also voiced support for
competition as a way to make people “consider their own real needs, and those of others.”41

C. Transparency and community management
Transparency was one of the one of the top two or three most important aspects of KDP for
Bappeda and Tim Koordinasi Heads. It was also one of the best performing; 86 percent of
officials rated this aspect of KDP as either ‘good’ or ‘very good’. The premium placed on
transparency was reflected in numerous comments in which officials praised the ‘system of
transparency’ and commented on the importance of ‘transparency and participation’.

Box: The influence of contractors and suppliers

In Lampung Timur members of the Public Works agency were on record in a local newspaper saying that
KDP infrastructure was substantially cheaper than that built by contractors. In interviews, they reported
that this enabled them to bargain with contractors to reduce prices. However, as in one third of districts
visited, the interests of contractors and suppliers apparently influenced decision-making. Here, contractors
reportedly staged a protest to officials about the negative impact of KDP on their profits. As a result,
officials explained that they were keen to ensure a balance between community-managed projects and
those handled by contractors. “It is necessary to create a win-win situation,” as one remarked.


In the context of corruption, the KDP 2 PAD notes that, “some of KDP's strongest support has
come from district and sub-district administrators who are pleasantly surprised to find out how
much cheaper KDP infrastructure can cost than infrastructure provided through traditional
agencies and contractors.”42 Research for this study provides strong backing for this claim. 80
percent of officials surveyed rated the cost efficiency of KDP as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. These
judgements were reflected in comments from officials in over half of districts visited that projects
built through KDP could cost a fraction of those built by government agencies and contractors.

Although such judgements were linked to other benefits of community management such as
higher levels of contributions, transparency clearly played a part. According to the District
Secretary in Karawang, for example, transparency was, “very important for the maximal use of
funds,” a belief that was echoed by the Tim Koordinasi Head in Cianjur who wrote that, “KDP
mechanisms should be applied in other direct community aid programs in order to prevent
leakage.”43



38
   Bappeda, Sumba Barat, NTT; see also Paiman, Bappekab, Lumajang
39
   TKPPK, Sumenep, East Java; see also Toni, Bappeda, Lampung Timur
40
   Idris, TKPPK, Sumenep
41
   Source!
42
   From KDP2 PAD p.104
43
   TKPPK, Cianjur, West Java; see also Bappeda, Lebak, Banten

                                                                                                          16
Although some were keen to see more transparency in district programs, in over one third of
districts enthusiasm for transparency and community management was tempered by doubts about
whether it would be realistic to replicate KDP procedures in other programs. Most of these related
to scepticism that it would be possible to replicate a program that threatened the profits of
contractors. In Serang, for example, one member of Bappeda commented that, “KDP is good,
participative, and planning comes from the aspirations of the community. But the problem is that
the district doesn’t want to kill off the contractors that already exist in the area.”44 Meanwhile, in
Pasaman, the Sekda noted that it was, “bad for the profits of contractors and suppliers,”45 and in
nearby Rokan Hulu, the Deputy Bupati noted that, “the swakelola aspect of KDP cannot be fully
implemented because contractors would not be able to eat. That’s why there’s no chance that the
model of KDP can be adopted in other programs.”46

The influence of contractors on policymaking was sometimes related to corruption on the part of
legislators or bureaucrats. In Sumenep, for example, officials related that attempts to replicate
KDP procedures had been rejected by DPRD members, apparently because some owned
contracting firms. Legislators in Ponorogo made similar accusations about the Bupati. The PMD
Head in Rokan Hulu also pointed to another avenue for corruption, noting that, “there are
agencies that don’t support KDP because the Dinas Head and the Sekda will not get any fee.”47

D. Simplicity: length and complexity of KDP process
The most common complaints about KDP related to the length and complexity of planning and
implementation. Many felt that the length of the planning process ‘bores’ community members.
As one Bappeda Head put it, “KDP is very good at educating the community in planning,
implementing and monitoring. It’s just that the process prior to implementation feels quite long,
and this makes them bored and uncertain.”48 Four or five further complained that KDP distracted
community members from their work. As the Tim Koordinasi Head in Buton put it,
“implementation takes too long and gives rise to boredom. … The administrative processes are
also too lengthy. They bore the community and make them neglect their work.”49

Such criticisms of the length of KDP planning processes might help to explain why officials rated
time efficiency in KDP so poorly. This was by far the worst performing aspect of KDP for
officials. Just under one third of survey respondents rated the performance of the program as
‘poor’ or ‘very poor’ in this respect.

Criticisms extended to KDP rules and administration, which were said to be time-consuming,
complicated and confusing. As one planner put it, “villagers are too often confronted with things
that bore them, and which scare them away.”50 Similarly, according to a Tim Koordinasi member
in Sumenep, “the program is really quite difficult, right from the start of the process up to
implementation.”51 The Deputy Bupati in this district fulminated against the complexity of KDP
guidelines: “it’s like the holy book. Everything is regulated. It works against empowerment.” 52

E. Sustainability
Unsurprisingly, officials were often keen to stress that KDP ‘needs to be continued’ or that ‘three
years is not enough’. According to one of the Bupati’s assistants in Boyolali, “it takes time to

44
   Yani, Bappeda Staff/ TKPPK member, Serang
45
   Sekda, Pasaman
46
   Auni, Wakil Bupati, Rokan Hulu
47
   PMD Head, Rokan Hulu
48
   Bappeda, Kuantan Singingi, Riau
49
   TKPPK, Buton, Sulawesi Tenggara; similar comments were heard in Pesisir, Sijunjung and Lampung Timur.
50
   Bappeda, Yapen Waropen, Papua
51
   Rasyid, FGD, Sumenep
52
   Deputy Bupati, Sumenep; see also Budi, Bappeda Staff/ TKPPK Member, Grobogan

                                                                                                           17
make a difference. The program needs to run for more than three years. You cannot change the
mindset of the people in just three years.” The Bupati in Magelang was keen to note that the
program should be continued, commenting, “please don’t think that a program will solve many
problems in just one year,” while the Tim Koordinasi Secretary in Sumenep also felt that, “three
years is not enough for an empowerment program.”

In the shorter term, officials were generally optimistic about the maintenance and sustainability of
infrastructure projects built through KDP, commonly linking this to community participation and
‘ownership’, as described above. However, in well over half of districts, officials expressed
concerns about the performance of microfinance projects and the sustainability of the project in
phase-out locations. A number of officials expressed desire to do something about these
problems, and some expressed readiness to commit district funds to do so.

Box: Interest in intervention

In nearly half of locations visited, officials noted problems with repayment of loans. While some
commented on the need for more intensive facilitation and effective sanctions, they tended to focus on the
need to strengthen sub-district Financial Management Units (UPK). They were often keen to help.
Officials in six or seven districts called for authority to safeguard procedures and institutions such as the
UPK, enabling them to develop laws to protect funds or “formalise the process and mechanisms of the
PTO in a district regulation.”

Phase-out locations were also cause for concern. A number of respondents suggested that special
measures were required to ensure sustainability, including follow-up programs and training or for
facilitators to remain in situ for up to three years. Two or three proposed that they would be willing to
shoulder at least some of the financial burden for such activities. According to the Head of Bappeda in
Kotabaru, for example, “KDP phase out needs plans for a new program to increase the community’s
ability to manage development. This would preferably be integrated with the district budget so that, over
time, the district could apply the founding concepts of KDP in every aspect of village development.”


However, there was uncertainty about what one official called ‘the rules of the game’, particularly
in phase-out locations. Concerns included whether or not program funds in these locations were a
‘district asset or an asset of the centre’ and whether local governments had authority over their
administration. This led to calls for clarification. As the Head of Bappeda in Pamekasan put it,
“after implementation there needs to be a clear decision about authority to handle the program,
accompanied by a formal handover letter.”53 His counterpart in Sikka also called for guidance,
commenting that, “decentralization qualifies the district to handle and develop [the program].”54

3. Take up of KDP principles and procedures

Many officials suggested that KDP might be a model for other programs. According to the
Bappeda Head in Blitar, for example, “the implementation of KDP is very satisfactory, because it
is shaped from three aspects: poverty reduction, transparency and community contributions. It
will be used as the basis for future development programs.”55 Similarly, the Tim Koordinasi Head
in another location noted that, “I hope that the district will adopt the model developed in KDP.
With this model, all aspects of community life can be developed, including village community
institutions and human resources.”56 This phenomenon was widespread. Indeed, 83 percent of
officials surveyed reported that their district had used aspects of KDP in other programs.

53
   Bappeda, Pamekasan, East Java; see also Bappeda, Ponorogo, East Java
54
   Bappeda, Sikka, NTT
55
   Bappeda, Blitar, East Java
56
   TKPPK, Nunakan, East Kalimantan

                                                                                                           18
A. Participation
Officials were most likely to report allowing communities to make and prioritise proposals, and
play a role in managing implementation. They were also quite likely to report that efforts were
made to target marginal groups in district programs, such as women and poor villagers. Over two
thirds of respondents who said that their district had adopted aspects of KDP reported that they
had implemented these principles. The relatively high take-up of these ‘participatory’ aspects of
KDP in district programs would appear fairly simple to explain. Community involvement in
making and prioritising proposals, and managing implementation, were thought to be of strategic
value, increasing the skills and capacity of communities to engage in productive activities and
thereby fostering independence. They were also seen as key to generating ownership, providing
instrumental benefits of contributions and maintenance.

     Table: Likelihood of take-up of aspects of KDP in district-funded programs

                  Likely to be taken up (over 50%)                        Unlikely to be taken up (under 50%)

      Aspect of program                              % takeup   Aspect of program                              % takeup

      Community develop proposals themselves           88%      No limitation on activities (“open menu”)        28%

      Community prioritize proposals                   76%      Community members decide fund allocations        36%

      Project targets marginal groups                  68%      Independent facilitators (private firm/ NGO)     36%

      Community manage impl. incl. funds               67%

      Funds disbursed direct to community              66%

      Community select impl. team (no contractor)      54%



B. Competition
Districts are unlikely to adopt the system of competition as it stands in KDP, due to concerns
about jealousy, disappointment, tension or conflict. Nevertheless, competition was sometimes
said to be beneficial as a way to bring out community aspirations. As seen above, in two districts,
officials noted the desirability of running a competition for proposals, but at village rather than
sub-district level. This might well be a favoured strategy. It would likely be thought to reduce
potential for jealousy by ensuring equal distributions between villages and increasing the
‘manageability’ of any problems that did arise. It would also help to cut down the length of the
planning process, something about which the majority of officials complained.

C. Decision-making and control
Of all aspects of KDP, officials were least likely to report use of an open menu in their own
programs; only 28 percent of officials who reported that their district had taken up aspects of
KDP selected this option. Communities were also unlikely to be permitted to decide on fund
allocations. Only 36 percent of respondents selected this option. Lack of buy-in to these aspects
of KDP was reflected in calls from officials for reconsideration of open menu decision-making
and more control over allocations. For example, one Tim Koordinasi Head came out in favour of
“open menu proposals, but with priority for those that speed up poverty alleviation in line with
conditions in each district.”57 Many proposed KDP focus more, or exclusively, on microfinance
rather than infrastructure.58

57
  TKPPK, Magetan, East Java
58
  Bappeda, Ponorogo, East Java; Bappeda, NTT, East Java; Bappeda, Lumajang, East Java; Bappeda, Magetan, East
Java; The Head of Bappeda from Magetan provided the clearest exposition: “There should be restrictions on the open
menu, since around 80% of proposals from the community are for infrastructure. This is not effective for the

                                                                                                                          19
These calls might be understood in terms of a general desire for more ‘policy-related’ input and
control, which was also seen in other contexts. For example, three officials volunteered that it
would be desirable for district governments to have authority to adapt KDP, “in accordance with
local conditions.” According to the Tim Koordinasi Head in Ngada, for example, “the district
should be able to adapt the program in line with the conditions and characteristics of the area.” 59
Such calls were also made specifically in relation to microfinance policies and phase out
locations. Four or five officials argued that factors such as the level of poverty and time taken to
generate returns from loans varied from district to district. They suggested that it would be
preferable for local governments to have some say over interest rates and the timeframe for
repayments. A similar number of officials called for greater input and control in phase out
locations, in order that government could help to ensure sustainability.60

Box: District funding and calls for control

Officials in three or four districts drew a direct connection between contributions and their desire for
greater say. In Pasaman, the Tim Koordinasi Head felt that “the matching grant process shouldn’t be 100
percent the same as in full grant locations. The local government should have a say over a 25 percent
portion.” Meanwhile, his counterpart in Boyolali reasoned that “the matching grant comes from the
APBD, so the district should be able to determine the portion of funds used for SPP, UEP and
infrastructure.” Finally, according the head of Bappeda in Merauke opined that, “all rules that are applied
in the matching grant program should be in accordance with the conditions in the district.”


D. Transparency and community management
Although officials were relatively likely to report the existence of programs that would allow
communities to manage aspects of implementation, only 54 percent of respondents reported that
their district had a program that would permit community members to select implementation
teams, rather than using contractors. This is likely related to two, interconnected, reasons. First, in
four locations, officials expressed concern that community management of projects would
‘threaten the profits of contractors’. Second, in three districts, officials expressed doubt about
whether the will existed to adopt the ‘system of transparency’ in KDP, since the program had the
potential to ‘threaten the profits’ of members of the executive or legislature. In two of these cases,
officials drew a direct link between official corruption and deals with contractors.

E. Consultants and facilitation
Consultants and facilitation were highly rated by officials; 84 percent of Tim Koordinasi and
Bappeda Heads rated the capacity of consultants as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. However, they did not
view this aspect of the program as one of the most important, nor, as discussed later, did they tend
to see centrally-funded facilitation as a reason for contributing funds to KDP. It is therefore not
surprising that only 36 percent of respondents reported that their district funded a program that
used independent consultants. It is likely that most officials did not wish to pay for consultants
out of district funds. This might have been linked to desire for more control or simply to belief
that officials had the capacity to manage programs themselves.




empowerment of poor families. We propose the application of the open menu, but with limitations like in Gerdu Taskin
[an East Java KDP spin-off] with the following division of activities: Capacity building, 10%; Business empowerment,
60%; Empowerment of the economic environment (infrastructure projects that support the economy), maximum 30%”
59
   TKPPK, Ngada, NTT; also (TKPPK, Merauke, Papua
60
   I.e. Bappeda, Sikka, NTT; Bappeda, Pamekasan, East Java

                                                                                                                 20
                            PART II: SELECTION OF KECAMATAN

Following sign-up to the matching grant program in late 2001, officials were required to
nominate sub-districts that would receive local government funds. This task was normally
delegated to members of local Tim Koordinasi, in particular those from Bappeda, then the agency
responsible for leading coordination with KDP.61 Two considerations dominated the choice of
locations. First, in the majority of districts, officials made genuine, albeit less than rigorous,
attempts to target needy areas. Second, also in the majority of districts, officials considered it
desirable to ‘equalize’ funding across sub-districts. This was prompted by concerns that sub-
district heads or local inhabitants would be jealous and protest if their area was neglected.

1. Poverty and targeting

The selection of sub-districts to receive matching grants was constrained by their inclusion in a
so-called ‘long list’ of sub-districts eligible to receive KDP. This list, compiled centrally using
central statistics agency (BPS) data, ranked sub-districts based on poverty levels. In principle,
therefore, the selection of kecamatan was necessarily related to the level of poverty in these areas.
In over half of districts, officials reported that they based their choice of locations on the
‘ranking’ or ‘level’ of the sub-districts in this list.

In most districts, officials offered further reasons for targeting specific areas, typically referring to
factors such as inhabitants’ occupations or geographical conditions. According to some, for
example, selected sub-districts were home to, “farmers who suffered from drought and flooding”
or “people who live on the coast and fishermen” who needed microfinance and clean water
facilities.62 Others selected areas that suffered from economic problems related to “difficult
geography” or “access problems.”63 Only in Magelang did officials report that they referred to
hard data. In this case, officials referred to other statistics, including from the WHO, to compile a
list of sub-districts that they could cross-reference with the ‘long-list’ from the centre.64

2. Equalizing funding

In about half of districts, officials also said that the decision to nominate certain kecamatan was
because they had not already received KDP or did not currently receive any other poverty
alleviation or empowerment program.65 This was based on a perceived need to ensure that
funding for such programs should be shared out equally between different sub-districts, a need
that stemmed either from a desire to placate sub-district heads or ensure that community members
did not become jealous about perceived inequalities.

Some officials referred to the desire of sub-district heads (Camat) to receive ‘a program’.
According to the head of Bappeda in Pasaman, for example, “there was reaction from some sub-
district [officials] who questioned the process of selection,” while in Magelang, officials
commented that Camats were always keen to ‘receive a program’. However, only in Gorontalo
was this a decisive factor. In this case, one Camat reported that he ‘lobbied’ the Bupati to receive
KDP and received word that he would receive matching grant funding shortly after.66

61
   In fewer than one quarter of districts were more senior officials, legislators or consultants said to be involved.
62
   Budi, Grobogan, Sekretary TKPPK, Serang
63
   Umar, Pasaman; Johansyah, Ketua Tim Koordinasi, Karawang; PMD Head, Magelang
64
   In two districts (Lumajang and Magelang) officials felt that BPD data was not up to date. In two others (Biltar and
Ponorogo) consultants noted the same.
65
   Informants included Boyolali, Bupati Assistan II; Gultom, Lampung Timur; Bappeda, Karawang; consultant and
officials, Ponorogo; consultant and officials, Pasaman
66
   Camat, Limboto, Gorontalo

                                                                                                                   21
The desire to avoid arousing jealousy from communities was a stronger motivation. It reportedly
influenced the choice of locations in at least one third of districts visited. As one member of
Bappeda in Karawang put it, “we needed to level the development funds that were allocated in
the district, so that all of the funds did not just go to one area and make people in other areas
jealous.”67 Similarly, the head of Bappeda in Alor noted that, “we really agree with the concept of
the matching grant, because it can prevent jealousy among the community if one kecamatan
receives KDP and another does not. This creates uniformity and harmony.”




67
  Saradin Sinarbang, Bappeda staff, Karawang; see also Kepala Kantor DPM, Lumajang; A.Rasyid, Bappeda,
Sumenep]

                                                                                                   22
                            PART III: REASONS FOR FUNDING

Key findings

•   Buy-in to KDP principles and performance. This played a key role in the readiness of officials to
    provide district funds. In particular, officials valued strategic and instrumental benefits of community
    participation. Some also said funding would facilitate transfer of KDP principles and procedures to
    other programs. However evidence does not support this. The program rarely boosted monitoring and
    reporting or stimulated greater interest from senior members of district administrations.

•   Financial incentives for take up. Officials did not tend to cite the obvious benefit of free technical
    assistance. Rather, they commonly hoped they would be rewarded with more funding for KDP or
    other projects, even though this was not part of the formal arrangement. To a certain degree,
    participation in the matching grant program represented a ‘token effort’ to show willing.

•   Failure to contribute. This was neither systematically related to limited fiscal capacity nor to the
    ‘buy-in’ of key officials. The latter might be explained by the fact that the matching grant program
    did not present decision-makers with a ‘significant’ choice about whether they wanted to participate
    in KDP or not, since failure to contribute was costless. The former indicates that most districts were
    not funding the program ‘to capacity’, providing support for the idea that participation was to some
    extent tokenism. However, failure to provide funds was also sometimes influenced by ‘positive’
    factors, including availability of other, ‘competing’ programs, blocking of funding proposals by other
    members of the executive or legislature, and problems with communication within and between
    district governments and the centre.


Of the 190 districts participating in the first year of KDP2, 79 opted to provide funding for one or
more sub-districts. Local government contributions ranged from Rp. 500 million to Rp. 4 billion,
averaging between 0.6 and 4.7 percent of 2002 development spending. However, only a handful
of districts made contributions at the upper end of the scale. On average, allocations to KDP
amounted to just over Rp. 1 billion, or just 1.2 percent of development spending.

This study attempted to determine the reasons why local decision-makers contributed funds. It
focused on factors such as ‘buy in’ to the program’s principles and performance, the importance
of free technical assistance and even desire to follow central government guidance. It also looked
at why other districts did not contribute. This was harder to fathom. Support for KDP aims and
judgements about its performance were no less positive in districts that did not provide funding
than in those that did. Furthermore, while some claimed that budget limitations were decisive,
fiscal capacity had little explanatory value in relation to funding decisions.

A number of factors might help to explain this puzzle. First, the fact that the matching grant
program was ‘costless’, since it did not have any impact on full grant funding, meant that sign-up
to the program was probably not a very significant test of ‘buy-in’. Second, the fact that many
officials cited desire to ‘please’ the central government as a key reason for contributing funds
suggests that a certain amount of tokenism was involved. This would help to explain why most
districts only put up a relatively small amount of funds, a fact that further serves to explain why
fiscal capacity did not influence allocations.

Investigation of the budgeting process also suggested some ‘positive’ factors that might have
prevented allocations. These included the availability of alternative programs, veto of proposals
by senior members of the executive or legislators and simple failures of communication within
district governments, and between local governments and the centre.


                                                                                                          23
1. Rationale for contributing funds

A. ‘Buy-in’ to KDP

A1. Support for participation
Contributions to KDP were undoubtedly linked to buy-in to its principles and procedures. In the
survey, over 70 percent of officials cited support for community participation as one of the top
two reasons for joining the program, far more than selected any other reason. As detailed earlier,
participation was valued for two principal reasons. First, it was seen as a ‘strategic’ way to carry
out development by inculcating skills, empowering villagers and thereby reducing dependency.
Second, it boosted outputs, increasing contributions and sustainability. The head of Bappeda in
Pasaman neatly summed up these dual reasons for favouring KDP, when he noted that “KDP is a
project with a strong empowerment aspect and we need that kind of program. It also encourages
community participation in planning and monitoring and this guarantees the final result.”68

Box: The need for an empowerment program

During interviews, desire to support or need for ‘an empowerment program’ was almost invariably cited
as a reason for funding KDP. Such programs were commonly understood in opposition to previous ‘top-
down’ programs, which were said to have perpetuated dependency. In contrast to these, ‘bottom-up’ or
‘empowerment’ programs were thought to reduce dependency by inculcating skills and enabling villagers
to ‘help themselves’. Such attitudes often cashed out in an emphasis on capacity building and
microfinance projects.

It was therefore interesting that, in at least four districts, officials said that an empowerment program such
as KDP ‘fitted’ with the priorities of the district, enshrined in strategic plans (Renstra). In Kendari, for
example, the Deputy Bupati noted that one of the main elements in the district’s Renstra was “the
people’s economy and infrastructure. We also wanted to put more focus on empowerment programs.” The
common elements in these plans were a focus on development of ‘human resources’ and the ‘people’s
economy’. Support for such aims was widespread among officials interviewed for this study, and they are
likely embodied in many such plans, both central and local.

This rhetoric of ‘empowerment’ was also practiced and propagated in a number of government-run
projects. Most strikingly these included other cost sharing programs, such as the provincially managed
Gerdu Taskin or Kampung Tua programs in East Java and Lampung. They also included local projects
hatched under the aegis of local cross-sectoral Poverty Alleviation Committees (KPK), which many
districts have already set up under mandate from the centre government. In around one third of districts,
these were already active in creating ‘stimulant’ programs.


A2. KDP as a model
In nearly one third of districts, officials indicated that their decision to fund the matching grant
program was related to desire to use KDP would as a ‘model’ or ‘benchmark’ for other programs.
In Pasaman, for example, the Sekda noted that, “the matching grant is very important as a
comparison for similar projects funded by the APBD.”69 Similarly, the Tim Koordinasi Head in
Alor wrote that, “the district government is still learning the concept of KDP from the matching
grant program and hopes that it will be adopted as the basis for development in the district.”70

While KDP was certainly seen as a model, there is reason to question whether the matching grant
program helped. If it were really intended to act as a model one would surely expect more
intensive monitoring and reporting and greater interest in the results. Yet this did not normally

68
   Evi, Kepala Bappeda, Pasaman
69
   Sekda, Pasaman; see also Kepala Dinas Sosial, Karawang; Bappeda, Serang
70
   TKPPK, Alor, NTT

                                                                                                            24
happen. In the survey, around 90 percent of Dinas and Bappeda Heads reported that there was no
difference in monitoring of full and matching grant locations. Interviews also established that Tim
Koordinasi did not usually institute new reporting requirements, and senior decision-makers did
not usually ask to see the results. This issue is discussed further in the final section of the report.
     Figure: Reasons for funding KDP

     The survey presented Bappeda and Tim Koordinasi Heads with a selection of six reasons that might explain why
     their district funded the matching grant program and asked to rate these in order of priority. Reasons that were
     given top priority were allocated three points, those ranked second received two points, and so on. This chart
     illustrates the weight attached to different reasons for funding.




B. Cost sharing incentives

Many officials opined that the matching grant program offered a way for districts to ‘share’ the
burden of development with the central government. However, although the obvious incentive for
joining the program was free technical assistance, this was not the main draw. Rather, in almost
every district, officials saw contributions as a way to attract more project funding. As one
member of Bappeda in Lumajang commented, “KDP doesn’t come here automatically. This is a
form of participation from the district to maintain the program.”71

B1. Technical assistance/ free facilitation
Officials rated the abilities of facilitators highly. 84 percent of those surveyed rated them as
‘good’ or ‘very good’. Some also cited free technical assistance for facilitators as a reason for
joining the matching grant program. In Pasaman, the head of Bappeda noted that, “through the
matching grant we can get technical assistance that is needed to guide us in proper management
of the project.”72 Nevertheless, facilitation was neither one of the most important aspects of the
program for officials, nor was it one that they were likely to take up in their own programs. It is
therefore not surprising that the survey showed free technical assistance and facilitation was not a
strong reason for joining the matching grant program. No respondent rated it as the primary
reason for doing so. While technical assistance and operational expenses amounted to up to 20
percent of the value of grants, it is unlikely that officials normally factored this into a cost-benefit
calculus, since facilitation was not a cost that they normally carried in their own programs.73




71
   Paiman, Bappeda Staff, Lumajang
72
   Evi, Kepala Bappeda, Pasaman; see also Magelang, Miharsih, PMD Staff/ TKPPK Secretary
73
   It is worth noting that some officials did see technical assistance as a financial benefit. According to the Sekda in
Pasaman, for example, “It [the matching grant program] was a stimulant for the local government to carry out
development with our limited fund resources.” Meanwhile, in Sumenep, one member of the PMD commented that,
“funds in the district are limited, so we need funds from the centre,” a view that was also apparently shared by
members of the local empowerment agency in Poso. Similarly, in the survey, a few officials noted the importance of
‘backup from the central government’ for consultants and DOK. As one wrote, “because of limitations on local budget
and capacity, the government still needs to provide operational expenses and technical assistance.”

                                                                                                                        25
B2. ‘Following instructions’
In most districts, officials volunteered that a request from the central government to contribute
funds to KDP played a key role in their decision to do so. In Serang, for example, members of the
Tim Koordinasi related that they put up funding because they had been instructed to do so, while
the Deputy Bupati in Rokan Hulu saw instructions as a powerful incentive, noting that, “if the
central government gives instructions, the Bupati and Dinas will obey.”74 In the survey, this was
the second most important reason for funding KDP, well ahead of free technical assistance.

A number of officials signalled that willingness to follow central guidance was related to limited
capacity to design and run programs. As one PMD official in Kendari noted, “the district is still
confused by Otonomi Daerah, since we are used to following policies developed by the centre.
The district government still has trouble developing its own programs and policies, since capacity
is quite low.”75 Nevertheless, as the survey showed, this was not a strong reason for funding
KDP; out of all possible reasons, limited capacity was least likely to be chosen.

Box: Expectations of payback

In almost every district, officials indicated that the decision to fund KDP was influenced by belief that
they would be more likely to receive funding for KDP or another project. The corollary to these views
was a feeling that those who provided funding should benefit or that those who did not should be
sanctioned. In Rokan Hulu, for example, one official commented that, “we have obeyed the instruction
from the central government, so now we should get paid back.” Similarly, in Pasaman, the Sekda
demanded, “if I give you matching grant, give me more full grant funds.” The Deputy Bupati in Sumenep
offered a clear idea of what he expected to receive, noting that, “the appreciation that the district would
like to be shown is an increase in full grant, or in our DAU [general grant transfer] allocation.” Others felt
that, “districts that don’t join the program shouldn’t be given funding.”

There was evidence that this had the potential to lead to problems if expectations were not fulfilled.
Officials in at least four districts said that, if more funding did not materialize, they would refuse to
allocate any more district funds. This was a particularly vexed issue in districts where many kecamatan
were being phased out of KDP. In Sumenep, one member of the Tim Koordinasi noted that, “for 2005, the
district government will agree to increase the number of matching grant locations, so long as more
kecamatan are allocated full grant funding.” Here, officials commented that unless they received more
funding, they might as well divert funds to a program that was designed and run by the district.
Meanwhile, in Solok, members of the Tim Koordinasi related that they had raised this issue with the KDP
secretariat during a trip to Jakarta, threatening that, unless the district received more full grant funding,
they would not allocate any more district funds to KDP.


Rather than blind obedience or limited capacity, willingness to follow the centre was usually
motivated by financial considerations. Officials often felt that contributions to KDP would help to
attract more funding. Sometimes they hoped that, “if we provide funds for the matching grant, it
might attract more full grant from the centre,” a sentiment expressed by the Sekda in Karawang
and Pasaman and by members of PMD and Bappeda in Rokan Hulu, Grobogan and Blitar. Others
thought the reward would be in the form of other projects. As one PMD member in Lampung
Timur commented, “it seems there is a misperception that local governments will be awarded
more projects if they are willing to provide funds for certain projects from the centre. I can
understand why, because the Minister of Home Affairs once promised that he would award more
projects if local governments were willing to increase allocations to projects from the centre.”76


74
   Auni, Wakil Bupati, Rokan Hulu
75
   Ahmad Nazaruddin, Staff DPPMD, Kendari
76
   Gultom, Lampung Timur; A few program consultants also noted this phenomenon. According to one KMKab in
Kendari, “the only motivation for the district government to join the program was as a way to fish for more full grant

                                                                                                                   26
Some pointed to their financial dependency and expressed concern that they would be penalized
if they failed to provide funding. As one member of Bappeda noted, “in Otonomi Daerah, it’s
impossible to develop the district because money is still in the centre. So unless we follow the
centre, the district won’t get any funds.”77 Similarly, in Sumenep, the Tim Koordinasi secretary
opined that, “KDP is very complicated. Actually we didn’t really want to use the program, but we
chose two kecamatan because we wanted to follow the rules from the centre. The government
was worried that we wouldn’t get another project from the centre if we refused.”78

2. Failure to provide funding

Budget constraints were often cited as a reason for not providing matching grant funds. In the
words of one PMD Head in South Sumatra, “the matching grant program is really good. It’s just
that our budget is here limited so we can’t implement it yet.” Others voiced scepticism about such
claims. “They’re richer than us,” said one PMD member of the next-door district, “so actually
they should be able to provide funds.” Analysis suggests that such scepticism was warranted.
Neither take-up of the matching grant program nor the amount contributed to it was
systematically linked to local government capacity to pay.

   Figure: Fiscal capacity and funding decisions

   Some officials claimed that limited budget could be a decisive factor in whether or not a district chose to
   contribute funds to KDP. The following chart, based on budget data for 173 districts that participated in the first
   year of KDP2, shows that there was little significant trend for matching grant districts to have more resources
   than non-matching grant districts. Only slight differences at the lower end of the scale suggest that budget
   limitations may have been a more decisive issue for a handful of (relatively poor) districts.




Buy-in to the KDP concept and judgements about its performance also had little explanatory
value in relation to take-up. The survey showed no significant difference between matching grant
and non-matching grant districts in terms of the priorities of officials or the likelihood of take up


funding.” Meanwhile, a consultant in Blitar stated bluntly that, “it would be better if the matching grant program was
not just seen as a way to get more aid from the central government.”
77
   Briefing with researchers in Malang; Apparently related to this was the notion, voiced in at least three districts, that
funding for community development should come from district own revenues [PAD]. This was seen in Ponorogo
[Sutrisno], Karawang [Johansa] and Sijunjung [Staff Bappeda, Sijunjung]
78
   Idris, PMD Staff/; Sekretaris TKPPK, Sumenep;

                                                                                                                         27
of KDP procedures in other programs. Officials’ judgements about KDP performance were not
generally more positive in districts that decided to fund it than in those that did not. That these did
not tend to determine funding decisions is confirmed by the fact that districts that had already
participated in KDP1 were only marginally more likely to contribute than those that had not.79

     Figure: Ratings of KDP performance

     Local officials generally judged KDP performance to be very positive and cited this as a reason for funding the
     funding it. However, judgements about KDP were no less positive in districts that did not contribute. This can be
     seen in the following chart, based on survey results from Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads.




Investigation of the budgeting process, discussed in the second part of this paper, suggested a
number of ‘positive’ factors that might help to explain why some districts failed to provide
funding, even if buy-in from key officials and the amount of budget available was the same as in
matching grant districts. These included the availability of alternative programs, veto of proposals
by senior members of the executive or legislators and simple failures of communication within
district governments, and between local governments and the centre.

First, some districts might have chosen to provide funds to other ‘empowerment’ programs
instead. In Pesisir, one of the three non-matching grant districts visited, officials reported that
they chose to contribute to an alternative cost-sharing program.80 Districts might also have funded
their own programs, some of them ‘spin-offs’ of KDP. For example, Kotabaru, a district that did
not contribute to KDP, reportedly allocated just under Rp. 8 billion for its Gerakan Pembangunan
Desa spin-off program in 2003.81 In some cases, officials might have preferred to throw their
support behind home-grown programs that jettisoned aspects of KDP that they found
problematic, such as transparency, competition, and lack of control.82


79
   See Annex 2
80
   This district reportedly provided funding to the KDP sister program, UPP, instead.
81
   Another might have been Bogor, which allocated just under Rp. 17 billion for its Pembangunan Sarana Prasarana
Desa melalui pola Imbal Swadaya program in the same year.
82
   Indeed, in four districts, the decision to provide funding to KDP was said to have come down to a lack of choice.
According to one member of the PMD in Lampung Timur, for example, the primary reason for funding the program
was because it was “the only program that has a strong empowerment aspect and transparency.” Officials in Sumenep,
Sijunjung, and Rokan Hulu echoed such sentiments. While lack of capacity was not a reason for choosing to contribute
to KDP, decisions to provide funding were taken in the wake of a radical decentralization. Development of effective
‘empowerment’ programs might take a little more time. As most officials opined, ‘empowerment’ was a relatively new
concept, and one for which many were keen to have a ‘model’ or ‘benchmark’.

                                                                                                                         28
Second, more senior officials and legislators might sometimes have blocked allocations to KDP.
In Lampung Tengah, for example, the Bupati was said to have vetoed a proposed allocation to the
program, on the basis that, in the newly split district, the priority was to fund development of the
district capital. Resistance might also have come from other agencies, keen to secure funding for
other projects. Legislators also sometimes vetoed proposed allocations; this occurred in one out of
ten non-matching grant districts surveyed. As also discussed later, their reasons might have
included concern for their ‘own’ projects or the ‘lack of profitability’ of KDP. Indeed, the latter
might have affected decision-making at any stage, by members of the executive or DPRD.

Third, it is also possible, that some districts simply failed to allocate funding due to relatively
simple problems of coordination within local executives or between local executives and the
centre. Such problems, documented later, were sometimes related to staff turnover and sometimes
to inadequacy of information. They were found to have led to reductions and failures to make
routine allocations in a significant number of districts. It is not unlikely that they were also a
reason for the failure of some districts to sign up to the program in the first instance.




                                                                                                 29
SECTION 2
Budget allocations, disbursals, and monitoring




                                                 30
             PART I: LOCAL GOVERNMENT BUDGET ALLOCATIONS

Key findings

Budget allocations for KDP encountered a number of difficulties, including contest from other local
government agencies and legislators. Corruption also sometimes acted as a disincentive to put funds into
the program, and is likely to become a bigger issue as the amount of funding increases in future.

•   Sectoral interests. Allocations were coordinated through one agency, PMD, which often lacks clout.
    They were subject to contest by other agencies, though members Bappeda did provide support.
    Building a wider base of support, by expanding the role and stake of other agencies in KDP is likely
    to impact positively on funding decisions.

•   Involving legislators. Although DPRD were often uninterested in allocations, as the amount
    increased, so did their attention. This usually resulted in reductions. However, limited attention was
    sometimes due to lack of knowledge. Exploring ways to engage more with legislators is desirable.

•   Information. Provision of clear, timely and reliable information is essential to avoid confusion and
    enable officials to arrange allocations. Failure to do so will lead to frustration and lost opportunities.

•   Socialization. Loss of operational knowledge related to staff turnover can have a damaging effect on
    the ability of officials to negotiate allocations. It is also a more general issue for the program

•   Rules and sanctions. Shortfalls in district government funding were not countered by clear rules and
    sanctions, such as reduction of technical assistance. It is desirable to formulate and socialize these.


During the first two years of the matching grant program, there were numerous problems and
deviations from initial funding commitments in participating districts, including cuts and
reductions in funding. These occurred for two reasons: issues internal to the local budgeting
process, and those at the interface of KDP and district procedures. This section explores some of
the factors that shaped outcomes during budgeting; who was involved, the role they played and
the major dynamics of the process. It also highlights issues with the interaction of the program
with local actors, including the flow of information and understanding of the program.

Box: Problems with district funding for KDP

Shortfalls in funding for sub-districts. In 2003, 26 percent of matching grant districts failed to allocate
sufficient funds to participating sub-districts. This affected 18 percent of sub-districts that received district
grants, which suffered average shortfalls of Rp. 300 million each. Similar reductions occurred in 2004.

Cuts in funding by legislatures. In 2003, only one out of ten legislatures entirely vetoed funding. But
hey were more likely to reduce it. In 20 percent of matching grant districts, legislators cut the number of
sub-districts by an average of two kecamatan per district. The same pattern held in 2004.

Failure to propose allocations. In nine out of ten non-matching grant districts surveyed, the executive
never put forward a proposal to fund the matching grant program. Although they might have decided not
to do so, information from interviews suggests this might also have been due to problems of coordination
and knowledge about the program.

Failure to make new allocations. District executives had the opportunity to propose allocations for new
kecamatan in 2004. Problems of information and coordination within districts and between district and the
centre prevented more from making new allocations and led to confusion even in those that did.




                                                                                                              31
Box: District planning and budgeting

Budgeting commences in the wake of the annual planning exercise, an elaborate process that is
intended to reconcile bottom-up proposals from villages with district priorities. Based on the
results, agencies submit spending proposals through local planning agency, Bappeda, to the
budget committee (Tim Anggaran). This team, led by the District Secretary, is charged with
compiling the draft budget (RAPBD). As noted in a recent World Bank study, planning is,
“largely void of considerations of affordability.” The process therefore involves radical cuts,
placing Bappeda and the Tim Anggaran in a powerful position.

Following compilation of the draft budget, around September or October, the draft is presented
to the DPRD budget committee, which conducts a weeklong review. The RAPBD is then
revised and presented to the DPRD in the first of three plenary meetings, following which
legislators conduct field visits to verify the need for projects. The various DPRD commissions
then hold meetings with related Dinas to discuss proposals. Following further revisions, the
DPRD votes on the budget during a final plenary meeting.


    Results of District                      All Spending Units
    Coordination Meeting                   (Dinas, Badan & Kantor)
    (Rakorbang)                                                                   Submission of proposals, coordinated
                                                                                  by Bappeda


                                       Executive Budget Committee
                               (Tim Anggaran) run by District Secretary (Sekda)
                                                                                  Revision & compilation of draft
                                                                                  budget (RAPBD)


                                                    Bupati
                                                                                  Submission of draft budget
                                                                                  (RAPBD) to DPRD


                                           DPRD Budget Committee
                                     (Panitia Anggaran) Preliminary Review
                                                                                  Tim Anggaran revise and
                                                                                  resubmit RAPBD


                                           DPRD Plenary Meetings
                               •      Explanation from Bupati
                               •      General review from DPRD
                               •      Bupati’s reply                              DPRD verification teams
                                                                                  conduct site visits


                                             DPRD Commissions
                                   (Komisi) meetings (Rapat Kerja) with Dinas
                                                 representatives
                                                                                  Further revision of RAPBD by
                                                                                  executive


                                         DPRD Plenary Meeting
                               DPRD approves the budget, which then becomes a
                                        district regulation (Perda)




Budgeting should finish in December, prior to the start of the fiscal year. However, this rarely
happens. Out of 51 districts surveyed, only 14 percent had agreed the 2003 budget before
January of the same year. In two-thirds of cases the budget was not agreed before March, and in
28 percent not until May or later. However, there does seem to be some progress in rolling back
the date for agreement of the budget. In less than half of districts surveyed had the 2004 budget
not been agreed before March, and only 8 percent had not approved the APBD before May.



                                                                                                                         32
1. The budget allocation process

A. Proposals in the executive
Local empowerment agency heads were a key player in the process of budgeting contributions to
KDP. After local governments signed up to the matching grant program in 2001, responsibility
for coordination of KDP passed from district planning agency, Bappeda, to local empowerment
agencies (PMD). Although representatives from Bappeda still formed part of district coordination
teams, alongside others from Health, Education and Public Works departments, the task of
managing the team and handling budget allocations to the program passed to members of PMD.

The interests of members of this agency were therefore the first hurdle in the fund allocation
process. In some cases, members of PMD are likely to have resisted allocations to KDP on the
basis that it would crowd out other programs. According to one Dinas head, “the existence of the
matching grant will reduce my Dinas budget allocation because the amount is fixed and that
means I cannot allocate it for another project.”83 As discussed in previous sections, officials might
have had a number of reasons for preferring other projects, including desire for more control,
dislike for the length and complexity of KDP processes, and easier opportunities for corruption.

     Table: Summary of Expenditures Kantor Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Pasaman 2004

     In the context of district expenditures, contributions to the matching grant program were not a significant item,
     commonly amounting to just over one percent of total development spending. For the agency proposing the
     allocation, however, it was quite a different matter. In Pasaman district, for example, a Rp. 1 billion allocation to
     the matching grant program accounted for over 38 percent of departmental budget and total spending on KDP
     accounted for nearly 57 percent of budgeted expenditures. This illustrates the relatively small size of the agency
     and shows why crowding out of budget for other programs could have been a significant issue.

        Departmental Expenditures                                                                         Amount (Rp)

        KDP Matching Grant                                                                               1,000,000,000
        KDP Operational Budget (PAP)                                                                       277,800,000
        KDP Comparison Study:                                                                               96,400,000
        KDP Training and Assistance:                                                                        57,000,000
        KDP Socialization and Awareness Raising:                                                            55,000,000
        Subtotal:                                                                                        1,486.200,000

        Training and Evaluation of Nagari:                                                                 173,000,000
        Poverty Alleviation Committee:                                                                      30,000,000
        Empowerment of Community Institutions:                                                              48,000,000
        Programs for Training and Empowerment of Youth and Jobless:                                        240,800,000
        Programs for Nurseries, Mothers, Widows and Housewives:                                            290,470,000
        Subtotal:                                                                                          782,270,000

        PMD Operational Expenses:                                                                          344,500,000
        Subtotal:                                                                                          344,500,000

        Total budgeted expenditures 2004:                                                                2,612,970,000



Fund allocations were also subject to competition from other agencies. This occurred in over one
third of districts visited. In Lampung Timur, for example, one PMD member commented that,
“the interests of other Dinas,” placed limitations on the amount of funds available, while in next-
door Lampung Tengah, competition for funds was cited as a reason why this district failed to
make any contribution.84 This problem was exacerbated by the limited clout of empowerment
agencies, which were commonly of limited size and status, particularly compared to Bappeda, the
previous ‘owner’ of allocations to KDP. As the Head of the PMD in Solok noted, “Bappeda has a

83
     Susilo, Head of PM Rokan Hulu
84
     See Gultom, PMD Staff/ TKPPK Member, Lampung Timur; Immamudin, KMKab, Lampung Tengah

                                                                                                                             33
higher rank and runs all program planning. For us, it’s hard to get a program without having this
authority.”85 KDP Regional Management Unit (RMU) members in North Sulawesi and Central
Java also noted this phenomenon. In the words of one, “it was much easier [to get funding] when
Bappeda would both plan and implement KDP.”86

As a result of its limited power, PMD members often depended on support to ensure that
proposals were kept on the table during the compilation of the budget – a process that necessarily
involves swathing cuts. Although this occasionally came from the Bupati or Sekda, in well over
half of districts visited, members of Bappeda played a key role in helping to ensure that proposals
for the matching grant program were included in the budget. As the agency responsible for
channelling proposals to the Tim Anggaran, and usually a key player on the committee, it was
likely to have been effective in doing so. As the Head of the PMD in Rokan Hulu commented,
“here, Bappeda has total authority to determine the amount of allocations for each Dinas.”

 Box: The importance of the Bupati’s committment

 It is hard to overstate the importance of initial commitment to funding KDP on the part of district heads.
 This provided PMD officials with the leverage that they needed to ensure that proposals were kept on the
 table even in the face of competition from larger and more powerful agencies. As one member of Bappeda
 in Boyolali commented, “it’s not up to us to decide the budget allocation. The Bupati already committed
 to funding the program in front of the President, so there is no choice but to proceed.” According to
 another, this helped to ensure that other officials could not “play around.”

 However, Bupatis were peripheral to the process of budgeting for the program. As the Deputy Bupati in
 Sumenep reported, “the Bupati and DPRD are only involved in the political arena. The Dinas are
 responsible for all operational issues.” Similarly, in Pasaman the Sekda noted that, “someone must remind
 the Bupati. … The commitment belongs to the government of Pasaman. But only certain people know
 exactly about the matching grant and most of them are in the Tim Koordinasi.”

 Since the Bupatis did not play a hands-on role in budgeting, formalization of their commitment in letters
 of understanding co-signed by DPRD Head played an important proxy role. The importance of this letter
 was noted by officials in more than half of districts visited, where it was typical to hear comments such as
 that of one official in Rokan Hulu that, “the basis for submitting the proposal … was the commitment
 between the Bupati and the DPRD.” Such ‘formal’ buy-in from district heads was therefore necessary,
 although not sufficient, to ensure that funding proposals would be successful. This really depended on the
 goodwill of second-line officials responsible for arranging allocations.

B. Budget allocations in local legislatures
Consultants and officials commonly reported that members of the legislature had no significant
comments or questions relating to district contributions to KDP. Based on their comments, as
well as those of legislators themselves, it appears that this was largely due to a lack of interest,
due to the ‘limited capacity’ of DPRD members, their pursuit of other interests and the relatively
small size of allocations to the program.

It is not uncommon to hear negative references to the ‘human resources’ (Sumber Daya Manusia)
of legislators in Indonesia, and it is perhaps not surprising that a number of officials repeated this
charge to explain legislators’ lack of understanding and scrutiny of proposals.87 According to the

85
   Azril, Kepala Kantor KPM, Solok; Some couched this status issue in terms of the distinction between Kantor and
Dinas, which held in at least 20 percent of districts surveyed. As one PMD member in Pasaman noted, “we couldn’t
submit the Rp. 1.5 billion allocation, because we are just a Kantor and other Dinas would be jealous.” Chaidir, Staff
KPM, Pasaman; see also Aprizal. Staff KPN, Sijunjung
86
   Subagyo, RMU Training Specialist, Central Java
87
   As noted, for example, in “A Preliminary Study of Local Elites in Indonesia: Sociological profiles of DPRD
members”; Takashi Shiraishi

                                                                                                                  34
Sekda in Pasaman, for example, “the lack of quality of the human resources of DPRD members
prevents them from paying attention to the detail of proposals submitted by the executive.”88
Similarly, according to his counterpart in in Karawang, “the executive has to be tolerant of the
perceptions of the DPRD about the matching grant program, because of their limited human
resources.”89

Box: Management of budgeting in the legislature

Many officials indicated that negotiation of budget allocations depended less on the content of proposals
than on informal management of the process. According to one member of the Tim Koordinasi in
Pasaman, for example, “the approval of members of the DPRD was not because they know about the
program but because there were certain lobbies from Head of Dinas instead. This is a common practice
for other project proposals in the district.” Such lobbies also occurred in Karawang, where the Sekda, who
spoke disparagingly of the ‘human resources’ of legislators, commented that, “what is important here is
how we approach the DPRD in a number of ways to get their approval for funds.” Similarly, in Serang, a
consultant noted that, “here, the executive is very clever at lobbying the DPRD to submit proposals in the
APBD. So there was never any trouble.” As one member of Bappeda noted, “this informal lobby is more
effective than formal meetings.”


Yet, whatever the supposed mental limitations of legislators, it would be naïve to think that they
do not take an interest in the apportionment of district funds. More convincingly, in most districts
it seems that DPRD members were simply more concerned with other things. In Pasaman, for
example, the Head of Bappeda commented that legislators were often too busy with their own
business to question the actions of the executive, noting that, “within the last two years, DPRD
members were too busy trying to mobilize support from the public and neglected their main
function.”90 Similarly, in Rokan Hulu, the head of the community empowerment agency noted
that, “members of DPRD did not really care about the detail of the matching grant. It seems that
they don’t know much about the program. They are too busy with their own business.”91

Among the other business that might have occupied DPRD members was pursuit of their own
interests, personal or political. As one PMD staff member in Lampung Timur put it, “as long as
we do not intervene in DPRD members’ proposals, proposals from the executive will be smoothly
agreed.92 This was echoed by the Sekda in Pasaman, who commented that, “members of the
DPRD only care about their own proposals,”93 and perhaps also by one DPRD member in
Sumenep, who noted that, “members of the DPRD never cause any problems for the matching
grant proposal from the executive. For my friends in the legislature, the most important thing is
that there is no cut to our payroll.”94

The relatively small size of contributions to the matching grant program was also likely to have
been a major factor in their failure to attract attention. Indeed, contributions to KDP only
accounted for 1.2 percent of total development expenditures, an amount that might simply have
been ‘below the radar’ of legislators. Certainly, there was evidence that the more a district
proposed to contribute, the more likely the allocation was to be contested and cut. In three out of

88
   Syahiran, Sekda, Pasaman; see also Evi, Kepala Bappeda, Pasaman
89
   Saifudin D. Jufri, Sekda, Karawang
90
   Evi, Kepala Bappeda, Pasaman
91
   Susilo, Kepala Dinas SPPM, Rokan Hulu; Such comments chime with the observation in a recent Smeru report that,
“some of them [DPRD members] are still not serious about performing their duties and ignore discipline, for instance,
they come late to meetings or rarely attend them at all.” (see “Governance and Poverty Reduction: Evidence from a
Newly Decentralized Indonesia”; Sumarto, Suryahadi & Arifianti, SMERU, 2004)
92
   Gultom, Secretary of TKPPK, Lampung Timur
93
   Syahiran, Sekda, Pasaman
94
   Darwis, Ketua Komisi A, DPRD, Sumenep

                                                                                                                  35
the four districts visited where allocations were cut by legislators, the executive had proposed Rp.
2.5 to 3 billion, significantly more than the average Rp.1.2 billion contribution.95 There is
therefore reason to think that if district funding increases in future, it will lead to a significant
increase in the attention that legislators pay to allocations. On current form, this is not likely to be
positive.

Box: Guidelines from above: the importance of a ‘dasar hukum’

‘Instructions’ or ‘requests’ from the central government were a crucial factor in encouraging districts to
sign up to fund KDP. They also played an important role in budgeting. Time and again, officials referred
to routine letters from the centre as a ‘dasar hukum’ that would help to persuade Bappeda, the Tim
Anggaran or DPRD to accept proposals. As one PMD member in Pasaman put it, “our basis for proposing
the program was very clear, that is, the letter from the central government. … If we didn’t have a letter I
reckon there wouldn’t be any matching grant.”

Many referred to this issue in the context of regional autonomy, under which it might be expected that
districts would have a certain amount of discretion in the allocation of local government funds. However,
officials did not necessarily see things this way. In the words of one bureaucrat in Lampung Timur,
“although there is already regional autonomy, we still need a legal foundation from the higher up
structural arm, in other words, from the centre, in order to implement development programs in the
district. So if the centre doesn’t provide a legal foundation about the matching grant, perhaps we wouldn’t
be able to allocate funds.” Similarly, in Sumenep, one of his counterparts noted that, “although there is
already regional autonomy, in the regions, we still wait for policy from the centre, which will become a
basis for carrying out development in the district.”

This also played a significant role in negotiations with legislators. According to one member of the Tim
Koordinasi in Lampung Timur, “although there is currently regional autonomy, we still need written legal
documents from the central government to support our argument during negotiation with DPRD.”
Meanwhile, in Grobogan, another official reported that, “the Tim Koordinasi actually had an idea to make
our own program for locations that did not yet get any KDP funds ... but this encountered obstacles when
we went to the DPRD because there was no legal foundation; the legality was not clear.” As the
consultant in this location, who was familiar with these concerns, noted, “all that remains is for the central
government to send a letter of appeal to make PPK Mandiri, and the local government is ready to do it.”


C. KDP and ‘profit’
Local government officials generally rated KDP very highly in terms of transparency and
reducing corruption; nearly 90 percent of those surveyed rated its performance ‘good’ or ‘very
good’ in this respect. They also valued this; transparency clearly rated as the second most
important aspect of KDP for these officials, above the ability of the program to generate
community contributions or to increase technical skills.96 However, in over one third of locations



95
    Where researchers were able to elicit reasons for cuts by DPRD members, the main reason cited was ‘budget
limitations’. According to one DPRD member in Sumenep, for example, “we must look at the capacity of the district to
implement the matching grant, because for Sumenep, Rp. 1.5 billion is a great deal. So, we could only approve two
kecamatan from the four kecamatan submitted by the executive.” His account was backed up by one official who
reported that the DPRD, “only agreed two out of the four kecamatan proposed by the Tim Koordinasi because of
budget limitations.” Similarly, in Grobogan, a member of the PMD reported that the DPRD Budget committee cut their
proposal for four kecamatan because of budget limitations. There is some reason to doubt that budget limitations alone
were the determining factor here. In particular, it is puzzling that DPRD members should become arbiters of how much
budget was available. Rather, it is likely that funds were reallocated to other programs preferred by legislators. Current
World Bank research on DPRD accountability would seem to bear this out (see draft papers on Magelang, Lebak)
96
   In light of the fact that two surveys conducted in 1999 and 2000 found that the majority of public officials surveyed
saw corruption as a serious problem, the importance attached to transparency is perhaps not entirely surprising.
[Surveys carried out by Institute for Policy and Community Development Studies (IPCOS), information from Warta
CIMU, April 2004]

                                                                                                                      36
visited, informants also suggested that it would not suit the interest of other members of the local
government to emulate the success of KDP in reducing corruption.

This was also a disincentive to find the matching grant program. According to the PMD Head in
Rokan Hulu, “if I were only concerned about the profitability of a project, then I certainly
wouldn’t propose the matching grant program for my Dinas, since I won’t make any profit from
it.”97 He made it clear that this could also be a disincentive for others. “Of course the allocation
was challenged. I am sick and tired of the people here. All that they think about is profit. In 2003,
when I proposed Rp 1.25 billion [for KDP], Bappeda asked me to cut down the amount to Rp. 1
billion and give them the rest for their personal purse.”

Box: ‘Profit-oriented’ budgeting

Many officials and legislators candidly admitted that the submission of budget proposals by the executive,
and the revision and agreement of these proposals by members of the legislature (DPRD) were coloured
by a preference for what have been termed ‘profit-orientated’ projects. According to one particularly
outspoken agency head, for example, “for me many Dinas Heads and members of the DPRD are greedy
rats and dogs that always think about profit for any project. What’s in their mind is just money and
money.” Meanwhile, the Deputy Bupati in the same location reported that, “all DPRD members think
about is how to get personal interest from every program submitted by the executive.”

Although the exact mechanisms by which members of the executive or legislature would profit were not
often elaborated, one theme that emerged in a number of interviews was the role of contractors owned by
or linked to these figures. It appears that, during budgeting, projects can be ‘earmarked’ for these firms.
As one interviewee noted, “Usually contractors are awarded a project as a result of a deal they made with
the local government, Dinas or even directly with the Bupati. An envelope (money) is the manifestation of
their deal with the bureaucrat for receiving the project.”

In one district, a number of informants, including the Head of Bappeda, complained that the budget
committee, composed of the Sekda and three of the Bupati’s ‘right hand men’, jettisoned many proposals,
including that for the matching grant program, replacing them with those that would benefit “some of the
contractors who became his ‘golden children’.” In another, the project consultant noted his belief that
budget allocations were skewed by the fact that many members of the DPRD owned contracting firms.

A recent report from research institute Smeru notes that, “the use of legislative powers is currently only
being used to promote the legislature’s interests, not to empower the people they represent.” This is hard
to dispute. At the current time, stories about abuse of district budgets by legislators are rife. As reported
recently, “state prosecutors found evidence linking thousands of councillors to graft cases in almost every
province, regency and city across the country.” In more than one case, this included every single member
of the legislature. What is also clear, both from discussion with district officials and from ongoing
investigations in a number of districts, is that local officials are also implicated in such activities.


Officials and legislators in one or two districts also claimed that the Bupati himself did not
support KDP for this reason. In one the Bupati has twice been in the news since March of this
year in relation to problems with contractors, most recently when he announced that he was
‘ready to be investigated’ for problems with contractors working on the Dutch government-
funded School Improvement Grant Program (SIGP).98 According to one legislator, who pointed to
the close connections of the Bupati with a number of contractors, “the allocation for the matching
grant program was not added to the APBD because the Bupati could not get an envelope [money]
from it”99 Senior officials from the PMD and Bappeda bore out this story, of the Bupati’s


97
   Susilo, Head of PM Rokanhulu
98
   See Jawa Pos, August 3, 2004, “Markum Siap Tanggung Jawab”
99
   Komisi D member, DPRD Ponorogo

                                                                                                           37
resistance, finally prevailing upon legislators to intercede with the District Head to make him live
up to their commitment to provide funds. As one legislator subsequently explained:

   “Bappeda members didn’t want to discuss the issue directly with the Bupati, because they were
  afraid that he would demote them. They asked for help from the DPRD. So I and other members
      of the Development Commission met the Bupati and asked why the matching grant program
  hadn’t been included in the RAPBD. I asked was it because the Bupati couldn’t get an envelope
 [money] from it. The Bupati was angry, and said that it would be entered into the revised budget.
        But [we] weren’t satisfied with an oral commitment. We insisted that the allocation would
                            definitely be entered into the RAPBD before we would approve it.”100

As noted earlier, DPRD members did not normally play a significant role in questioning or
contesting allocations to KDP, in large part because the amount involved was generally relatively
small. This might help to explain why, although legislators in at least one location were reported
to have rejected plans by the executive to adopt KDP procedures in other programs because they
could not profit, there was no information to suggest that such calculations had formed part of
their thinking about allocations the matching grant program. However, it seems reasonable to
speculate that, as allocations to the program increase, ‘profit-orientation’ might come to play a
more significant role in the calculations of members of district executives and legislatures.

2. Operational issues: information, rules and knowledge

A. Clear and timely information

A number of consultants voiced concern about delays in information and policy for district-level
Tim Koordinasi. As one wrote, “information received by Tim Koordinasi in the district is often
late and unclear, so their participation is often delayed.”101 Some complained that they regularly
received information through the consultant network long before the official versions arrived
through ‘protocolairre’ channels.102 Although these issues were not confined to the matching
grant program, they became particularly pressing when they involved local government funding.
The lessons are simple: failure to provide clear, timely and reliable information will lead to
missed opportunities and generate frustration, and will likely erode goodwill for the program.


Case 1: Postponement of KDP2

Many officials complained about the postponement of KDP in 2002. As one member of Bappeda in
Boyolali commented, “we were disappointed. … It was a very bitter experience.” This delay interfered
with planning and led to questions from legislators about failure to use funds set aside for the program. As
a result, some demanded firm guarantees before they would commit district funds. This occurred in
Ponorogo, where one legislator explained, “if they allocated the funds but the program was not
implemented, it would be difficult for the Bupati. The DPRD would question why the program was not
realized. So the executive just waited for confirmation.” The Head of Bappeda in Sumenep was vocal
about this issue, declaring that, “the central government doesn’t need to hope that the district will allocate
funds for the matching grant program if it can’t even confirm consultant staff for the same year.”




100
    Komisi D member, DPRD Ponorogo
101
    KMKab, Purworejo, Central Java
102
    KMKab, Ponorogo, East Java; KMKab, Lampung Timur, Lampung

                                                                                                           38
Case 2: Missed opportunities in 2004

In four districts, local governments were keen to provide additional funding to KDP in 2004. However,
their interest soon turned to confusion about whether this was possible. As one official reported, “we
made calls to the PMD in Jakarta to confirm the information on the matching grant program, and we also
sent a fax. But we didn’t get any answer until finally a letter came.” This letter was sent at the end of
December, when budgeting should already have been concluded. For some, it came too late. According to
one informant in Lampung Timur, officials had to abandon plans to fund five additional kecamatan.
Others grumbled about the experience. According to one informant in Grobogan, “it was too close to the
approval of the budget … we didn’t want to do it because of the limited time.”


Case 3: A vacuum of information on KDP3

Frustrated by the speed with which information arrived from the centre, in Grobogan and Lampung
Timur, consultants took matters into their own hands, disseminating cost sharing plans in KDP3 with local
officials. As one official in Lampung Timur reported, “the district prepared for the mixed grant in
September 2003. … We got the information as a rumour, and afterwards, we conducted a hearing with the
DPRD. However, the letter from the centre never came…” Officials and consultants in both locations
complained bitterly about the lack of solid information. In Grobogan, for example, one consultant
commented, to the assent of officials, “the real question is not the commitment of the district to the
matching grant program, but the commitment of the central government. The centre often flip-flops. Just
imagine: information about implementation in 2004 is not at all clear. So when will it start? In 2002, the
matching grant was delayed and now KDP sharing is also delayed. If it can’t be implemented, it would be
better if the centre didn’t raise the issues.”


B. Rules and sanctions

During the first year of the matching grant program, many districts failed to live up to their
commitments. As noted previously, for example, 18 percent of sub-districts that received grant
funding from local governments suffered from shortfalls worth an average of Rp. 300-350 million
each.103 These problems were not countered by systematic use of sanctions. Despite the fact that
technical assistance for facilitation in matching grant locations was provided from the centre, for
example, reductions in district funding were not countered by withdrawal of assistance. It is likely
that clear sanctions, and socialization of them, would go some way to ensuring that members of
the executive lived up to the commitments of their district.

C. Operational knowledge of the program

C1. Staff turnover on the Tim Koordinasi
A number of consultants and officials commented on high staff turnover on the district Tim
Koordinasi. According to informants in Blitar and Gorontalo, for example, within six months, the
composition of the team could change utterly. This had a negative impact on the ability of
officials to engage in the program. As one member of the Tim Koordinasi in Blitar reported, “all
of the Tim Koordinasi members are new to the program. They don’t understand KDP procedure,
and they don’t yet have knowledge of the program.”104 Although this phenomenon raises wider
concerns about long-term buy-in and funding for KDP, it also impacted on existing commitments.




103
      Based on results from matching grant survey
104
      Sekretaris TKPPK, Blitar

                                                                                                        39
Box: Staff turnover and loss of operational knowledge

In the two years that passed since Ponorogo district agreed to contribute funds to KDP, there was a
complete turnover of staff on the district coordination team. As a result, officials failed to enter funds for
the program in the draft budget. As the Tim Koordinasi Head reported, “I never knew about the
commitment between the Bupati and the DPRD, so it was hard to submit the proposal,” an account backed
up by one of his juniors, who admitted that he had been unable to locate key documents relating to the
program. Lobbying by the consultant and the arrival of an official letter from the central government,
helped to jolt officials into action shortly before the budget was finalized. Nevertheless, as a former
member of the team noted, “staff turnover really became an obstacle to implementation of the program.”

Meanwhile, in Kendari, confusion and uncertainty caused by staff turnover played a role in the failure to
allocate budget to the matching grant program in 2003. This was exacerbated by problems caused by the
handover of authority from Bappeda to PMD, which occurred in the middle of 2003. Although he did not
understand why Bappeda had not submitted a budget proposal, one PMD staff member noted that most of
the Bappeda staff involved in sign up to the program had already moved to other Dinas. In his view, “the
turnover of staff made coordination of the budget allocation difficult.”


C2. Legislators’ understanding of and involvement in KDP
Key members of district legislatures, such as its chairman, or the head of the development
commission generally had little grasp of what KDP was about. It was common, as a prelude to
interviews, for them to require explanations of the program, or even personal introductions to the
consultant. Indeed, in Pasaman, which allocated Rp. 1.5 billion to KDP, one official laughingly
related that, “the DPRD don’t know what the matching grant is. They think it is something like a
marching band.”105

In some cases this might well have been due to lack of interest. In Magelang, for example, one
official reported that, “it can be difficult to talk to DPRD people [about KDP]. They always send
different people to attend meetings, so there are difficulties for them to truly understand the
program.”106 Meanwhile, according to one DPRD Chairman, members of the institution were ‘too
lazy’ or ‘too busy with their own business’ to even turn up to meetings.107 In at least one district,
this appeared to relate to a narrow conception of legislators about their role. According to one
Deputy Chairman of the DPRD in Sijunjung, “our duties are only related to budget allocations. ...
If you want to know about implementation of the program, you should talk to Dinas members.”108

Nevertheless, in two or three other districts, DPRD members exhibited a great deal of interest, but
expressed frustration at lack of information about the program. In Lampung Timur, for example,
the head of the DPRD Development Commission complained that, “the executive never
communicates with us about KDP. They never invite us to discuss about the project. … Relying
on the budgeting process to communicate about KDP is not enough.”109 A local journalist who
had often written about KDP reinforced these complaints. In her experience, “in general,
members of DPRD lack information on KDP and feel ignored and left out.”110




105
    Anggota TKPPK, Pasa_FGD_1504
106
    Miharsih, PMD Staff, Magelang
107
    DPRD Chairman, Boyolali.
108
     Deputy Chairman DPRD, Sijunjung. See also “Governance and Poverty Reduction: Evidence from a Newly
Decentralized Indonesia”; Sumarto, Suryahadi & Arifianti, SMERU, 2004: “DPRD members perception of their own
authority tends to be narrow-minded and static. They feel that their functions are only to ‘legitimize’ policies.”
109
    Head of Development Commission (Komisi D), DPRD, Lampung Timur
110
    Sri, Journalist, Radar Lampung. See section on monitoring and reporting of budget Part II: III.

                                                                                                               40
                  PART II: DISBURSAL AND TAXATION OF FUNDS

Key findings

In general there was a great deal of willingness to accommodate KDP procedures. However, these
conflicted with district procedures, leading to violations of district and program rules. These conflicts can
and should be rectified. Better guidance for consultants and officials would also reduce confusion.

•   KDP fund request procedures. These are not entirely relevant to district processes of fund
    authorization, making violations ‘costless’ for officials.

•   Delays in disbursal. Administrative problems during fund authorization were the biggest cause of
    delays, followed by problems with empty district treasuries. These will continue to occur.

•   Direct disbursal. Direct transfers from treasury to projects contravene normal district procedures on
    disbursals through spending unit accounts. There is little reason to insist on this condition.

•   Conflict with the budget year. This was the main cause of violations to KDP and district procedures
    and created great difficulties for officials. It should be avoided by aligning KDP with the budget year.

•   Taxation. This can generally be negotiated. However, variations in local regulations and
    interpretations of central regulations will result in a minority of districts that insist on applying it.

•
Disbursement of funds was a vexed issue during the first year of the matching grant program.
Over 60 percent of consultants and officials surveyed volunteered concerns about this aspect of
the scheme. Officials invariably complained of difficulties budgeting for a program that ran over
two fiscal years, while district funds had to be disbursed within a single budget year. The flow of
funds to sub-districts also caused concern, due to conflict between direct disbursal procedures in
KDP and normal district procedures for disbursals. Finally, in some districts, officials wished to
deduct tax from local government allocations.

Box: Violations of KDP and district procedures

Procedural conflicts often led to violations of KDP procedures. There were documented in the survey:

Over one-third of districts ignored fund request procedures. In 49% of districts, officials asked that
funds be disbursed before the fiscal year-end. This led to violations of fund authorization procedures. 29%
of districts failed to follow a three-stage rule for disbursals, while in others reports were sometimes faked.

In nearly one-third of districts there were delays in disbursals. Consultants in 29% of districts
reported delays in disbursals as a result of district procedures. The main reasons were bureaucracy (39%),
empty district treasuries (kas kosong, in 33%), and the closing of the district budget (22%).

Only half of districts disbursed funds directly. Only 52% of districts sent funds direct from treasury to
kecamatan accounts. Others were loath to depart from the standard use of intermediary agency accounts.

In eight percent of districts, matching grant funds were taxed. This was typically a 10-11.5% tax on
procurement. In many districts, officials were able to negotiate with colleagues to waive tax.

Conflicts also led to violations of district procedures, particularly as officials tried to use workarounds to
the fiscal year mismatch. The most serious of these were disbursal of funds to non-governmental
accounts, which occurred in 15 percent of districts surveyed, and use of other informal practices such as
borrowing funds from the treasury and submission of false implementation reports.



                                                                                                           41
Interestingly, officials in districts that did not contribute to KDP were sometimes well aware of
problems faced by their counterparts. According to the Head of Bappeda in Kuantan Singingi, for
example, “the problem is that there is no synchronization of disbursals with implementation,” an
opinion shared by the Tim Koordinasi Head in Kotabaru, who provided lengthy suggestions for
how remedy this.111 Indeed, anecdote suggests that officials here saw this as a disincentive to
allocate funds to KDP, despite the fact that they rated the program highly. This lends weight to
the comment of one consultant that if such problems recur, “it will complicate the situation in the
field and make the district think again before allocating budget to the matching grant program.”112

1. Fund authorization and disbursal procedures

The direct transfer system is an integral part of the management of fund transfers to KDP. Grants
from the central government are disbursed direct from the national treasury to a collective
account (rekening kollektif) in participating kecamatan. There are no intermediaries. This grant is
disbursed in three tranches of 40%, 40% and 20%. The first tranche is disbursed upon submission
of a fund request to the district branch of KPKN (the national treasury). Transfer of the second
and third tranches depends on the accounted-for use of at least 90% of the previous tranche.

KDP fund requests follow a standard format. Disbursal requests (Surat Perintah Pencairan
Langsung, or SPP-LS) for KPKN are co-signed by the head of the Financial Management Unit
(UPK) and kecamatan-based project manager (PjOK). For the first disbursal, this is accompanied
by a summary of village proposals and the amount allocated to each (Surat Perjanjian Pemberian
Dana, or SP2D). The sub-district head is an additional signatory to this. Requests for disbursal of
second and third tranches are accompanied by a summary of village expenditures and status
report from the bank, which provide evidence of the level of realization of the previous tranche.


Box: Local government financial management

In June 2002, a Ministry of Home Affairs Regulation (Kepmendagri 29/2002) introduced a new financial
management system for local governments, which included substantial changes in budgeting. Along with
the introduction of a framework for performance-based budgeting, responsibility for drawing up,
disbursing and reporting on budget was placed squarely on spending unit (e.g. Dinas) heads. This entailed
a switch from the previous project-based (DIP) system to one based on departmental administration.

In this system, spending unit heads are responsible for the submission of budget documents, which list
proposed expenditures for the upcoming year. Following agreement of the budget, these documents
(which become known as Dokumen Anggaran Satuan Kerja or DASK) form the basis for financial
administration. The head of a spending unit is responsible for submitting fund requests and all funds flow
through accounts administered by departmental treasurers. At the end of every month, unit heads must
report on revenues and spending, and the progress and performance of programs. Their reports form the
basis for three-monthly reports for the district legislature.

One feature of local budgeting that remained unchanged was the cut-off of budget at the end of the fiscal
year. Prior to this (at the end of December), the general district treasurer must call a halt to disbursals. All
transactions should be closed, reports finalized and remaining funds returned to the district treasury. Use
of this budget will be reported to the legislature during the annual accountability speech of the Bupati in
the following months. Unrealized funds should be re-budgeted in the APBD for the following year.




111
      Bappeda, Kuantan Singingi, Riau TKPPK, Kotabaru, South Kalimantan
112
      KMKab, Batang, Central Java

                                                                                                             42
Having agreed to abide by KDP rules and manuals, in principle, officials were bound to observe
the mechanism of staged disbursals based on the submission of funding requests and reports from
participating kecamatan. This was outlined in sample Surat Edaran sent by the central
government, which only required the signature of Bupatis to become official district procedure.

A. Fund authorization
Districts tended to adopt KDP formats wholesale. In only one out of six districts (Boyolali) did
researchers find that these had been intentionally modified, and then only by modification of the
formal summary of village proposals (SP2D) to include the signature of the local empowerment
agency head. The rationale for this was that, as head of the agency responsible for fund
allocations to the program, the Chairman of the Tim Koordinasi should take responsibility for
verifying competition results, rather than delegating this task to kecamatan officials.

Processing of fund requests was a different story. In no district were kecamatan officials deemed
competent to request the release of funds direct from the district treasury, as they did from
KPKN. The limited authority of the PjOK was noted by the Tim Koordinasi Head in Trenggalek,
who wrote that, “it’s impossible for the kecamatan apparatus to arrange disbursal of APBD funds.
The PjOK doesn’t have a significant role in disbursals.”113 It is reasonably clear why this should
be the case. Spending unit (i.e. Dinas) heads are responsible disbursals to programs listed in the
annual budget documents for their department.114 While agency heads might theoretically be able
to depute PjOK to sign and submit these requests, this was never found to have occurred.
                          Figure: KDP Fund Request and Authorization Procedures


                                                    Community proposals
                                                  Winning proposals from MAD

                                                              UPK
                                                 UPK Chair & PjOK cosign fund
                                                request (SPP-LS) and attachments
                        MATCHING                                                          FULL GRANT
                         GRANT

                                     TKPPK
                           Receive SPP-LS. Dinas Head
                           prepares and signs new SPP

                                   Kas Daerah
                                 (District treasury)
                           Receive SPP, submit to Bupati

                                      Bupati
                          Sign Surat Keterangan Otorisisi
                                      (SKO)

                                   Kas Daerah
                         Prepare Surat Perintah Membayer                            KPKN
                             Uang (SP-MU) for bank                             (Treasury branch)




Fund requests from matching grant kecamatan still played a role in the disbursal of funds, as
stipulated in Surat Edaran issued by Bupatis. However, in almost every case it appears that it was
necessary for the head of the district agency responsible for coordinating the program to prepare a
further fund request (Surat Perintah Pembayeran or SPP) for the district treasury (Kas Daerah).


113
      Komentar & Saran, MG Survey, TKPPK Trenggalek, Jawa Timur
114
      See Ministry of Home Affairs Regulation 29/ 2002, Section 38, section 1 & 2

                                                                                                       43
From here, fund requests were normally forwarded to the Bupati’s office, where the District Head
would put his signature to a Letter of Authorisation (Surat Keterangan Otorisasi or SKO) for the
release of funds. This would be returned to the Kas Daerah, which would then prepare a letter
(Surat Perintah Membayer Uang , or SP-MU) requesting disbursal from the government account.

It is not clear whether, with the receipt of fund requests from agency heads, treasury officials
found it further necessary to refer to KDP formats. However, given the number of districts that
made disbursals in violation of KDP fund authorization (request and reporting) procedures (it
would be reasonable to estimate that violations occurred in over half of districts),115 it seems fair
to say that standard KDP fund request formats and procedures did not play a significant role in
the bureaucratic process. It seems likely that they were followed, or ignored, more or less at will.

Box: Administrative delays

Problems with bureaucracy were the main cause of delays in disbursals to kecamatan participating in the
matching grant program. These were almost invariably the result of simple administrative failures,
commonly related to the absence of district staff who played a role in fund authorization procedures.

In Kendari, the Bupati’s attendance of a leadership course (Lemhanas) in Jakarta led to a three-month
delay in disbursals. According to the deputy head of the district, “even as deputy Bupati I was not
authorized to disburse money for the matching grant.” Meanwhile, in Buton, the merger of PMD with
another Dinas held up disbursals for three months until a new Dinas Head was appointed. There were also
lesser delays in Sijunjung, where the treasurer of the District Secretariat was on honeymoon, and in
Boyolali and Lumajang, where facilitators complained of the lack of availability of treasury officials.

Although facilitators in one or two of these locations were able to shepherd allocations part of the way
through the bureaucracy, in others, such as Buton, Kendari and Sijunjung, little could be done to speed the
process. It is likely that such problems will continue to recur, although less so, with current plans for
district disbursals to take place in one or two tranches, rather than three. Perhaps it is also to be hoped that
administrative practices might gradually become more refined to anticipate such problems, for example,
with implementation of practices such as use of deputies to sign official documents.


B. Direct disbursals

There was a slight conflict between standard district disbursal procedures, in which funds should
normally flow through agency accounts, and that used in KDP, in which funds normally flow
direct from the treasury (KPKN) to kecamatan. In the sample circular letter sent to districts, it was
specified that this latter method should be used. This led officials to understand that transfers to
KDP should circumvent normal district procedures. Sometimes this caused confusion. In three or
four cases, officials complained that they could not disburse funds in contravention of rules
requiring that they flow through Dinas accounts. Meanwhile, one district consultant, concerned to
defend KDP rules, disputed officials’ plans to disburse funds by way of official accounts.116

This should probably not have been much of an issue, and in most cases it wasn’t. From the
perspective of safeguarding KDP funds, there should be little problem with these funds flowing
through Dinas accounts, which are governed by strict reporting requirements. Meanwhile, in
those districts where officials arranged direct disbursals, it appears the district treasury was


115
    This estimation is based on the survey finding that 29% of districts did not disburse funds in three tranches of 40%
40% and 20%. Interviews found that even among those that did, in over half, standard procedures were ignored in
favour of rapid disbursal prior to the fiscal year end. Meanwhile, in the survey, just under half (49%) of consultants
were asked by officials to ensure that this occurred.
116
    Agus, Consultant, Lumajang

                                                                                                                    44
apparently relatively happy to accede to the direct transfer system laid out in the Bupati’s Surat
Edaran. Nevertheless, the fact that conflict existed did give rise to concern.

2. Timing of disbursals: KDP and the district fiscal year

The main cause of problems was a conflict between annual district budgeting and the KDP
project cycle, which normally runs over two fiscal years. This created a dilemma for consultants
and officials. With funds from the district budget at stake, many were keen to ensure that all
disbursals could be made prior to the close of the district fiscal year. Yet, they were also
committed to following KDP procedures, which made disbursals conditional on implementation.
At the same time, both were keen to avoid delays in disbursals to KDP that might have resulted
from attempting to carry over funds from one year to the next. Complicating the issue was the
fact that these concerns could sometimes be reconciled by circumventing district rules on the
close of budget, for example, by disbursing to non-governmental accounts or faking reports.

A. Conflicting concerns

A1. Fear of censure
In almost every district, officials worried that they would face censure if projects failed to meet
the deadline for disbursals by the fiscal year-end. Their concerns invariably revolved around the
Bupati’s annual accountability report (LPJ). This budget report, normally delivered between
January and April, is the main event in the accountability of the executive to the legislature.
During this process, legislators often focus on failure to disburse funds as an indicator of poor
performance. As the PMD Head in Ponorogo complained, “if we do not disburse funds before the
end of the year, the DPRD will say that the executive is not capable of doing its job.”

Fears that unrealized budget would result in censure extended to the highest levels of the
executive. In Karawang, for example, the Sekda pointedly remarked that, “the matching grant
should involve a match between KDP and the district on many issues, but especially on the
annual reporting of the development budget to the DPRD.” Similarly, the Head of the Provincial
Tim Koordinasi in South-East Sulawesi noted that unrealized budget for KDP, “would really
lower the credibility of the Bupati in the eyes of the DPRD.”117

Public airing of the failings of lower level officials during this process would likely reflect badly
on the Bupati, whose wrath they might then incur. According to the Secretary of the Tim
Koordinasi in Donggala, for example, “that would be very embarrassing for me. The DPRD
would question the Bupati about why the funds had not been used, and he might impose a
sanction on me. Maybe I would even get sacked.” This did occur in Sumenep, where unrealized
budget allocated to the program in 2002 became an issue in the annual accountability hearing for
the Bupati. As one member of the Tim Koordinasi related, “the ones who bore the brunt of the
Bupati’s anger were us … the ones who were directly connected with the program.”118

A2. Concern about delays
Consultants and members of KDP Tim Koordinasi were also motivated by a desire to ensure that
disbursals ran smoothly. Quite apart from concerns about censure, they expressed concern that, if

117
   Aksioma, Head of TKPPK Propinsi, Sulawesi Tenggara
118
   Salaf, PMD Staff/ Anggota TKPPK, Sumenep. It is worth noting that while concern to avoid such situations from
occurring were invariably cited by officials, where problems did arise, the same informants would often report that it
was quite easy for them to manage criticism. And of course, they would have had the reasonable alibi that disbursals to
KDP were really out of their hands. Perhaps one explanation for this is that problems arising out of the accountability
process might be as much political as performance-related, and legislators might not necessarily be looking for reasons.
In many districts, government servants might be wary of providing legislators with ammunition that could be used for
political purposes.

                                                                                                                    45
funds for the program remained in the treasury beyond the close of the fiscal year, disbursals
would encounter delays while they were re-budgeted for the following year. Although this should
occur by December of the previous fiscal year, in most locations, the APBD for 2004 would not
have not approved until February or March, and in a significant minority of cases, not until
after.119

A number of informants also noted that unrealized funds might be used for other purposes. In
Pasaman, for example, the Head of Bappeda noted that, “once funds are returned to the Kas
Daerah, they can become open to competition from every Dinas.” Meanwhile, in Ponorogo, the
Chairman of the Tim Koordinasi expressed concern that funds would not be safe from ‘money
politics’ during this process, “especially during an election year, when members of the DPRD
might need retirement funds.”

A3. Conflict with the PTO
While many officials admitted that, with other projects, fear of delays and censure could result in
a year-end rush to disburse, this would have conflicted with KDP rules, which make disbursals
conditional on the use of previous tranches of funding. As noted above, in most districts, officials
were theoretically committed to following these rules by a circular letter signed by the Bupati.
This should have governed these disbursals. As the Secretary of the Tim Koordinasi in Donggala
complained, “we have to carry out everything according to the PTO [operational guidelines].”

Similarly, although consultants were also concerned to avoid problems that might have resulted
from rollover of project funding, they were naturally reluctant to see funds disbursed in a manner
that would breach KDP rules. For some, this was a determining factor. According to a consultant
in Lumajang, who had intervened to stop officials disbursing funds early, “here we do everything
according to the rules.” Just how strictly consultants chose to interpret these rules varied from
district to district. There was little by way of central intervention or guidance on these matters.

B. Possible workarounds: circumventing district rules

There were a number of potential workarounds to the problem of the cut off of funding at the
close of the year. The first, which was seen in two districts visited, and mooted in others, was use
of a ‘discretionary fund’ that came directly within the purview of the Bupati. Other approaches
were informal, and violated district procedures. They included borrowing funds from the district
treasury to cover KDP implementation during the crossover from one fiscal year to the next,
faking reports to the treasury in order that funds did not need to be returned, and disbursal of
funds to non-governmental ‘holding’ accounts.

B1. Discretionary accounts
In most districts, matching grant allocations were listed in departmental budget documents and
administered by agency members. However, in Serang, following the postponement of KDP in
2002, funds were entered into a so-called Pos Pembiyayaan under the direct control of the Sekda,
a solution that enabled them to be carried over to the following year. Similarly, in Sijunjung,
officials reported that funds for the matching grant program in 2003 were to be drawn from the
so-called Pos Bantuan under the Sekda, in order to avoid problems with the close of the budget.
While the rules governing use of these funds were not clear, it appears that the Sekda had a great
deal of discretion over their use, and could avoid constraints imposed by the fiscal year. However,
as one consultant in Serang pointed out, the ‘flexibility’ of these funds might be cause for
concern, since they could easily be diverted to other purposes.



119
      Based on responses from Ketua TKPPK in 51 districts surveyed as part of the matching grant survey.

                                                                                                           46
B2. Borrowing funds
Among the informal practices used to avoid problems with delays in disbursals following the
close of the budget, the practice of borrowing money from the treasury was reported by Dinas
Heads or members in many districts, among them Lumajang and Boalemo. According to the
Head of the PMD in Boalemo, for example, although the district had no formal mechanism for
rolling over unspent funds, he could arrange for the disbursal of unspent funds from the treasury
prior to the agreement of the budget for the following year (a process he called ‘dititipkan’).


B3. Falsifying reports
Agency heads could also avoid rules on the close of budget by making false reports. According to
a consultant in Lampung Timur, “the Tim Koordinasi had a strategy to avoid the closing date of
the budget. They took 100 percent of the funds from the treasury to the Pimpro account. The
important thing was that, before the budget closing date, the funds were out of the Kas Daerah.
So the Tim Koordinasi made a responsibility report [to the treasury] first, even though the money
was not yet transferred to the UPK.”120 Meanwhile, in Pasaman, the Head of Bappeda admitted
that she would certainly consider making up financial reports in order to retain the ability to
disburse funds to programs following the closing of district budget.121

                                          Figure: District Disbursals to KDP

                                                          Kas Daerah
                                                 (district branch of province-
                                                   based government bank)




              Rekening Khusus Dinas                                                 Official Dinas Account
             Special (non-governmental)                          Funds direct to     (Rekening Bendahara/
               acccount under Dinas                              UPK - 52% of      Rekening Pimpro) – at least
             member – 10% of districts                           districts              25% of districts



               Rekening Khusus UPK                Rekening Kolektif UPK
             Special (non-governmental)            Villagers’ collective
             account under UPK – 5% of               accounts in UPK
                       districts



        Based on 63 survey returns from KMKab, cross-referenced with returns from 56 TKPPK members
        Dotted line shows possibility funds flowed through official accounts. Anomalous cases excluded here.


B4. Disbursal to non-governmental accounts
In many districts, consultants reported that they had requested for matching grant funds to be
                                       Figure account.
disbursed to a special (non-governmental)     based on a This would
                                                         sample       have enabled
                                                                of 63 matching         the Tim
                                                                               grant districts    Koordinasi
                                                                                               surveyed
to ensure that funds were disbursed from the treasury before December, but still follow KDP rules
on disbursals in three stages, on the back of fund requests. Two possibilities were considered. The
first was disbursal of funds to a private account controlled by a Tim Koordinasi member. This
was often referred to as a Rekening Khusus Dinas. The second was disbursal to a special account


120
   Consultant, Lampung Timur
121
   Evi, Kepala Bappeda, Pasaman; It is worth noting that consultants and facilitators sometimes colluded in faking their
own reports. See transcripts for Lampung Timur: “We understand that, since APBD funds are being used, they need to
be reported by the Bupati’s LPJ ... So what we do to deal with that situation is that during the work we also prepare
[implementation] reports, and sometimes if necessary we finish the report even the work has not been finished.”
Kecamatan Facilitator, Lampung Timur. This was not a totally isolated case.

                                                                                                                    47
mirroring the official UPK Rekening Kolektif and controlled by KDP actors at sub-district level.122
As noted by some officials, however, such practices do not conform to Department of Home
Affairs (Mendagri) regulations.123 Many officials reported that the Finance Department had
rejected their request to use such an account, due to concerns that funds would be misused.124
While these solutions appealed, they were only used in 15 percent of districts surveyed.

3. Taxation

In only eight percent of districts surveyed was tax levied on matching grant funds. In locations
where respondents provided further information, the common element was a procurement tax
worth between 10 and 11.5 percent of the value of materials. However, reasons for levying tax
varied. While one Tim Koordinasi Head reported that the application of tax was based on a
twenty-year old law, the other two pointed to local regulations (Perda). In one, the Perda pre-
dated decentralization, while in the other, it was only established in 2003.125
      Table: Taxation of matching grant funds

      District          Amount of tax                                Reason

      Kendal            No information provided                      No information provided

      Magetan           11 percent                                   Undang Undang 6/1983 on Ketentuan Umum &
                                                                     Tata Cara Perpajakan
      Way Kanan         10% for materials                            Perda 1/2003 on Pokok Pengelolaan Keuangan

      Ngada             11,5% for non-local materials and 20% from   Perda 7/1998 on Tarrifs (Retribusi)
                        district standar harga for local materials
      Kendari           No information provided                      No information provided




Taxation was generally waived, often because districts were requested to do so. It was common to
hear that, “there was no tax, because the petunjuk [guidelines] said there should not be.”126 In the
majority of cases this was rationalized on the basis that funds for KDP were Community
Managed Funds (swakelola) for Direct Community Aid (Bantuan Langsung Masyarakat) and
therefore not subject to tax. According to the head of the Finance Department in Pasaman, for
example, “there is no tax for the matching grant, since it is classified as swakelola, which means
that the funds go direct to the community and are used by the community.”127

This sometimes involved negotiation. In four locations, consultants or Tim Koordinasi members
reported that they intervened to dissuade the Tax Agency (Dinas Pajak) from levying tax on
procurements. In all but one, tax officials heeded the central government request not to do so. In
Magelang, however, officials were unmoved by any of the consultant’s efforts. As a result, in
2003, a 10 percent procurement tax was levied on building materials, and a further 1 percent
income tax was imposed on honoraria for teachers. The latter was particularly galling for the
consultant, who opined that the tax agency was exceeding its legal mandate. However, as she
admitted, there was little she could do. In the one district-funded kecamatan, tax levied on
building materials and teachers fees came to just under Rp. 47 million, around 6.2% of the total
grant allocated to this sub-district.

122
    Although it was clear that this was essentially an analogue of the normal UPK account, there was a little variation in
terms of who was responsible.
123
    Trie Murnlise, Bappeda, Boyolali
124
    This was seen in Donggala, Buolemo, Gorontalo, and Ponorogo, among others.
125
    Based on 63 valid responses to the KMKab survey, crossreferenced against the TKPPK survey
126
    Gambuh, Bappeda staff/ TKPPK Member, Blitar; see also Gultom, PMD Staff/ TKPPK member, Lampung Timur
127
    Information from Karawang, Boyolali, Lampung Timur, and Rokan Hulu was more or less the same.

                                                                                                                      48
                      PART III: MONITORING AND REPORTING

Key findings

Although use of local government funds might be expected to stimulate increased interest, local
government monitoring of funds and implementation was not normally more intensive in matching grant
locations. Research identified a number of problems that affected monitoring and reporting of KDP:

•   Systemic weaknesses. The accountability system in local government hardly stimulates good
    monitoring and reporting. Researchers never found evidence of significant debate about KDP during
    the annual accountability process. Legislators are unlikely to raise significant questions about
    performance, and district heads are therefore unlikely to see evidence of success or failure unless they
    take a strong personal interest. Despite introduction of ‘performance-based’ budgeting, there is little
    stimulus for officials to formulate meaningful performance indicators and monitor systematically.

•   Sectoral thinking. As also seen in budgeting, agencies other than PMD and Bappeda are not often
    very involved in monitoring and reporting on the program. Lack of a clear role and financial stake are
    likely to be the main reasons. In connection with the latter, control of operational funding is a
    significant issue, though it will not easily be resolved.

•   Lack of understanding of KDP. This is likely to have affected the effectiveness of monitoring by
    members of Tim Koordinasi and legislators.

    o   In Tim Koordinasi, this was sometimes related to staff turnover, and resultant limited
        understanding of KDP processes and procedures. It might be worth considering targeted
        socialization activities for those that are interested and would benefit.

    o   Although many legislators are likely to be genuinely unmotivated to engage constructively, in
        three or four districts there was pent up demand for involvement and information, and complaints
        of exclusion. More room for involvement (for those from relevant commissions and KDP
        locations) would be greeted enthusiastically by some. This problem was also noted during the
        budget process, during which support from legislators might be of help in preventing reductions.


Local officials were involved in monitoring and reporting on KDP prior to the implementation of
the matching grant program. Kecamatan project managers were required to report monthly to
local coordination teams. Members of the team would also carry out monitoring trips to sub-
districts and villages, and local audit agency, Bawasda, also conducted audits on central funds for
the program. Use of these funds should also have been reported to local legislators during the
Bupati’s accountability speech to the legislature. This was not the only occasion on which DPRD
members were involved. In many districts, legislators said that, as part of their routine monitoring
activities, they looked at the implementation of KDP.

Since matching grant funds came from the district budget, it might be expected that this would
have had an impact on scrutiny. This was not often the case. In the survey, 92 percent of Tim
Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads reported that monitoring of implementation in matching grant
locations was the same as or less intensive than monitoring in full grant locations and 84 percent
reported that scrutiny of funds was the same as or less intense than in full grant locations. This
section therefore focuses on the general issue of monitoring and reporting, including who and
what was involved, and why it was often no different for full- and matching-grant funds.




                                                                                                          49
1. Monitoring and reporting in the executive

A. Reporting requirements
As the official directly responsible for government coordination of the program at kecamatan
level, PjOK are generally required to provide monthly progress reports to district Tim Koordinasi.
These reports are generally less detailed than those of KDP facilitators, whose monthly reports
were sometimes said to form the basis for documents produced by PjOK.128 They were neither
more frequent nor more detailed in locations that received district funds.129

Perhaps failure to impose additional reporting requirements was related to satisfaction with
current arrangements. Three-quarters of officials surveyed rated reporting and information in
KDP as ‘good’ or ‘very good’. Conceivably, they did not see the need to do more. However, it is
also worth noting that senior officials, such as Bupatis, rarely asked to see reports. While officials
in two or three districts, such as Sijunjung and Sumenep, were required to provide regular reports,
it appears that most were not. There was therefore little incentive to gather more information.

B. Who carried out monitoring, and how often?
Members of the Tim Koordinasi from local empowerment agencies were most heavily involved
in monitoring and coordination. According to consultants surveyed, in over half of locations,
PMD officials carried out monitoring with consultants more than ten times in a year, and in 100
percent more than twice a year. Members of the Tim Koordinasi from Bappeda were next most
likely to be involved. However, they were less active. Only in 15 percent of locations did
members of Bappeda join consultants on field trips more than ten times in one year, and in only
66 percent of districts did they do so more than twice. Interviews found that members of other
agencies were not normally involved in routine monitoring. Indeed, in at least one third of
locations, PMD and Bappeda officials indicated that there was poor coordination with members
of other agencies on the Tim Koordinasi.

Box: Operational funding and jealousy

Local government operational funding for KDP was a major sticking point. These funds, which normally
account for around five percent of grant funding, are intended to cover expenses of district and sub-district
bureaucrats. However, although some districts formulated rules governing distribution, in others, the
lion’s share remained in PMD. In around half of locations visited, the unwillingness of PMD to share
these funds was cited as a reason for lack of involvement of members of other agencies. However, this
was not a clear-cut issue. PMD members in some locations claimed that members of other agencies were
more interested in getting their ‘cut’ than in using funds for their intended purpose.

A sense of the vexed nature of this issue can be seen from Rokan Hulu, where the head of the
empowerment agency noted that, “usually the only active members of the Tim Koordinasi in monitoring
are from Dinas SPPM [the empowerment agency], while other Dinas never join. You know why? Because
other Dinas consider the amount of money for monitoring is too small. So they are not interested. That is a
fact.” However, willingness in the agency to share was also questionable. One member voiced the opinion
that operational funds for members of other Dinas should come from their departmental budget, while
according to a member of Bappeda, “all of the implementation was handled by PMD alone, without any
involvement from Bappeda. The PMD never invited us to carry out monitoring.”



128
    In locations where researchers viewed PjOK reports, such as Lumajang and Sumenep, they were somewhat less
detailed than those of facilitators, listing only dates and the location of activities, with little or no detail on the process.
In Grobogan, Sumenep, Rokan Hulu, researchers found that these had been compiled from facilitators’ reports.
129
    In only one district was there found to be any difference in demand for the frequency of reports. This was in
Ponorogo, where PjOK and FK complained that the deadline for these reports was stricter than for full grant locations..
In Sumenep, one PjOK said that the Tim Koordinasi required his report go into more detail on infrastructure and loan
activities than those from full grant kecamatan, and provide attachments such as charts and photographs.

                                                                                                                            50
The fact that members of local empowerment agencies were most heavily involved in KDP is not
surprising. Since their agency was in charge of the team responsible for handling coordination of
the program, monitoring and reporting was clearly within their ambit. Bappeda was also
relatively active. Having previously led local government coordination, in many districts Bappeda
staff were quite knowledgeable about and involved in KDP. Indeed, in three or four districts
visited, such as Serang and Blitar, the agency still assumed primary responsibility for
coordination, either formally, or in a de facto manner.

C. What did monitoring involve?
Monitoring by officials was not normally systematic or structured. Officials usually appeared to
conceive monitoring simply in terms of attendance at meetings and field visits as a way to resolve
problems that they knew to exist. Although some Tim Koordinaisi attempted to formulate
monitoring schedules, others conducted monitoring on an ad hoc basis only. Monitoring of
implementation was also often ad hoc and prompted by foreknowledge of problems. As a former
member of the Tim Koordinasi in Gorontalo reported, “if there were problems, we would visit the
location to see them for ourselves.”130 Similarly in Buton, kecamatan facilitators reported that
“the Tim Koordinasi only conduct monitoring to locations where there are problems.”131

Box: Scattered requests for more socialization and training

In over one third of districts visited, the understanding of officials on the Tim Koordinasi about KDP was
apparently quite limited, commonly as a result of staff turnover. It is likely that this affected the ability of
officials to engage effectively in monitoring. Four or five survey respondents raised this issue, which one
Tim Koordinasi Head requesting, “please repeat the socialization of the matching grant program, since
many officials and policy makers that were involved in the program have now moved on.”

These respondents emphasised the importance of fully understanding the KDP concept and rules in order
that they could engage effectively with the program, points that were sometimes made in relation to the
KDP operational manual (PTO). Two or three called for, “an explanation of the PTO, in order that the
district can deal with the program.” Others identified a need for training. One consultant advised, “don’t
just train PjOK, but also members of the Tim Koordinasi. That would help to ensure that the bureaucracy
had a shared understanding.” This call was also echoed by a Tim Koordinasi Head in another province,
who wrote that, “the Tim Koordinasi should be invited to attend the training of KDP actors.”


There were generally no clear performance indicators and there was little sense of what findings
could help to achieve. It was rare that members of the Tim Koordinasi had specific aims or
outputs in mind beyond perhaps a diffuse desire to identify and alleviate problems. When asked
to what indicators would be used to judge the program, they would usually reply only in the most
general terms, mentioning participation, community ownership, repayments, quality of
infrastructure, or just the fact that budget had been realized. Only in one district (Sumenep) had
officials formulated specific performance indicators and operationalised these in questionnaires
that were used during field visits. These questionnaires, for villagers, covered topics such as
facilitation, socialization and problems with implementation. There were also formats that Tim
Koordinasi members filled out, in which they included recommendations for implementation of
the program in the future. It is not likely to be coincidence that the head of this district was said to
take a special interest in KDP and required regular reports on its progress.




130
      Muktar, ex-Secretary TKPPK, Gorontalo
131
      FK, Buton

                                                                                                             51
2. Monitoring by legislators

A. Routine monitoring by legislators
Where they did monitor KDP, legislators tended to pursue their own agenda rather than
collaborate with consultants or officials. The survey showed that legislators in 70 percent of
districts never conducted field visits with consultants. Where they did, it was not often; in only
two percent of districts did members of the DPRD accompany consultants on field visits than
twice in one year.132 While DPRD members in two locations reported that they worked together
with the executive on monitoring and coordination, this was quite unusual.

Monitoring by legislators consisted of ‘formal’ monitoring, as part of routine activities, or
‘informal’ monitoring, in areas where they lived. In perhaps half of locations, legislators reported
that they would monitor as part of routine commission activities (particularly Komisi D, the
development commission). As one DPRD member in Rokan Hulu reported, “the DPRD has its
own system for monitoring projects, and sometimes we also visit KDP locations as part of
this.”133 Legislators also carried out ‘informal’ monitoring. In such cases, they were said to be
aware of KDP by virtue of their place of abode. It was not uncommon to hear, as in Solok, that,
“the DPRD understand a lot about the program, because we have members that come from
kecamatan which received the matching grant, so they also understand the process.”134

Box: Involvement and exclusion of legislators

Where DPRD members were actively involved and knowledgeable about KDP, they were said to have good
relationships with officials and consultants. According to one DPRD member in Lumajang, “the legislative
and executive works together regularly for program monitoring. We have a mutual understanding with the
executive, and openness and give and take with each other.” Meanwhile, in Boyolali, one Bappeda member
noted that officials had involved legislators in planning and consulted with them on the choice of locations.
The DPRD Chairman also emphasised the importance of joint monitoring and the need for legislators to,
“understand the objective of such programs for our community.” The consultant here also promoted
legislators’ involvement and was keen to encourage legislators to visit KDP sub-district meetings.

By contrast, legislators in two or three districts expressed interest in getting more involved in KDP, but
complained that they were excluded. According to the chairman and members of the development
commission in Lampung Timur, for example, officials had rejected their request to conduct joint monitoring
because there was, “no rule” about this in KDP guidelines. They also had little contact with consultants and
poor access to information about the program. As one noted, “I live right beside the UPK but I have no idea
what it does.” Similarly, one legislator in Rokan Hulu complained of the ‘arrogance’ of officials, who he felt
had deliberately excluded the DPRD. As he complained, “I, as a member of DPRD, have never been invited
into any KDP forum at village or kecamatan level, even though I think it is very important for us to go.”


The effectiveness of these activities was open to question, since legislators generally had limited
understanding of KDP. As noted elsewhere, this was typically put down to their lack of interest in
getting involved. As one PMD Head put it, “lack of information among members of the DPRD …
is not only caused by socialization. The goodwill of members of the DPRD is another aspect of
it.”135 However, this did not always hold true. In at least one third of locations visited, members of
the legislature expressed their interest in learning more or in getting more involved in monitoring


132
    . Di lokasi matching grant 72,9% anggota DPRD belum pernah melakukan monitoring, 25,4% melakukan kunjungan
1-2 kali dalam 1 tahun, dan 1,7% melakukan kunjungan 3-10 kali dalam 1 tahun. Di lokasi non-matching grant 70%
anggota DPRD belum pernah melakukan monitoring dan 30% melakukan 1-2 kali monitoring dalam 1 tahun.
133
     (DPRD Member, Rokan Hulu); also Solok
134
     Anggota DPRD, Solok; also in Ponorogo
135
     (Kepala PMD, Rokan Hulu)

                                                                                                           52
and coordination.136 Whether they did so appeared to be within the gift of consultants and
members of the executive, who were in a position to provide information and explanations about
the program, but who did not always appear enthusiastic to encourage legislators’ involvement.

B. The accountability report
Local legislators’ involvement in monitoring funds and implementation was most intensive in
connection with the the Bupati’s accountability report. This annual event is the main formal
occasion on which legislators scrutinize the use of the previous years’ budget. It involves on-the-
ground monitoring. Almost without exception, DPRD members would report that their next step,
following the delivery of the report would be to “go to the field” to see programs for themselves.

      Box: Lack of performance measures: expectations and accountability

      Under the new ‘performance based’ system, introduced in 2002, members of the executing
      agency (PMD) must draw up criteria by which the success of the program would be judged.
      However, the performance measures that were used by the PMD in formal budget documents
      (DASK) related to the program were quite unspecific. Despite the fact that this document
      specifies input, outcome, output, benefit and impact, documents viewed by researchers did not
      specify measurable targets that could be used during or after implementation of the program.

      The lack of measurable targets by which officials and legislators would view the matching grant
      program could be seen in the DASK from Pasaman, Magelang, Rokan Hulu, Kota Bengkulu, the
      most detailed of which is included below.

         Indicator            Performance measures                                     Performance target
         Input:               Funds                                                      Rp. 1,520,000,000
         Output:              Implementation of KDP                                       7,749 households
         Result:              Supporting Secretariat for KDP                                          90%
         Benefit:             Creating community prosperity
         Impact:              Higher level of community involvement in development


      Researchers were usually unable to find any more detailed or developed documents related to the
      way that officials would judge the success of the program. There was not normally much attempt
      to move beyond these, and there was apparently little incentive to do so, unless legislators were
      to have demanded this of the executive, which they were never found to do. Only in very few
      districts, such as Sumenep and Sijunjung, did more senior members of the executive made such
      demands of the Tim Koordinasi of their own accord, based on their interest in the program.

There is no evidence that this process resulted in meaningful debate or examination of KDP. The
only issue that ever arose was the simple one of whether funds had been disbursed and works
completed.137 Indeed, in over one third of districts, DPRD members had (unfairly) criticised
officials for failure to disburse KDP funds. In others, it was just not discussed; on the same day
that they voted to accept the Bupati’s speech, members of the development commission in
Lampung Timur professed almost total ignorance of KDP and the matching grant program.

As discussed above, it is likely that limited understanding of KDP on the part of legislators would
make it difficult for them to come to an objective evaluation of its results. But, it is anyway
unlikely that the accountability process is conducive to objective evaluations of performance.
While members of the executive appear to take their role in preparing for this process quite
seriously, the only sanction open to the legislature is removal of the district head. In cases where
happens, it is likely that this was a political, rather than a purely performance related issue.

136
  These included Lampung Timur, Magelang, Boyolali, Rokan Hulu, and Lumajang
137
   Compare ongoing WB research in Lebak; “during budget review especially when reviewing Bupati annual report,
questions raised by DPRD members were around whether the intended target and activities specified in RASK and
DASK had been achieved. There were no questions on impact or benefit that occurred because of target achievement.”

                                                                                                               53
                      ANNEX I: RESEARCH SITES AND SURVEY RETURNS

1. Field research locations

The following table shows the 17 main sites for field research, together with information used in
the selection of sites. This included the amount allocated to the matching grant program and the
number of years that the district had participated in KDP.

                                                                  No. MG     1st yr MG allocation      KDP1
                 Province             District
                                                                   Kec.                     (Rp)     (no. years)

                                      Pasaman                         2              1,500,000,000        3
                                      Sijunjung                       1               500,000,000         0
                 West Sumatra
                                      Solok                           2              1,450,000,000        3
                                      Pesisir Selatan                 0                         0         3
    Sumatra
                                      Rokan Hulu                      2              1,000,000,000        3
                 Riau
                                      Kampar                          0                         0         3
                                      Lampung Timur                   2               800,000,000         3
                 Lampung
                                      Lampung Tengah                  0                         0         3
                                      Boyolali                        3              2,750,000,000        3
                 Central Java         Grobogan                        2              1,500,000,000        3
                                      Magelang                        1               750,000,000         0
    Java                              Blitar                          2              1,000,000,000        1
                                      Lumajang                        2              1,000,000,000        3
                 East Java
                                      Ponorogo                        1               500,000,000         3
                                      Sumenep                         2              1,500,000,000        3
                                      Buton                           4              2,000,000,000        2
    Sulawesi     Sulawesi Tenggara
                                      Kendari                         3              1,500,000,000        0


2. Survey returns

Surveys were sent to almost all of the 79 matching grant locations (barring locations used for
testing) and to 16 of the non-matching grant locations participating in the first year of KDP2. The
following table shows survey returns broken down by respondent and district type.

                                           Matching grant districts            Non-Matching grant districts
                                                        Percentage of MG                      Percentage of Non-
    Respondent type                  No. of surveys                        No. of surveys
                                                             districts                           MG districts
    KMKab                                  63                 80%               10                   9%
    Ketua Tim Koordinasi                   56                 71%               10                   9%
    Kepala Bappeda                         48                 61%               10                   9%


The following is a run-down of the salient features of each respondent group:

•      District consultant survey. In deciding which of the two district consultants should complete
       the survey, consultants were advised to select the one who most often coordinated with
       officials, or who had been in the district longest (the two are not necessarily unrelated).
       Returns were split roughly half-half between those from ‘Empowerment’ and ‘Technical’


                                                                                                               54
      consultants. This tend to confirm the suspicion that job titles often have little to do with
      which consultant takes the lead in coordinating with officials.

•     Tim Koordinasi survey. Of respondents to the survey for Tim Koordinasi heads, 77 percent
      were heads of local empowerment agencies, and the remainder tended to be PMD staff.138 It is
      worth noting that in at least eleven percent of cases, respondents were only members, rather
      than head, of the Tim Koordinasi. However, this is not thought to have had a serious impact
      on the validity of analysis, since respondents were still members of the Tim Koordinasi and
      of the agency charged with leading coordination of the project.

•     Bappeda survey. Although 73 percent of surveys intended for Bappeda heads were filled out
      by this figure, staff members from the agency comprised 27 percent of respondents. Again,
      although analysis should be read with this in mind, this is not anticipated to have a
      particularly detrimental impact on the validity of the analysis, which should still provide a
      guide to attitudes to KDP and the matching grant program from within the institution.




138
   In two or three cases, members of Bappeda filled out this survey. This was because, occasionally, Bappeda had not
yet relinquished the chairmanship of the Tim Koordinasi to PMD.

                                                                                                                 55
         ANNEX II: BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON KDP2 DISTRICTS

1. Previous participation in KDP

Among the districts that participated in first year of KDP2 in 2003, 119 had already participated
in the first phase of the program, the vast majority of these for three years. The remaining 79 were
participating in the program for the first time. Take up of the matching grant program was slightly
greater among the former group of districts, but not by a great deal. While 36 percent of districts
that had never participated in KDP1 provided matching grant funds, only 45 percent of those that
had received the program before did so.

                                                                                 Non-KDP1
                                                          KDP1 Districts
                                                                                  Districts

                            Non-MG                              66                   45

                            MG                                  53                   26

                            %age fund MG program               45%                  36%


On average, allocations to KDP amounted to just over Rp. 1 billion for each district participating
in the matching grant program. The size of contributions to the program was similar between
districts that did and did not participate in KDP1. Districts that had already participated in KDP
contributed an average of Rp. 1.1 billion each, while those that had not made contributions worth
an average of Rp. 1 billion per district.

2. Local government budget information

In the face of claims that limited budget could be a decisive factor in determining sign-up and
size of contributions to the matching grant program, it was thought desirable to look at the link
between district fiscal capacity and allocations to KDP. Analysis focused on whether take-up of
or amounts allocated to the matching grant program was linked to the relative wealth of a district.

Using data on 2002 development expenditures as a crude measure of local government capacity
to allocate funds to KDP for the following year, a comparison of KDP2 matching grant and non-
matching grant districts shows up no significant difference between these two groups.139 This can
be seen in the enclosed chart, which plots realized development expenditures against the number
of districts that fell into any expenditure category. It is clear from this that there was no
significant trend for matching grant districts to have more funds to spend on development than



139
   Analysis is based on 2002 realized development expenditures for 173 of the 190 districts that participated in KDP2
in 2003. This is based on the assumption that, since participation in the program would have been largely determined in
advance of knowledge of 2003 revenues, 2002 budget information is likely to provide a more reliable guide to district
budget constraints as they would have looked at the time. The focus is on development expenditures; local government
expenditures are divided into two broad categories: routine and development spending. Routine expenditures, on
staffing and operational costs, accounted for an average of 66% of district expenditures in 2002. Development
expenditures account for the rest of district government spending, and include spending on areas such as Trade and
Transport, Regional Development, State Apparatus, Education, Agriculture and Health. Since routine expenditures
appear to represent a relatively fixed cost for local governments in the early years of decentralization, this analysis uses
only realized development expenditures, calculated as realized 2002 expenditures minus routine expenditures for that
year. (These staffing and operational costs rocketed in 2001 following the ‘decentralization’ of 2.1 million civil
servants to the regions. The transfer, which was accompanied by an increase in the DAU allocation is said to have been
accompanied by an implicit agreement not to retrench. (Hofman, Decentralizing Indonesia, 2002, pp iv & 98))

                                                                                                                        56
non-matching grant districts.140 This can also be seen from the very small difference between the
median figures for development expenditures in districts that provided matching grant funds (Rp.
70 billion) compared to those that did not (Rp. 69 billion).

Indeed, the only very significant difference between the two groups can be seen in districts with
development expenditures of less than 40 billion, the majority of which did not join the matching
grant program. This suggests that, while the amount that a district spent on development generally
bore little relation to whether or not it contributed funds, budget limitations may have been a
more decisive issue for the handful of (relatively poor) districts at the bottom end of the scale. 141




The amount allocated to the program among those that did contribute also seemed to bear little
relation to ability to pay. This can be seen in the chart below, which sets contributions to the
matching grant program against the amount that the district spent on development in the previous
year. As is fairly clear from the (black) trend line included, there was little trend for the amount
contributed to the program to increase in line with the amount that a district had to spend.




140
    Here, there is no attempt to adjust for population size, or other characteristics that might affect ‘fiscal capacity’.
However, it is worth noting that, of these, compensating for population size also showed up no significant difference
between matching grant districts and those that did not fund the program.
141
    The analysis also looked at 2002 revenues. This did show that matching grant districts were a little more likely to be
better off. While 50% of matching grant districts had potential development expenditures (calculated as untied income,
including carryovers, minus routine expenditures) of over Rp. 100 billion in 2002, this was true of only 38% of non-
matching grant districts. Conversely, 50% of districts that did not contribute funds to KDP had potential development
expenditures of less than Rp. 90 billion, compared to only 36% of matching grant districts.

                                                                                                                      57
                                        ANNEX III: SURVEY RESULTS

1A. Ratings of KDP performance

As part of the survey of Bappeda and Tim Koordinasi Heads in matching grant and non-matching
grant districts, officials were asked to rate the performance of KDP according to twelve criteria.
These comprised:

1. Poverty alleviation
2. Increasing civic skills of community
3. Increasing technical skills of community
4. Capacity of KDP consultants
5. Transparency/ reducing corruption
6. Efficiency of project (cost economy)
7. Efficiency of time in implementation
8. Meeting implementation targets
9. Satisfactoriness of project output
10. Level of community contributions
11. Satisfaction of community with project
12. Reports and availability of data


Ratings were recorded on five-point scale, on which 1=very poor, 3=satisfactory, and 5=very
good. Over 90 percent of Bappeda and Tim Koordinasi Heads rated KDP performance
‘satisfactory’, ‘good’ or ‘very good’ for each factor, except for ‘time efficiency’.

There were no very significant or systematic differences between the average ratings accorded to
these aspects of the program from officials in matching grant and non-matching grant districts.142




142
   The chart illustrates the average rating for each factor, aggregated from responses by Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda
heads. Comparison of responses from these two respondent types did not show up significant differences between the
two.

                                                                                                                 58
Over 90 percent of Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda heads surveyed rated every aspect of KDP
performance as ‘satisfactory’, ‘good’ or ‘very good’. The only exception was ‘time efficiency
during implementation’. Typically 10-20 percent of these respondents rated this aspect of the
program as ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’. However, there was a great deal of variation in which aspects of
the program were judged to be ‘good’ or ‘very good’. The table below displays results aggregated
from Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads in matching grant and non-matching grant districts.143


               Consistently/ generally above average                   Consistently/ generally below average
               Aspect of program             Good/ V.Good              Aspect of program               Good/ V.Good
      Transparency/ less corruption               86%       Efficiency of time                                 18%
      Capacity of consultants*                    84%       Increasing civic skills                            36%
      Efficiency of project (cost)                80%       Meeting implementation targets                     41%
      Reports and availability of data            77%       Level of community contributions*                  48%
      Satisfactoriness of outputs                 73%
      Satisfaction of community*                  65%
      Increasing technical skills*                60%
      Poverty alleviation*                        53%


1B. Priorities of local officials

From the twelve aspects of the program listed above, survey respondents were also asked to list in
order of priority, the three aspects of the program that they deemed to be the most important.
Analysis was conducted using a scoring system, in which aspects of the program ranked first
priority were allocated three points, those ranked second received two points, and so on.

The following table, aggregated from the scores by Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads shows
that the priority accorded to different aspects of KDP followed more or less the same pattern in
matching grant and non-matching grant districts.




143
   Analysis also looked at the average score received by each factor in relation to the group average. Average scores
for seven were found to fall consistently above or below the overall average for responses from Bappeda and Tim
Koordinasi Heads in matching grant and non-matching grant districts. Average scores for the other five were generally
above/ below the group average for three out of the four possible respondent types. These are marked with [*]. By this
measure, the attitudes of decision-makers were found to be quite consistent between respondent and district type.

                                                                                                                      59
Poverty alleviation ranked as by far the most important of KDP, followed by increasing the
technical skills of communities and transparency in second and third place. Fourth and fifth place
went to community contributions and increasing civic skills, although the latter tended to rate
more highly for Tim Koordinasi heads and the former for Bappeda Heads. The following table
illustrates the rank order of priorities.144

1. Poverty alleviation
2. Transparency/ reducing corruption
3. Increasing tech. skills of community
4. Level of community contributions
5. Increasing civic skills of community
6. Satisfactoriness of project outputs
7. Satisfaction of community with project
8. Efficiency of project (cost economy)
9. Capacity of KDP consultants
10. Reports and availability of data
11. Meeting implementation targets
12. Efficiency of time in implementation


1C. Summary: importance and performance

The following table illustrates the top five most important aspects of the program for Bappeda
and Tim Koordinasi Heads, together with the ratings accorded to them.

                                                                          Percentage of respondents
                  Top five most important aspects
                                                         Ave/Good/V.Good       Good/V.Good            Very Good

      1. Poverty alleviation                                   100%                 53%                 24%

      2. Transparency/ reducing corruption                     99%                  86%                 40%

      3. Increasing technical skills of community              99%                  60%                 26%

      4. Level of community contributions                      98%                  48%                 16%

      5. Increasing civic skills of community                  100%                 36%                 14%




144
   Where there were slight differences in the rank order, as described, the table reflects results from matching grant
districts. The larger respondent group on which these results are based makes this the more reliable data set. This was
also reflected in greater consistency between responses from Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads from matching grant
districts, another sign of the reliability of this data.

                                                                                                                   60
2. Take-up of KDP principles and procedures

As part of the survey, Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads in both matching grant and non-
matching grant districts were asked whether any aspect of KDP had already been used in
programs that were funded by the district, and, if so, which aspects. The aspects of the program
listed in the survey comprised:

1. Project targets marginal groups (women and poor)
2. Independent facilitators are recruited (from private firm/ NGO)
3. Community members are asked to develop project proposals themselves
4. No limitation on the type of activities that can receive funding (“open menu”)
5. Community members determine the level of priority of proposals
6. Community members decide on fund allocations
7. Community selects the implementation team (no contractors)
8. Community members manage implementation themselves, including fund
9. Funds are disbursed direct to community accounts


Over 70 percent of Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads from both matching grant and non-
matching grant districts answered the first part of this question in the affirmative. The table below
summarizes the percentage of Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads who reported that their district
had taken up aspects of KDP in matching grant and non-matching grant districts.


                                                                MG Districts        Non-MG Districts


                             Bappeda Heads                           80%                 100%


                             Tim Koordinasi Heads                    70%                  80%



As can be seen from this table, a higher proportion of respondents from non-matching grant
districts reported the take-up of aspects of KDP in district-funded programs than did those from
matching grant locations. One simple reason for this might be the larger margin for error among
the relatively small sample of respondents from the non-matching grant group. Whatever the
explanation, however, at a minimum, what is clear from these figures is that the survey provides
no more evidence for spill-over effects in matching grant than in non-matching grant locations.145

Of those respondents who reported that their district had used elements of KDP in their own
programs, there was a striking similarity between responses for which aspects of the program


145
    It was also striking that a significantly higher proportion of Bappeda than Tim Koordinasi Heads in matching grant
and non-matching grant locations reported that their district had already taken up aspects of KDP in a district-funded
program. Indeed, analysis of whether Tim Koordinasi and Bappeda Heads in any given district tended to return the
same answer showed that this occurred only about 70 percent of the time. There are two or three possible explanations.
It is possible that Bappeda Heads knew more about district programs than the PMD Heads and staff who usually
answered the Ketua TKPPK survey, and were therefore more likely to answer in the affirmative. There might also have
been some room for subjectivity to influence responses; there might, for example, be room for interpretation in
deciding whether district-funded programs really met the listed criteria. It is also possible that some respondents took a
normative reading of the question as being about whether they would be prepared to, or would support, the adoption of
certain aspects of KDP. This gives rise to methodological concerns about how answers to this question can be
interpreted. However, even if they only tell us as much about the attitudes of respondents as they might do about the
reality of development programming in their respective districts, these responses are still thought to provide a useful
guide to the likely-hood of take-up of the elements of the program listed. The issue should, however, be kept in mind
before making any strong claims based on this data.

                                                                                                                      61
they would use. For the sake of simplicity, therefore, the following chart is based on aggregated
responses from all both respondent types in matching grant and non-matching grant districts.




The following table summarises responses:

             Likely to be taken up (over 50%)                            Unlikely to be taken up (under 50%)

 Aspect of program                              % take up   Aspect of program                                  % take up

 Community develop proposals themselves           88%       No limitation on activities (“open menu”)            28%

 Community prioritize proposals                   76%       Community members decide fund allocations            36%

 Project targets marginal groups                  68%       Independent facilitators (private firm/ NGO)         36%

 Community manage impl. incl. funds               67%

 Funds disbursed direct to community              66%

 Community select impl. team (no contractor)      54%




                                                                                                                       62
