                                                           93529




               GUATEMALA
Elements of a Transport and Logistics Strategy




                                          Anca C. Dumitrescu
                                                 Graham Smith
                                          Theresa K. Osborne




                      1
CONTENTS



CONTENTS.................................................................................................................................................................................. 2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ........................................................................................................................................................ 3
ABREVIATIONA AND ACRONYMS .................................................................................................................................... 4
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................................ 5
I.                 Introduction ......................................................................................................................................................... 7
II.                Why a Transport and Logistics Strategy? ................................................................................................ 7
III.               Key Definitions and Approach ...................................................................................................................... 9
IV.                Guatemala’s Mediocre Ratings for Logistics and Competitiveness ............................................. 11
V.                 Flows and Costs on the Main Logistics Corridors .............................................................................. 13
VI.                Estimated Costs of Guatemala’s Main Transport and Other Logistic Bottlenecks................ 15
VII.               Priority Areas for Actions to Reduce Logistics Costs ........................................................................ 20
VIII.              Matrix of Recommended Activities .......................................................................................................... 36
Annex 1: Suggested Trade-Supporting Investments in Transport and Logistics ..................................... 38
Annex 2: Strategic Workshop of June 10, 2014 ...................................................................................................... 39
Annex 3: Guatemala Logistics Performance Index (LPI) .................................................................................... 40
Annex 4: Reform of Guatemala’s Port Subsector ................................................................................................... 42
Annex 5: Strengthening the Institutions Managing Guatemala’s Roads ....................................................... 45
Annex 6: Public-Private Partnerships in Transport and Logistics: ANADIE............................................... 48
Annex 7: Air Transport’s Contribution to Trade Facilitation ............................................................................ 51
Annex 8: A Possible Railway Link to Mexico and the USA.................................................................................. 52
Annex 9: References and Bibliography ...................................................................................................................... 53
Annex 10: Map ........................................................................................................................................................................ 55




                                                                                            2
                                    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper was prepared by Anca Cristina Dumitrescu (Senior Transport Specialist and Task Team
Leader), Graham Smith (Transport Consultant), and Theresa Kay Osborne (Senior Infrastructure
Economist). The report benefitted from the valuable contributions of Gylfi Palsson (Lead Transport
Specialist), and Stephen Muzira (Senior Transport Engineer). The team extends its thanks to the following
peer reviewers for their invaluable comments during the preparation of this paper: Marc H. Juhel (Practice
Manager), Jean Noel Guillossou (Program Manager), and Charles E. Schlumberger (Lead Air Transport
Specialist).

The authors are grateful to the Government of Guatemala for their support and collaboration in the
preparation of this document, and in particular to the counterparts in PRONACOM.




                                                    3
                    ABREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ANADIE     National Agency for Partnerships to Develop Economic Infrastructure (Agencia
           Nacional de Alianzas para el Desarrollo de Infraestructura Económica)

BRT        Rapid Bus Transit

CABEI      Central American Bank for Economic Integration

CAFTA      The Central America Free Trade Agreement

COVIAL     Unidad Ejecutora de Conservación Vial

CREMA      Performance-based maintenance contracts

DGC        National Road Directory (Dirección General de Caminos)

IADB       Inter-American Development Bank

LAC        Latin-America and Caribbean region

LPI        International Logistics Performance

MAGA       Ministry of Agriculture

MCIV       Ministry of Communications, Infrastructure and Housing

NTLS       National Transport and Logistics Strategy

OECD       Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development

PPP        Public-Private Partnership

PRONACOM   Programa Nacional de Competitividad

SSATP      Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program

TLC        The Total Logistics Costs

WB         World Bank




                                           4
Executive Summary
Objective. This document has been produced by the World Bank to support the Government of
Guatemala as it improves its transport and logistics sector management in pursuit of enhanced
country competitiveness. It identifies and defines elements of a National Transport and Logistics
Strategy (NTLS) through the development of a methodology which analyzes bottlenecks and
related costs along the main logistics corridors. It does so with a view to (a) mobilizing support
in the trading community (essentially private sector) for logistic service improvements, (b)
identifying the need for broader public-sector reforms in transport which indirectly impact
logistics performance, and (c) helping the Government to set sector priorities and hence to
prioritize public investment. At the same time, it points out where improved data and monitoring
of performance are needed in order to better quantify economic costs, diagnose key logistics
issues, and track improved performance.

Approach. The methodology for calculating the logistics costs is based on a World Bank
research paper from 2007, refined in subsequent studies - the most recent being “Logistics Costs
Study of Transport Corridors in Central and West Africa” (2013) under the Sub-Saharan Africa
Transport Policy Program (SSATP). Total logistics costs are derived from the sequence of transit
and processing operations, as the sum of two components: (i) financial cost of logistics services;
and (ii) economic impact of delays and uncertainties. Upon calculating the logistics costs along
four main trade corridors in Guatemala, for both export and import flows, we extracted the
potential savings/“avoidable” costs per corridor based on the difference between the actual costs
of logistics components and the costs of the same components in a well performing market (the
“comparator”). Logistics costs and their sub-components were approximated for those elements
where some basis for computation was available. Much of the data used is based on a trucking
survey carried out by the World Bank in Guatemala in 2012. In addition, this paper relies upon
recent observations and interviews of the World Bank team, as well as the World Bank’s
“Country Policy Note on Transport and Logistics: Guatemala” (July 2013). Whenever possible,
the authors used the latest (2013) trade statistics data from the National Port Commission of
Guatemala. Due to insufficient data available, the results cannot include all the sub-components
of total logistics costs. Furthermore, they do not include logistics and transport costs pre- and
post- corridor – in particular, along rural or secondary roads, and for maritime or air shipment.
For these reasons, the avoidable costs are likely to be even higher than reflected here.

Corridor Logistics Costs and Savings. The pattern of trade flows determined that the
computation of total logistics costs focus on four trade corridors that capture the country’s main
export flows from production areas to the ports and land borders, where inefficiencies are
deemed most critical; and in the case of imports, transportation from these ports or land borders
to consumption areas. The corridors identified as offering the largest potential reduction in
transport and logistics costs, along with the estimated savings (“avoidable” logistics costs), are as
follows in declining order:

   (a) USA (Pacific Coast) and South-East Asia via Puerto Quetzal to Guatemala City –imports
   (US$277.5 million avoidable logistics costs);



                                                 5
   (b) Guatemala’s western highlands via Guatemala City to Puerto Santo Tomás de Castillo –
   exports (US$106.1 million estimated savings);
   (c) Mexico via Tecún Umán to Guatemala City –imports (US$56.5 million estimated
   savings);

   (d) Guatemala City to San Salvador –exports (US$41.6 million estimated savings).

Main contributors to high logistics costs. The data analysis and qualitative assessments of
weaknesses in Guatemala’s transport and logistics sectors show that the main contributors
identified as increasing the logistics costs are:
   -   Inefficient and costly road freight services due largely to a lack of competition and
       barriers to more flexible freight allocation. This situation is sustained in part by
       prohibitions on international trade in road freight services;
   -   Deficient and costly seaport operations and infrastructure;
   -   Costly document and goods processing, including delays at borders (ports and inland
       border crossings);
   -   Guatemala City urban congestion; and
   -   Poor road condition, particularly secondary and tertiary networks due in part to poor
       maintenance.

Suggested Actions to Reduce Transport and Logistics Costs. The Guatemalan government
cannot do everything at once –it lacks both people and money: the institutional capacity and the
fiscal capacity. Priorities can only be set after a public-private dialogue, and champions for
change need to be identified, encouraged and supported. A set of nine main actions have been
identified roughly in declining order of the expected benefit-cost balance –giving a heavier
weight to benefits that can be achieved relatively quickly and easily. They refer to (i) opening
road freight transport services to greater competition; (ii) ease major trade corridor bottlenecks at
inland border crossings; (iii) reform the institutional framework for the major public seaports on
the landlord model under a national Port Authority; (iv) launch public investment in
infrastructure improvements of the ports; (v) construct a partial by-pass of Guatemala City or
comparable solution; (vi) improve aviation safety through minor investments in runway repairs
and navigational aids; (vii) improve tertiary road networks serving areas where perishable fruits
and vegetables are grown for export; (viii) improve road maintenance throughout the country and
strengthen the institutional capacity of the road agencies; and (ix) conduct a study to assess the
economic and financial viability of reviving the railway for freight. A Matrix of recommended
activities in short, medium and long term is also included, along with an annex on trade
supported investments in transport and logistics.




                                                 6
                                              GUATEMALA
                         Elements of a Transport and Logistics Strategy

 I.      Introduction

      1.       This document has been produced by the World Bank to support the Government of
      Guatemala as it improves its transport and logistics sector management in pursuit of enhanced
      country competitiveness. It identifies and defines elements of a National Transport and Logistics
      Strategy (NTLS) through the development of a methodology which analyzes bottlenecks and
      related costs along the main logistics corridors. It does so with a view to (a) mobilizing support
      in the trading community (essentially private sector) for logistic service improvements, (b)
      identifying the need for broader public-sector reforms in transport which indirectly impact
      logistics performance, and (c) helping the Government to set sector priorities and hence to
      prioritize public investment. At the same time, it points out where improved data and monitoring
      of performance are needed in order to better quantify economic costs, diagnose key logistics
      issues, and track improved performance. It thereby proposes, as part of the set of recommended
      activities, to build the Government of Guatemala’s capacity to measure performance and take
      action. While the document is based on sound analysis of some aspects of the country’s logistics
      system, it must be considered primarily a starting point which is subject to broad country
      dissemination and debate by public and private stakeholders.


II.      Why a Transport and Logistics Strategy?
      2.      The importance of good logistics performance for economic growth, competitiveness,
      and poverty reduction is increasingly well understood, particularly for small, open economies
      such as Guatemala’s. As formal trade barriers have declined within Central America and within
      the CAFTA region over the past five decades, high logistics and transport costs have emerged as
      a key remaining impediment to trade. Today Guatemala, like most Central American countries,
      rates relatively highly on international indicators of openness to trade, ranking in the top 50
      countries out of 180. Yet the Latin-America and Caribbean region on average lags behind East
      Asia and Pacific, the Middle East and North Africa, and high-income OECD countries on the
      costs of importing and exporting, and it scores better than only South Asia and Sub-Saharan
      Africa.

      3.      A variety of indicators show that Guatemala has costly logistics challenges as well.
      Despite dramatic improvement in Guatemala’s Doing Business 2014 ranking from 93rd to 79th
      out of 183 countries, its position in the “Trading Across Borders” indicator ranking has dropped
      from 112th to 116th in the world. Moreover, according to the Logistics Performance Index
      (World Bank), Guatemala ranks 74th out of 155 countries in the timeliness, availability, and
      quality of logistics services. (See Annex 4 for details). Also, although business surveys show
      that the region’s insecurity is a more severe constraint to doing business, a substantial percentage
      of firms in Costa Rica (54 percent), El Salvador (32 percent), Guatemala (25 percent), and
      Nicaragua (24 percent) also rated the high cost of transportation as a major constraint. Indeed,
      issues of crime and insecurity affect transport and logistics directly.



                                                       7
4.     Until recently, governments have not focused on logistics in their strategies because they
 were thought to be performed mainly by the private sector. We recommend a joint approach,
 public and private, identifying win-win options in which both sides gain. Here are some of the
 main reasons:

   -   Logistics has become a public policy concern of national governments. Logistics
       performance is enhanced when approached holistically – due to the complex sequence of
       coordinated activities in several areas of the economy – and regionally –due to the
       international trade dimension.
   -   Focus on logistics is a relatively new approach to evaluate weak links in import and
       export chains, and hence to advise all stakeholders on where to improve what and how.
       Furthermore, such performance depends on interventions of the government in
       infrastructure, logistics service provision and enabling regulations, and cross-border trade
       facilitation. We therefore encourage the Government of Guatemala to take a
       comprehensive view and a strategic approach: what are the big-picture problems that will
       require cooperation (and motivation) among many stakeholders?
   -   At the same time, the importance of consistent policies across sectors – including trade,
       agriculture, transportation, and customs, for example – cannot be emphasized enough.
       Too easily, ministries take a narrow view, and a short-term view sometimes driven by
       political periods in office. Mechanisms are needed for a medium-term perspective (say,
       4-8 years), neither too short to tackle infrastructure-related bottlenecks, nor too long to
       recognize the urgency of getting started.
   -   A cooperative approach between the public and private stakeholders – i.e. all the
       participants along the logistics chains – is necessary to promote and implement the
       needed reforms. A dialogue is needed across sectors of the economy and across socio-
       economic networks, to identify shared interests and win-win opportunities. Options for
       such a public discussion should be considered.
   -   Empirical evidence and studies have demonstrated that transport infrastructure, services
       and regulations play a crucial role in logistics performance. In Central America and in
       Guatemala specifically, high transport costs are cited as an important impediment to trade
       and economic growth. The Government of Guatemala wants to address that.
   -   A “classical” transport strategy with diagnostics, identification of shortcomings and
       challenges, recommendations and priorities (including investment) by sub-sector –while
       usually not linking it to other sectors of the economy-- offers an incomplete picture. It
       does not answer questions such as “How can transport and its modes serve better the
       logistic chains?”, “What are the concerns of the users of transport infrastructure and
       services?”, or “Where should the government put its scarce resources in the sector to
       better address the country’s logistic shortcomings?”

5.      We aim to cast our net wider than traditional initiatives, which tend to focus mostly on
 the provision of infrastructure. We aim to take advantage of the World Bank’s global
 experience and particularly its familiarity with economic development of the entire LAC region
 - in consultation with the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and the Central American
 Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) –and recent thinking on the interactions between trade
 economists and transport specialists, with customs reforms and enhanced awareness of logistics
 also playing a big role.


                                                8
III.    Key Definitions and Approach

   6.      What are Logistics? Simply put, modern logistics is the process of mobilizing goods from
    origin to the final destination market. That process includes the management of transport and
    inventory in a manner that reduces their costs within the whole logistics chain, and which makes
    deliveries to customers more reliable. Transport Logistics can be defined as the services,
    regulations, procedures, and infrastructure that allow for the free and timely movement of goods
    and people.

   7.       This paper will:
        -   Provide a brief description of the methodology to be used for calculating the logistics
            costs along key corridors for international trade (Chapter III);
        -   Review the ratings for Guatemala and neighboring countries in Doing Business, Logistics
            Performance Index, Transparency International and other indexes or rating systems
            (Chapter IV).
        -   Describe the main logistics corridors in Guatemala with their trade and transport flows
            and volumes (Chapter V);
        -   Provide ballpark calculations of main logistics costs along these corridors, including
            their breakdown, thus facilitating the identification of the main bottlenecks, with
            emphasis on transport infrastructure, services and regulatory framework issues (Chapter
            VI);
        -   Identify priority areas to reduce logistics costs, and suggested actions. To that end,
            the paper identifies policy and/or regulatory measures as well as investments that each
            subsector needs in accordance with the Government’s strategic priorities, to meet the
            poverty reduction, regional integration and social goals of its overall development
            strategy (Chapter VII);
        -   Suggest a Matrix of Recommended Activities in the short, medium and long term,
            including responsible agencies (Chapter VIII); and
        -   Summarize the conclusions of a strategic workshop held in Guatemala City in June 10,
            2014, which discussed and disseminated recommendations and priorities on strategic
            thinking, public awareness, identification of champions for reforms, and mobilization of
            support among stakeholders (Annex 2).

   8.     Methodology. This transport and logistics strategy is approached from the point of view
   of the private sector and users – producers, exporters, importers, freight-forwarders and
   transporters - operating along the main logistics corridors (national and international) of
   Guatemala. Identifying the logistics costs - and calculating the “avoidable” ones - along the main
   corridors can help the Government formulate policies that result in reduction of transaction costs.
   The methodology for calculating the logistics costs on selected trade corridors is based on a
   World Bank research paper from 2007. It has been refined in subsequent studies, the most recent
   being “Logistics Costs Study of Transport Corridors in Central and West Africa” (2013) under
   the Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program (SSATP). In the LAC region the
   methodology is currently being used in Haiti and in this paper for Guatemala. In accordance


                                                   9
with this approach, the typical steps in the supply chain from port to hinterland (in the case of
imports), or from the production area to the port/land border (in the case of exports) is illustrated
in Figure 1 below.

                                    Figure 1: Typical Logistics Chain




9.      Logistics costs are derived from the sequence of transit and processing operations. They
are directly or indirectly paid by the shipper or consignee (the importer or exporter of goods
shipped along a corridor) and/or by consumers if goods are being imported.1 The total logistics
costs (TLC) is the sum of two components:
    TLC = (i) Financial cost of logistics services + (ii) Economic impact of delays and uncertainties

     (i) Financial costs of logistics services including “gateway costs” paid at the port/border of
         entry or exit; inland transport costs paid to truckers /transport operators for actual transit
         transportation; and inland processing costs incurred when crossing the border and at final
         destination; and
     (ii) Economic impact of delays and uncertainties (so-called “hidden costs”) – reflecting
          the time value attached to the cargo, the lead-time in transit, its variability, and the cost of
          running out of stock or setting up alternative logistics (hedging against unreliability).
          This is an important component of economic costs, but unfortunately, major sub-
          components of this cost cannot be computed due to the lack of reliable and detailed data
          on transit and waiting times.

10.     Costs and their sub-components were approximated for those elements where some basis
for computation was available, on four main trade corridors in Guatemala, for both export and
import flows (see Chapter IV below). Much of the data used is based on a trucking survey
carried out by the World Bank in Guatemala in 2012, but this does not provide all the data
needed. Due to insufficient data available, the results cannot include all the sub-components of
total logistics costs in Guatemala. For that reason, the avoidable costs are likely to be even higher
than reflected here. In addition, this paper relies upon recent observations and interviews of the
Bank team as well as the World Bank’s “Country Policy Note on Transport and Logistics:

1
 What share of the economic costs of inefficient transport and logistics is incurred by consumers versus producers
depends upon the relative elasticity of supply and demand for the products being transported. For example,
agricultural exports are likely to have a price high elasticity of demand, and therefore costs would be largely borne
by producers.


                                                         10
  Guatemala” (July 2013), which summarizes existing knowledge and prioritizes across issues in
  transport and logistics. Finally, the authors used whenever feasible the latest (2013) trade data
  extracted from the port statistics of the Comisión Portuaria Nacional.


IV.   Guatemala’s Mediocre Ratings for Logistics and Competitiveness

  11.     Several international rating systems, launched less than a decade ago, have proved to be
  valuable instruments to shed light on trade and logistics performance, to make the trade process
  (costs and times) more transparent, and to show governments of low-performing countries the
  advantages they can expect to gain from efforts to improve logistics.

  12.     As formal trade barriers have declined within Central America over the past five decades,
  high logistics and transport costs have emerged as a key impediment to trade. The nations of the
  region have signed a series of agreements aimed at regional economic integration and both multi‐
  lateral and bilateral treaties with countries outside the region. Guatemala, like most Central
  American countries, rates relatively highly on international indicators of openness to trade,
  ranking in the top 50 countries out of 1802. Yet the LAC region lags behind East Asia and
  Pacific, the Middle East and North Africa, and high-income OECD countries on the costs of
  importing and exporting, and it scores better than only South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa.

  13.    Survey-based competitiveness indicators highlight some challenges for Guatemala. The
  country’s ranking in the 2012-2013 Global Competitiveness Index3 improved only slightly to
  the 83rd position (out of 144 countries), from 84th in the previous year’s survey. Cited as main
  drawbacks are concerns about crime, corruption, excessive government bureaucracy and
  inadequate infrastructure and human capital are cited as main drawbacks.

  14.    Guatemala has a somewhat better position in the Doing Business Index 2014, ranking
  79th out of 183 countries. It is above the LAC average of 97. It also shows an overall
  improvement from 2013 in the easiness to do business, when it ranked 93rd. That was due to
  notable improvements in starting a business and paying taxes. However, trading across borders
  has deteriorated. Also, although in most LAC countries business people view the region’s
  insecurity as a more severe constraint to doing business than transport costs, a substantial
  percentage of firms in Costa Rica (54 percent), El Salvador (32 percent), Guatemala (25), and
  Nicaragua (24) also rated the high cost of transportation as a major constraint 4.

  15.     Unpacking logistics performance at the country level, the Central America country
  rankings on the recently released International Logistics Performance (LPI) Index5 are
  relatively poor, with only Panama in the first 50 countries out of 160. See Annex 3 for details
  including the LPI indicators.




  2
    Millennium Challenge Corporation (USA) trade policy indicator
  3
    IMF Country Report No. 13/247 (August 2013)
  4
    World Bank trucking survey in Central America, 2011-2012
  5
    “Connecting to Compete – Trade Logistics in the Global Economy”, World Bank, March 2014


                                                      11
                    Table 1: LPI Comparative Scores for Central America
                   Country                    LPI 2014                 LPI 2012
                                        (out of 160 countries)   (out of 155 countries
                    Panama                       45                       61
                  El Salvador                    64                       93
                  Guatemala                      77                       74
                  Costa Rica                     87                       82
                  Nicaragua                      95                      107*
                   Honduras                     103                      105
               Source: LPI      *2010

16.    Furthermore, the LPI reveals that most LAC countries are partial performers, with no
countries in the region classified in the top-performing logistics-friendly category. Two-thirds of
LAC countries have 50-60% of Germany’s top rating. Guatemala is among the partial
performers with 58% of Germany’s performance:

                                             Figure 2:




17.    The unexceptional performance of the LAC region in logistics services is becoming a
hurdle for growth and competitiveness. By comparing the aggregate values of each LPI
component against the aggregate average LPI for LAC countries, the “Connecting to Compete
(2014)” report also helps identify bottlenecks. According to the report, ”physical infrastructure
stands out as the most serious impediment to logistics performance, followed by customs
and border issues”.

18.    Transparency International issues a yearly rating of countries on the basis of surveys on
perceived levels of public sector corruption. Guatemala’s rating for 2013 of 123rd among the 177
countries rated is a matter of concern. Nicaragua and Honduras also have a low rating.


                                                 12
               Table 2: Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (2013)

                                             Rating                            Rating

                      Costa Rica                 49     Mexico                   106

                      El Salvador                83     Guatemala                123

                      Colombia                   94     Nicaragua                127

                      Panama                   102      Honduras                 140


V.      Flows and Costs on the Main Logistics Corridors

     19.     In the above context, the following chapters will utilize the data and information
     available to diagnose some of the general policy issues in the sector. Before one can definitively
     identify specific measures to reduce logistics costs, one needs reliable data and diagnostics to
     understand which factors influence logistics and transport performance – in particular, time and
     financial costs.
     20.     In addition to this broader empirical assessment, for the purposes of quantifying the
     current inefficiencies and measuring reductions in the time and financial cost of logistics
     performance, the TLS proposes to take a corridor approach. Recent international experience has
     shown the merits of the trade and transport corridor concept, which integrates all phases into
     unified measures of performance, and brings together all stakeholders, whether public or private,
     producers or consumers. Corridors are a sum of hard and soft components including physical
     infrastructure, operation, transport services and ancillary services (notably information
     technology, facilities, etc.) that allow identification and treatment of trade and transport
     bottlenecks in a holistic manner. Furthermore, most trade and transport corridors are multi-
     country/regional and involve one or several borders. A regional approach, including cross-border
     cooperation, is therefore crucial for reducing logistics costs.
     21.     Key Transport Sectors and Routes. The existing modes for transporting Guatemala’s
     traded goods are by road, sea, and air. Rail is essentially non-existent at present, and inland
     waterways represent a very small share of total transportation. Maritime transport dominates the
     international leg of Guatemala’s logistics chain, representing 78 percent of volumes and 65
     percent of total value traded in 2013. Overland road transport represented 25 percent, while air
     cargo was 10 percent of freight value traded, up dramatically from less than 1 percent in 2011
     (Table 3). Road transport is, nonetheless, used at some stage of all logistics chains – including to
     link production and consumption locations with air and sea ports or to transport intra-regionally
     traded goods. Among seaports, Puerto Santo Tomás de Castilla on the Atlantic and Puerto
     Quetzal on the Pacific move the greatest volumes. Of overland routes, Pedro de Alvarado with
     El Salvador sees the greatest export volumes and Tecún Umán on the Mexican border the
     greatest import volumes.




                                                      13
Table 3: 2013 Trade Flows by Transport Mode of the International Leg
                          Exports                          Imports                    Average Freight Values
                     Weight       Value               Weight       Value               Exports      Imports
    Mode            (000 tons)      ($ million)      (000 tons)       ($ million)     $ per ton    $ per ton
    Maritime               7,645           5,976           10,759          11,839             782       1,100
    Overland               3,021           3,174            2,202            3,738           1,051            1,698
    Air                       32             916               29            1,937          28,625           66,793
    Total                10,698           10,066           12,990          17,514              941            1,348
Source: Comisión Portuaria Nacional, Guatemala (2014)

22.     The pattern of trade flows determined that the computation of total logistics costs in the
present document should focus on four trade corridors deemed likely to capture 70-80% of
national trade flows. These four corridors capture the main export trade flows from production
areas to the ports and land borders, where inefficiencies of infrastructure and border controls are
deemed most critical, and in the case of imports, transportation from these ports or land borders
to consumption areas. The corridor which offers the largest potential reduction in transport and
logistics costs is listed first; the others follow in declining order.
       (a) USA (Pacific Coast) and South-East Asia via Puerto Quetzal to Guatemala City -
       mostly imports, but also important for some exports (notably sugar) 
       (b) Guatemala’s western highlands via Guatemala City to Puerto Santo Tomás de Castillo
       – mainly for exports to USA (Atlantic Coast and Gulf of Mexico)  
       (c) Mexico via Tecún Umán to Guatemala City (mainly imports from Mexico to Guatemala)

       (d) Guatemala City to San Salvador – mainly exports (agricultural and non-traditional, e.g.
       light manufacturing).

23.    The main export and import categories and characteristics associated with each of these
four corridors are6:
(a) USA (Pacific Coast) and South-East Asia via Puerto Quetzal to Guatemala City:
       - This corridor handles about half of all Guatemala’s imports, whether in value or in weight;
       and 30-40% of its exports. Its main efficiency (or otherwise) can therefore weigh heavily on
       Guatemala’s trade.
       - The main import flows are not only from the USA West Coast but also from China, South
       Korea and other South-East Asian sources: vehicles, manufactured goods (containerized),
       clothing and footwear (also containerized). Puerto Quetzal is also the main entry point for
       liquid fuels and coal, as well as corn and fertilizers, all imported in large volumes.
       - Sugar and palm oil, important exports grown and processed in the lowlands of the Pacific
       coast, dominate exports via this corridor.
       - Maritime transport via Puerto Quetzal competes with road and rail transport for trade with
       Mexico, especially that coming from, or going to, Mexico City (nearly 1,400 km from

6
    See Annex 3 for details on exports and imports by country, main products, volumes and values of trade.


                                                          14
      Guatemala City) and the northern half of Mexico.

  (b) Guatemala’s western highlands via Guatemala City to Puerto Santo Tomás – mainly for
  exports to USA (Atlantic Coast and Gulf of Mexico):  
      - The western highlands are the origin of much agricultural production, while Guatemala City
      is the site of garment production and light manufacturing. Unlike Puerto Quetzal, in volume
      exports dominate traffic passing through the port of Santo Tomás; in tons they exceed
      imports by about 60/40. The main export commodities are bananas and other fruits and
      vegetables, coffee, textiles and clothing (at least 750,000 tons per year, about $1.5 billion in
      value), crude oil and nickel.
      - The main (or representative) import commodities are vehicles and other manufactured
      goods (carried in containers on trucks). Since they have a price per ton more than double that
      of exports passing through the port ($2,000 per ton versus $890), imports dominate in value.

  (c) Mexico via Tecún Umán (proposed logistics park just inside Guatemala from Mexican
  border) to Guatemala City:
      - Imports from Mexico are more than double exports to Mexico in weight, and more than
      three times in value. Electrical goods and other manufactured goods are prominent among
      these imports;
      - Prominent among exports to Mexico are frozen seafood (sent by truck overland rather than
      by sea, for quicker and more predictable delivery), as well as palm oil and sugar.

  (d) Guatemala City to San Salvador:
      - This corridor carries predominantly Guatemalan exports to El Salvador and other countries
      of Central America: foodstuffs and manufactured goods originating in Guatemala including
      fabrics, palm oil, beverages and foods, as well as a diversity of goods in transit from Mexico,
      the US West Coast and East Asia (China, South Korea, etc.).
      - Most exports to the rest of Central America take the same route, in transit through El
      Salvador. Together they are about the same value as exports to El Salvador but only about a
      half of the volume (that is, they are higher-value goods).


VI.   Estimated Costs of Guatemala’s Main Transport and Other Logistic
      Bottlenecks

  24.     Guatemala faces a number of inter-related logistics and transport challenges that
  compromise its international competitiveness, reduce gains from trade, and increase the price of
  imported goods. Based on available data and analysis, and using the “micro-economic
  approach” described in Chapter III, Tables 4-6 below summarize the total logistics costs by
  component, that is, the direct logistics costs that could be saved (“avoidable costs”) on each of
  the four corridors identified. However, due to the paucity of data, these costs exclude (i) the
  potential avoidable costs of uncertainties in delivery times (one component of hidden costs); and
  (ii) avoidable costs of more efficient maritime service and pricing.7
  7
   There is some evidence of price discrimination and imperfect competition among maritime shippers, particularly those serving
  Latin American countries. See, e.g., Hummel et al. 2009.


                                                               15
25.     Calculation of logistics costs below started from (i) the gateway costs – document
processing, customs processing, and (where applicable) terminal handling charges 8 ; (ii) price
(freight) charged by trucks per ton-km (a sum of financial logistics costs), and (iii) added the
cost of time spent waiting at borders (for imports and exports overland) and/or the dwell time in
ports – in the case of imports - and other costs (a component of hidden logistics costs) along each
of the selected corridors (Table 4 below). The calculation of potential savings/avoidable costs
(Table 5 below) is based on the difference between the actual costs of various logistics
components in Guatemala and the costs of the same components in a well performing market
(the “comparator”). Taking into account the export and import volumes for each corridor,
combined with the avoidable costs within the total logistics costs, Table 6 below shows the
avoidable costs per corridor and as a percentage of goods value. It thus offers a snapshot of the
potential savings that could be made if the main logistics bottlenecks are addressed.

Table 4: Estimated Partial Logistics Costs Per Ton, Four Selected Corridors
                                                                                                               Total       % of Goods
                                               Financial Cost of
                                                                                                              Logistics       Value
    Corridor                                     Logistics and                       Hidden Costs
                                                                                                              Costs per     (Available/
                                              Processing Services
                                                                                                                Ton        partial costs)
                                                                                Inventory
                                            Overland                           Carrying Cost    Delivery
                                                            Gateway
                                            transport                           (including       Time
                                                            Costs**
                                              price*                            dwell time     Uncertainty
                                                                                at port)***
                                                          To/from West Coast USA
    USA Pacific Coast to Guatemala
                                              $ 31.6             $ 72.5            $ 2.82      No data           $ 106.9           11.4%
    City, via Puerto Quetzal
    Ciudad Guatemala to Puerto
                                               $ 21.4            $ 65.7            $ 2.36      No data           $ 89.4         11.4%
    Quetzal
                                                           To/from East Coast USA
    USA East Coast to Puerto Santo
                                               $ 53.5           $ 72.5             $ 4.26       No data          $ 130.2          6.5%
     Tomas
    Guatemala City to East Coast
                                               $ 31.2           $ 65.7             $ 2.87       No data           $ 99.8          7.4%
    US via Santo Tomas
                                                               To/from Mexico
    Guatemala City to Mexico via
                                               $ 57.3           $ 41.7              $0.25       No data           $ 99.2          7.9%
    Tecun Uman
    Mexico to Guatemala City via
                                               $ 49.8           $ 46.5              $0.30       No data          $ 96.6           6.4%
    Tecún Umán (imports)
                                                             To/from El Salvador
    Guatemala City to San
                                               $ 43.1           $ 41.7             $ 0.29       No data          $ 85.1           8.7%
    Salvadorvia Pedro Alvarado
    San Salvador to Guatemala City
                                               $ 53.8           $ 46.5             $ 0.93       No data          $ 101.3          6.7%
    via Pedro Alvarado

    *Source: Central America Trucking Survey, 2011-2012 (note: sample sizes by route are small and not representative)
    **Source: Doing Business, 2013
    ***Source: CA trucking survey and IDB 2013. Mean times are based on few observations




8
    Source: Doing Business - Trading Across Borders (2013).


                                                                          16
26.     For those elements of logistics costs that are quantifiable, one can compare to an efficient
benchmark (for example, Chile) and compute the avoidable elements, as shown in Table 5
below. The avoidable costs are split into potential price reduction for overland transport
(columns 2 - 4), and other direct and indirect logistics costs (last two columns). The analysis of
results shows that the main contributors to high overland transport prices are: the high markups
(second column); the combined effects of low track utilization, empty backhauls and wait times
(fourth column); and the low travel speeds due to traffic congestion and to a lesser extent poor
road infrastructure and network links (third column). Apart from the road freight, there is
potential to reduce “gateway” (port) costs including port handling charges, document processing
and long dwell times (sixth column). Chapter VII below provides a more extensive discussion on
these elements.

Table 5: Estimated Potential Logistics and Transport Cost Savings as a Percentage of Total
Logistics Costs as Computed in Table 4
                                                                                                 Reduced Gateway and
                                   More Efficient Overland Transport Market
                                                                                                   Inventory Costs
         Corridor                  Increased                                                                    Halve time costs
                                                                         Improved wait        To Chilean#
                                  competition/        Reduction in                                              (inventory costs
                                                                         times and asset       benchmark
                                    reduced           Congestion**                                              border, port, and
                                                                          utilization***     efficiency/cost
                                   markups*                                                                     other wait times)
                                                  To/from West Coast USA
USA Pacific Coast to
Guatemala City via Puerto              9%                 0.9%                1.0%                24%                2.28%
Quetzal
Ciudad Guatemala to
                                      10%                 1.0%                1.2%                14%                2.32%
Puerto Quetzal
                                                  To/from East Coast USA
USA East Coast to Puerto
                                      17%                 1.9%                2.2%                20%                2.67%
Santo Tomás
Guatemala City to East
                                       0%                 2.5%                3.0%                13%                2.36%
Coast US via Sto Tomás
                                                       To/from Mexico
Guatemala City to Mexico
                                      23%                 2.2%                2.6%                10%                0.06%
via Tecún Umán
Mexico to Guatemala City
                                      23%                 2.2%                2.6%                25%                0.07%
via Tecún Umán (imports)
                                                     To/from El Salvador
Guatemala City to San
Salvador via Pedro                    15%                 2.8%                3.3%                11%                0.14%
Alvarado
San Salvador to
Guatemala City via Pedro              23%                 2.4%                2.8%                28%                0.19%
Alvarado
Note: Other potential savings are available through reduction of informal payments, increased use of temporary workers, and
increased firm size. However, these savings were small relative to those represented above.
*Assumed reduction = Minimum of 9 cents per ton-kilometer and difference between price and 11 cents per ton-kilometer
(regional mean price on international routes). 9 cents is the estimated mean markup on less competitive national routes from
Osborne et al. 2014, discussed further below.
**Estimated coefficient on velocity in the price equation times 1/3 standard deviation of speed for Guatemala, detailed below.
***Sum of 1/3 standard deviation improvement in utilization, empty backhauls and wait times, detailed further below.
#Chile is chosen because it has the lowest gateway costs in Latin America (source: Doing Business).




                                                               17
27.    In Table 6 below we computed the total avoidable costs per corridor. It shows that the
corridors with highest avoidable costs are (a) the import corridor from the Pacific coast via
Puerto Quetzal to Guatemala City, and (b) the import corridor from the Atlantic coast via Puerto
Santo Tomás to Guatemala City, in terms of total maximum values per year. Among the export
corridors, the Puerto Quetzal and Tecún Umán corridors appear to have the highest potential
savings. These figures do not weigh the costs of taking the necessary measures to, for example,
reduce congestion and increase average travel speeds.

Table 6: Estimated Potential Savings Gains, all Measures, by Corridor
                                                       Freight                   Current                     Estimated         Savings as
                                                                    Average
                                                       volumes                   Logistics                    Potential        Percent of
                     Corridor                                      value per
                                                       (million                   Costs                       Savings            Goods
                                                                     ton ($)
                                                        tons)                   ($ milion)                   ($ million)         Value
                                                         To/from West Coast USA
       USA Pacific Coast to Guatemala
                                                        7,354                  934               786             277.5              4.0%
       City via Puerto Quetzal
       Ciudad Guatemala to Puerto
                                                        2,744                  784               245               66.5             3.1%
       Quetzal
                                                          To/from East Coast USA
       USA East Coast to Puerto Santo
                                                        1,975                1,989               257             106.1              2.7%
       Tomas
       Guatemala City to East Coast US
                                                        2,323                1,343               232               42.6             1.4%
       via Santo Tomas
                                                                To/from Mexico
       Guatemala City to Mexico via
                                                          364                1,250                 36              13.4             3.0%
       Tecún Umán
       Mexico to Guatemala City via
                                                        1,102                1,515               106               56.5             3.4%
       Tecún Umán
                                                             To/from El Salvador
       Guatemala City to San Salvador
                                                        1,508                  983               128               41.6             2.8%
       via Pedro Alvarado
       San Salvador to Guatemala City
                                                          566                1,517                 57               2.2             3.8%
       via Pedro Alvarado
       Note: Average freight values are estimated from national figures by entry/exit point, although the origin or destination may not be
       Guatemala City in all cases.


28.     These corridor-specific calculations are illustrative of the potential gains, and suggest that
reductions in freight markups and traffic congestion and in border, port and other wait times can
improve trade flows in Guatemala. They do not, however, include logistics and transport costs
pre- and post- corridor – in particular, along rural or secondary roads, and for maritime or air
shipment. Clearly, these cost elements can also be substantial. 9 We do not compute the
avoidable costs for these linkages simply due to a lack of data. We note, however, that the price
per ton for maritime shipping can be from $2,500 to $4,500 per container, or approximately $125
to $225 per ton, depending on the destination. To the extent that these prices are not reflective of
competitive markups and cost efficiencies, it is likely that they could be reduced as well.
Guatemalan maritime shipping is not as concentrated as other countries in the region, as shown
in Figure 3 below. However, there is some anecdotal evidence of high markups. Although
Guatemala may not have direct control over the degree of competition among shipping



9
    See, e.g., World Bank (2012) Supply Chain Analyses for similar corridors


                                                                        18
companies, there may be indirect means to influence this competition, and this issue is important
to track and analyze further.10


         Figure 3: Herfindahl Indices of Maritime Shipping Concentration at Countries' Ports,
                               Capacity-Weighted (2011) (1=Monopoly)
          0.9

          0.8

          0.7

          0.6

          0.5

          0.4

          0.3

          0.2

          0.1

            0
                El Salvador    Nicaragua       Belize     Costa Rica   Guatemala   Honduras   Panama
          Source: Containerization International Yearbook 2012


29.     The underlying data analysis and qualitative assessments of weaknesses in Guatemala’s
transport and logistics sectors show that the main contributors identified as increasing the
logistics costs, in rough order of importance, are:
     -    Inefficient and costly road freight services due largely to a lack of competition and
          barriers to more flexible freight allocation. This situation is sustained in part by
          prohibitions on international trade in road freight services;
     -    Deficient and costly seaport operations and infrastructure;
     -    Costly document and goods processing, including delays at borders (ports and inland
          border crossings);
     -    Guatemala City urban congestion; and
     -    Poor road condition, particularly secondary and tertiary networks due in part to poor
          maintenance.11

30.      Most of these transport and logistics issues have been quantified and factored in the total
cost, as shown in Tables 4-6 above. However, it is not possible to quantify the exact order of
magnitude or importance of each contributor because (i) they are interlinked in most cases; and
(ii) the avoidable logistics costs are different on each corridor and depend on different factors
including trade volumes and values. We also note that the avoidable cost may be much higher in
the case of Guatemalan exports of fresh vegetables and fruit from the farm gate-to–processing

10
   See, e.g., Hummels, D., V. Lugovskyy, A. Skiba (2009). “The Trade Reducing Effects of Market Power in
International Shipping.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 89.
11
   Sources: LPI survey responses to rate road quality and interviews with Bank staff working in the sector.
Moreover, the country’s roads comprise a major portion of national assets, so economic losses of improper
maintenance are likely to be large relative to other inefficiencies discussed within the sector.


                                                            19
   center (or market) link of the logistics chain. The losses incurred due to poor road condition on
   that segment have not been factored-in due to insufficient information. However, different
   scenarios may be developed on the cost of spoiled produce due to road infrastructure deficiencies
   and excessive border crossing waiting time. The following Chapter discusses in more detail each
   of the main contributors to logistics costs and identifies priority actions to reduce them.


VII.   Priority Areas for Actions to Reduce Logistics Costs

   VII.1 Inefficient and costly road freight services
   31.     This section relies heavily on a recently published World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper, “What Drives the High Price of Road Freight Service in Central America?” (Osborne, T.,
   M. Pachon, and G. Araya, (2014) No. 6844). It presents an econometric analysis of the
   determinants and costs and prices, using data from a survey of Central American trucking firms.
   In addition, the section draws from the World Bank’s (2013) “Country Policy Note on Transport
   and Logistics: Guatemala”, July 2013 (already shared with the Government of Guatemala).

   32.     Based upon the price comparisons for road freight service on main corridors for
   international trade, Central American domestic trucking tariffs (freight rates) are among the
   highest in the world at approximately 17 US cents per ton-kilometer relative to 5-12 cents in
   advanced countries and African trade corridors. As shown in Table 7 below, Guatemala is no
   exception to this pattern. Moreover, based upon rigorous econometric analysis of the
   determinants of costs and prices on routes important for international trade, the evidence is clear
   that these high prices are related to a lack of robust competition among road freight providers,
   particularly on “national” routes, which connect points within a country – for example, from
   Guatemala City to Guatemala’s seaports. On routes with more companies providing service
   relative to the volume of service, prices are significantly lower than on those with fewer
   companies operating. And although this varies among national routes, the level of competition is
   much higher on international routes – those involving an international border crossing.

                  Table 7: Costs and Prices on National and International Routes
                                      (US cents per ton-km)
                   Country              Mean                Min                Max            Average Markup
                                                                                               over Average
                                                                                                Direct Costs
                 Costa Rica                  10.9                 2.9              38.2                 6.1
                 El Salvador                 15.6                 4.5              53.9                 8.3
                 Guatemala                   16.4                 4.1              88.9                11.0
                  Honduras                  15.7*                 3.6             114.0                 9.3
                 Nicaragua                   11.3                 3.3              81.2                 6.1
                  Panama                   33.2**                 2.9             111.0                27.0
                  TOTAL                      16.9                 2.9             114.0                11.0
                 Source: Osborne et al. 2014.
                 Notes: Means are simple firm means, calculated from frequency-weighted route-firm prices*Difference
                 with Costa Rica statistically significant at 5 percent level **Difference with all other countries
                 significant at 1% level.



   33.   Thus, although the average costs borne by trucking companies do not vary on average
   between national and international routes, markups are approximately 8-10 cents higher on



                                                                20
national routes where international competition is prohibited (Figure 4 below). Regional barriers
to entry and limited competition on national routes are sustained by the prohibition on cabotage –
that is, a truck from one country may not pick up and deliver goods within another country – and
on foreign majority ownership of trucking companies. This also raises costs by reducing the
flexibility of fleet deployment and by allowing trucking firms to sustain high cost structures.
Moreover, this situation has not improved since the data were collected. As suggested by the
inland transportation cost component of the Doing Business Trading Across Borders Indicator
(Figure 4), these prices have only risen since that time.

Figure 4: Prices on National versus International Routes by Country (US cents per ton-
kilometer)
 70

 60

 50

 40
                                                                                                     National
 30                                                                                                  International

 20

 10

  0
        Costa Rica    El Salvador     Guatemala      Honduras      Nicaragua        Panama

Source: Central America Trucking Survey (2011-2012 data).
Note: International routes are defined as those requiring an international overland border crossing. National routes
do not.




                                                        21
       Figure 5: Trends in Components of Trading Across Borders, Guatemala (US$)
              1600

              1400
                                                                             Document
              1200                                                           Preparation
                                                                             Customs Processing
              1000

                800                                                          Terminal Handling

                600
                                                                             Inland
                400                                                          Transportation
                                                                             Total
                200

                  0
                      2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                 Source: Doing Business


34.     The Central America trucking survey data also permit an estimation of the contribution of
various factors to the costs of providing road freight service. The contribution of the main cost
elements for Guatemala is as shown in Figure 6 below.12 That is, more flexible use of temporary
labor, increased safe travel speeds (i.e., reduced congestion, particularly in and around
Guatemala City, but also in other bottlenecks), and enhanced input utilization – including higher
truck utilization, reduced empty backhaul, and reduced wait times – would have the greatest
effect on the costs that trucking firms incur in providing their service.

35.    Nonetheless, the total potential reduction simulated (of a 1/3 of a standard deviation
improvement in each variable) would reduce costs by 3 cents from 5.4 to 2.2 cents per ton-
kilometer. This represents a large fraction of total costs, but only a small percentage of prices.
Moreover, this level of cost reduction may not be possible without large public expenditures and
indeed an increase in competition to incentivize cost saving and quality improvement measures.




12
 The simulated improvements were computed as the estimated coefficient on the variable for the entire sample of 6
Central American countries multiplied by one-third of the standard deviation of the respective variable for
Guatemala.


                                                       22
          Figure 6: Simulated Reductions in Main Cost Factors, Guatemala Road Freight Service



                                             0.06                                                                                                           0.012000




                                                                                                                                                                       US $ per ton-km improvement
                                             0.05                                                                                                           0.010000
     US$ per t-k cumulative cost reduction




                                             0.04                                                                                                           0.008000

                                             0.03                                                                                                           0.006000

                                             0.02                                                                                                           0.004000

                                             0.01                                                                                                           0.002000

                                             0.00                                                                                                           0.000000
                                                    Current   Increased Higher safe Higher         Reduced     Reduced       Greater Better Road Reduced
                                                    Average   temporary travel speed utilization    empty      wait times   fleet size Quality   Informal
                                                     Cost       work    (congestion                backhaul                                      payments
                                                                          and other
                                                                            speed
                                                                           factors)


                                                       Cost net of cumulative improvements                    Improvement in US cents for each factor
Source: Guatemala Policy Note (2013) based on Central America Trucking Survey


36.     Utilization and empty backhauls are particularly problematic for Guatemalan trucking
companies. It is estimated that on average 77 percent of return trips are empty (Figure 7). The
problem applies to both short-haul and long-haul trips to ports and airport destinations, as well as
to foreign capital cities. For example, empty backhaul on trips from Guatemala City to San
Salvador is 90 per cent, to Tegucigalpa is 100%, and to Managua 75%. And yet it is much lower
to Costa Rica’s and Panama’s capital, at 24 and 10 percent respectively. This, combined with
low fleet utilization13, encourages owners to keep running old trucks, which have lower fixed
costs, but also lower fuel efficiency, even though fuel costs represent 40-60% of total operating
costs. In Guatemala, few firms report using best operating practices and technologies to improve
fuel efficiency.




13
            Fleet utilization is the number of kilometers traveled in a year, with or without load.


                                                                                                         23
                    Figure 7: Percentage of Trips with Empty Backhauls




                      ‘% Empty Return’ means % of return trips on which truck remains empty

    (a) As a result of increasing crime and violence in Central America, security costs have
        increased for trucking companies and represent 3-4% of total costs;
    (b) Increased waiting times and significantly high idle times for trucks while en route –
        especially at international borders-- impact transport costs.

VII.2 Deficient Seaport Operations and Infrastructure
37.     Three ports serve the needs of Guatemala’s imports and exports by sea: Puerto Quetzal
on the Pacific, and Puerto Santo Tomás de Castilla and Puerto Barrios on the Atlantic. Together
they move about 18 million tons, including about 1.2 million TEUs. The management structure
of the first two of the three ports that serve the import/export of goods in Guatemala is through
state-owned ports managed and operated by presidentially appointed controllers (interventores)
and with a limited part of operations carried out by the private sector (for instance operating
cranes). This can best be described as the tool port model. The third port – Puerto Barrios - is
managed and operated by the private sector on public land and infrastructure. Broadly speaking,
the physical conditions of the ports are acceptable or good. Nonetheless, the timeliness and
efficiency of service at the two publicly operated ports hinders Guatemala’s international
competitiveness. As shown in Table 8 below, indicators such as dwell time at port are relatively
high at Puerto Quetzal and Santo Tomás.

38.     Although efficiency of port handling, customs and other processing, and efficiency of
maritime service providers are likely the dominant determinants of the economic costs of using
the nation’s ports, port handling charges can also play a role. In this regard, Guatemala has the
highest charges in Central America, as shown in the table below:

           Table 8: Port Handling Charges, Central America and Comparators
                                       Port Handling Charges (US$ per container)
                                           Exports                 Imports
              Guatemala                      240                    260
              Costa Rica                     220                    250
              El Salvador                    100                    100


                                                  24
                  Honduras                               50                                  215
                  Nicaragua                             120                                  120
                  Panama                                 65                                  265
                  Singapore                             150                                  150
                                        Source: Doing Business 2014 (Data from 2013)

39.    More important still is to ensure that maritime shipping is as competitive as possible. A
properly incentivized port operator could interface more effectively with shipping companies and
provide fair and competitive access to port facilities.

40.     One institutional solution for improving incentives for port performance and ensuring
continuous, professional management has been the landlord port authority model, which has
been very successful internationally. Guatemala does not have a national port authority, but
some technical functions normally played by a port authority are in the hands of the two public
ports. However, there is a void of responsibilities when it comes to undertaking some other
functions normally performed by a port authority. For example, there is no body responsible for
developing a national strategic plan for the port sector and to guide its implementation, nor to
apply specific and uniform technical regulations and carry out marketing of the port sector at
large. In the case of the concessioned port, there appears to be no entity at all with any port
authority-related responsibilities. Apparently, a draft law for the creation of a national port
authority has existed for the last 7 years, but has not yet been passed by Congress.

Table 9: Indicators of Quality and Efficiency at Guatemalan Ports
  Port                                            Pto Barrios         Pto Quetzal                               Region (non-
                                                                                             Pto Santo          Transhipment
                                                                                             Tomas de            Ports only)
                                                                                              Castilla            Average
  Max Ship Size (TEU)                            Feeder 2,490         Feeder 2,758         Feeder 2,456         Feeder 2547

  Max depth at Container berth                                  9.5              11                       9.8             11.5

  Max Crane type Available                               None                Mobile                Mobile       Panamax STS***

  Number of container lines calling at port                     6                    8*               17                      8

  *2013 Throughput (000 TEU)                             3190                  323                   496                 282

  *Length of berth available for container                470                  810                   907                 665
  operations (m)
  Average berth utilization (%)                             56**                                      53                  54

  Max crane productivity (moves/hr)                        n/a                   22                   25                  26

  Total yard storage capacity (TEU)                      5,600               12,537                 7,500             10,518

  Storage capacity Index                                  178                  345                   147                 373
  (Capacity/Throughput**10,000)
  Average dwell time of containers on port                      2.1                  7.6                  5                   5
  (days)
  Average number of container vessels serviced                  2                    1.1                  3                   2
  per berth per day
  Average vessel size (TEU)                              1,100                1,793                 1,326              1,605

  *Vessel turnaround time - Total time at port              15                   16                   13                  28
  (h)
  *Average time off the berth i.e anchor (h)                    1.4                  6.5                  1.4                 6

  Average vessel productivity 2011 (TEU/h)                  45                   38                   28                  21.7

  Source: IDB (2013), except:
  *Comisión Portuaria Nacional, 2014




                                                            25
     *2012 Data from AGEXPORT. This lists 19 shipping lines for Puerto Quetzal.
     ***Maximum capacity in the region.



41.     Guatemala’s port efficiency is affected by a lack of global strategic vision and, no less
important, a lack of consistent, effective oversight of the sector. Management and investment in
ports is limited to the narrow view of each individual port, and long-range planning is difficult
under the current institutional arrangements.14 In addition, incentives to improve performance
are relatively weak. Institutional arrangements are essential for granting the authority and
capacity, as well as the incentives to operate more effectively.

42.     One institutional solution adopted in many countries of the world with considerable
success, has been to convert to a landlord port model. That is, to move from the tool or service
port models (as in the case of Guatemala) –where port authorities own the land, basic port
infrastructure, superstructure and equipment and provide port service directly and with limited
private sector involvement– to a landlord port sector model, where the public port authority owns
the port land and basic infrastructure, but where, through well-structured and transparent public-
private partnership arrangements, most port operations are concessioned to the private sector.
The private sector brings its own equipment, know-how and management systems, and employs
its own staff. More than 90% of the world’s major container terminals are now organized this
way.

43.      Access to the port. The two Atlantic ports, both located in the town of Puerto Barrios
and sharing the same access channel, have problems in ensuring access to the quays on-land and
to a lesser degree in the access channel. Long-term solutions seem to be needed to relieve the
traffic congestion caused by trucks waiting in the town to load or unload at the berths. Most of
the cargo passing through the town comes from or goes to Guatemala City and beyond. It is
reported that the heavy container traffic delays local road traffic and presents safety risks.

VII.3 Costly document and goods processing, including delays at borders (ports and inland
border crossings)
44.     Inefficient processing and clearance of goods causes delays that can be costly in terms of
the value of traded goods held up (inventory cost) –including wastage among farm products—
and in terms of the truck fleet being held idle. Although this cost was not a major contributor to
the total logistics costs along the four corridors studied, the cost of wastage/product losses and
the inventory value losses due to uncertainties in delivery times can be important and are not
included in our computation due to a lack of data.
45.        These issues can arise from:
      (a) Poor accountability and lack of incentives to improve cooperation and performance
          among border agencies.
      (b) Cumbersome sanitary and phyto-sanitary review and inspection processes, both at border
          points and at national laboratories, combined with lack of regional alignment of standards
          systems;


14
  In particular, management appointments are linked to the political cycle, resulting in high turnover and inadequate
long-term performance incentives.


                                                                  26
     (c) The problem of contraband, leading to (or used as a justification for) high rates of
         physical controls of consignments (between 60% to 90%); and
     (d) Weak governance of seaports.

46.      As a result, cost-effective solutions such as systematic application of risk management
principles in selecting shipments for inspection, additional processing lanes, secure parking
facilities, coordinated X-ray scanning, longer processing hours, and other measures are not
implemented. Where they have been introduced recently, it is said that Customs are not applying
the ‘green channel’ concept as intended, often holding up trucks no less time than trucks
assigned to the ‘red channel’.

VII.4 Guatemala City urban congestion
47.      Most –if not all– major transport and trade corridors in Guatemala include Guatemala
City as a logistics “node”, whereas the city of 1.1 million inhabitants is already heavily
congested. (The population including suburbs is estimated at 4.1 million.) Infrastructure and
traffic management solutions are needed to allow long-distance trucks en route to the national
ports to pass through or around Guatemala City, avoiding getting trapped in its congested city
streets.

48.      When a haulier seeks an “optimal route or path”15 point, the effort to move the cargo
through Guatemala City is increased by the so-called urban transit effects. An analysis carried
out by the World Bank in 2012 on the occasion of the Trucking Survey in Central America
showed that, in all cases where the optimal path passes through metropolitan areas, the overall
travel time increases by about 12%. This is an effect greater in magnitude than that produced by
topography (terrain slopes), but lower than the waiting times at border crossings.

49.     Freight traffic wishing to cross Guatemala City in the absence of a bypass gets caught in
local traffic jams. According to the optimal path analysis, Guatemala City adds at least 30
minutes to the freight travel time, decreasing the average travel speed from the typical origin to
the destination (often a port) of 86 km/h - in the absence of any other factors of impedance along
the road corridor - to below 76 km/h. This effect has been quantified and included as a factor in
the total avoidable transport cost.

50.      The above effects are conservative and do not take into account (i) the daily freight traffic
restrictions in the city, and (ii) the lost opportunity to travel during night – due to high security
risk. These add to the waiting time and further decrease the average travel speed.

51.    In addition to the maintenance and rural roads issues (above), innovative solutions may
be needed to address the need for a bypass around Guatemala City for trucks on long-distance
runs between the western highlands and Puerto Santo Tomás –and to divert them from worsening
rush-hour traffic jams, while not limiting their access to the City network to only a few hours in
24: a national-scale problem that needs to be integrated with city-based infrastructure planning
and budgeting.
VII.5 Poor road condition, particularly on the secondary and tertiary networks

15
  The optimal route is the one that, among all the possible ways to reach a destination, demands the least possible
effort. The effort can be measured in terms of time and costs.


                                                         27
52.     In addition to border management and infrastructure weaknesses, one of the main
logistics bottlenecks that affect the agro-logistics portion of Guatemala’s corridors is poor rural
access and quality, in particular roads serving farms (the first link in the export supply chain).
Guatemala is currently the largest food exporter in Central America and the second largest
regional exporter of perishable goods after Costa Rica. The supply chain analysis carried-out
under “Agro-Logistics in Central America” (June 2012) shows that the poor quality of rural
roads translates into high costs, particularly for pineapple, tomato and dairy farmers, and cattle
ranchers.

53.     Poor access and quality of rural roads can affect the exporting of perishable agricultural
products in different ways. When the constraint is related to access, producers either face large
losses moving their product to market on foot or using animals, or simply never develop their
production beyond household subsistence levels. For these producers, anticipated logistics
expenses may be prohibitive, and serve as a barrier to entry. Access constraints may keep many
small producers out of the market, and are nearly impossible to capture with a supply chain
analysis. This paper did not attempt to do so. In the second case, producers have access to rural
roads, but the quality is so poor that transporting their goods is too expensive and time-
consuming to be profitable. For example, rough rural roads and no refrigeration lead to product
losses that are 50% greater on the short freight journey (farm to consolidation warehouse –where
they may be loaded into reefer containers) than on the entire journey from the distribution center
to Rotterdam16. These producers may not enter the market, or may sell a much smaller quantity
of their goods, only at the highest point in the harvest season, when they can accumulate enough
volume to make it worthwhile.
                              Figure 8: Diagram of Rural Road Bottlenecks




Source: World Bank, Agro-Logistics in Central America

54.    Maintenance on the rural road network in Guatemala is notoriously inadequate.
Improvement has been thwarted by frequent changes of leadership coinciding with the political
calendar, inadequate independence of roads authorities, a lack of outcome-based incentives for
the roads authorities, and a lack of co-ordination between the Dirección General de Caminos
(DGC), which is responsible for strategic planning, construction, and rehabilitation of the road


16
     “Agro-logistics in Central America – A Supply Chain Approach”, Background Paper (June 2012)


                                                        28
network, and the Unidad Ejecutora de Conservación Vial (COVIAL), which is responsible for
maintenance.

VII.6 Nine Proposed Actions for Reducing Transport and Logistics Costs

55.     The Guatemalan government cannot do everything at once –it lacks both people and
money: the institutional capacity and the fiscal capacity. The beneficiaries of the status quo tend
to resist reforms. That is why priorities can only be set after a public-private dialogue.
Champions for change need to be identified, encouraged and supported; and other international
development agencies need to be informed and a consensus needs to be developed.

56.      This section examines policy clusters for reducing transport and logistic costs,
roughly in declining order of the expected benefit-cost balance –giving a heavier weight to
benefits that can be achieved relatively quickly and easily (‘low-hanging fruit’). An example is
savings that can be made quickly by border control changes that reduce border delays, within
perhaps a year. The second cluster includes efficiency increases that may take longer but can be
largely achieved within the duration of a single 4-year presidency. The transfer of port
operations from the public sector to private operators, conditional on passage of port reform
legislation, is a prominent example. A third category includes institutional strengthening that is
likely to take longer than four years to carry through, notably reform of the agencies managing
road improvement and maintenance.

(i)    Improved Performance by Freight Transport Services (Trucking)
57.     Action No. 1: Open road freight transport services to greater competition. Measures
need to be taken that will allow truck fleets to raise their annual output, expressed as paying ton-
km or loaded distance driven per year, and to respond more flexibly to demand. Policy measures
that open up the domestic trucking market to competition will create incentives for lower mark-
ups as well as quality improvement and cost savings, as well as create the opportunity and
incentives for increased fleet utilization. Liberalization of entry particularly into cabotage could
be extended on a regional basis, as part of a bilateral agreement, for example with El Salvador, or
in a limited manner as has been done in Europe. This action has potential for a high benefit-cost
ratio, as it may bring large benefits at little cost. Other actions recommended below will also
contribute to the same objective.

(ii)   Accelerated Border Controls
58.     International good practice among Customs administrations and other border control
agencies (plant and animal health inspection) in a growing number of countries has brought
about a radical reduction in waiting times at borders for the vast majority of trucks. This is made
possible by greater attention given to the professionalization of the border agents, greater
reliance on electronic processing of border controls, wider adoption of the Authorized Economic
Operator concept and risk management techniques, and greater transparency and accountability.
Delegation of powers from the plant and animal health agencies to Customs offers a further
simplification of border controls.

59.     For trucks waiting to leave Guatemala and enter El Salvador, it has been suggested that
more orderly parking and queuing on the Guatemalan side might ease the flow, as an interim
solution. However, if Salvadorian border controls start to apply risk analysis consistently, under


                                                29
which importers with a good record will be not be subject routinely to physical inspection,
waiting times will be cut substantially, reducing the need for such parking.

60.     These concepts, developed in the EU and well documented in World Bank lending, have
radically reduced waiting times at borders, as befits a customs union, within months, once the
political decisions were made.

61.    Websites that document in real time the length of queues of trucks waiting to pass
through the various border posts contribute to the transparency of their processing.

62.     At the Tecún Umán border crossing between Guatemala and Mexico, it has been
proposed that trains of Mexican Railways bringing imports to Guatemala and other Central
American destinations should be unloaded, not on the Mexican side as at present, but on the
Guatemalan side, in a logistics terminal (or ‘dry port’) under Customs bond. The main border
processing is not on the Mexican side but the clearance by Guatemalan Customs and phyto-
sanitary inspection (Ministry of Agriculture - MAGA) on Guatemalan territory. If adopted, this
change would eliminate the need for Guatemalan trucks to cross into Mexico and re-enter
Guatemala, shortening their turnaround time (starting from and returning to Guatemala City)
from three days to one day. However, this proposal needs a cost-benefit analysis within a
feasibility study of the concept, along with well-designed institutional arrangements.

63.     This change will also require negotiation between the Guatemalan and Mexican
governments. It will benefit both sides in that delivered prices within Guatemala of imports from
Mexico will be lowered, to the extent that Guatemalan trucks raise their productivity and lower
their freight rates; and Mexico stands to gain from the increase in its exports that is likely to
follow.

64.    This proposal has the support of ANADIE as a champion for reform. It is seeking
investors willing to develop and operate the proposed ‘dry port’, possibly linked with new
manufacturing plants in the Retalhuleu-Mazatenango-Escuintla-Puerto Quetzal corridor (see
Annex 6).

65.      Action No.2. Ease major trade corridor bottlenecks at inland border crossings. The
priorities are the Mexico-Guatemala crossing at Tecún Umán and Guatemala-El Salvador
crossing at Pedro Alvarado --both low-hanging fruits in the sense that they will not require big
spending on infrastructure. Most of the time-saving changes require the adoption of streamlined
processing, applying risk management and green channel concepts, and closer cooperation
among border agencies within each country, as well as across the borders. High benefits will
accrue as soon as new procedures are agreed on and implemented, at low financial cost: that is, a
high benefit-cost ratio.

(iii)   Public-private Partnerships and Legislation to Promote Development of Private
        Sector Investment in and Operation of Logistic Parks
66.    ANADIE already is promoting such initiatives and has several proposals that the World
Bank is interested in learning more about with a view to supporting, including a toll road in the
Guatemala City built-up area (see para. 74 below and Annex 6).




                                               30
67.    Other initiatives to mobilize funds for investment in improved transport logistics are the
subject for dialogue and consultation among MCIV, PRONACOM and ANADIE, the World
Bank team and other donors.

(iv)   Port Institutional Reforms
68.    The relatively poor performance of Guatemala’s two public ports could be substantially
improved by reorganization of the ports in accordance with the landlord port model. Their
performance shortcomings make the case for implementing the proposed national port authority
without further delay. It would be responsible for improving and expanding infrastructure in all
national ports, for awarding long-term contracts with private firms to operate the various
terminals, and overseeing their performance (see Annex 4).

69.     An appropriate draft law was prepared by the Comisión Portuaria Nacional in 2007, but
it has been side-lined. The model implies changes in relations and closer collaboration among
terminal operators, shipping lines, and freight forwarders. The role of the public sector is limited
to funding and development of the infrastructure, maintaining navigational aids and ship safety,
and oversight of compliance by the private terminal operators with the terms of their concession
contracts.

70.    The landlord port model is well documented globally. Adoption of this model together
with establishment of a national port authority, are measures offering substantial efficiency
improvements in a relatively short time.

71.     Action No. 3: Reform the institutional framework for the major public seaports on
the landlord model under a National Port Authority. Its task will be to develop national port
policy and strategy and to plan, coordinate and finance infrastructure improvements in the public
ports. The legislation will, in parallel, outsource the management and operation of the main
public port terminals to private operators, on the basis of competitively awarded long-term
concession contracts.

72.    Action No. 4: Within this new legal framework, launch public investment in
infrastructure improvements needed in Puerto Quetzal for Pacific trade and Puerto Santo
Tomás de Castilla for Atlantic/Caribbean trade. In the case of Santo Tomás include
excavation of access channels and water depth at berths to receive larger ships and facilitate
(speed up) handling of present-size ships. The future terminal operators will be expected to
upgrade cargo handling equipment (notably cranes), storage facilities, and better computer
systems to support container handling. Adoption of the landlord port model will shift many
management decisions from low-paid and therefore probably corrupt government employees to
higher-paid terminal managers and operators (and therefore higher-skilled and more business-
oriented, with less reason to be corrupt). Substantial benefits will accrue within a relatively short
term.

73.    Urgently needed improvements in these areas may warrant some continued public
financing in the short run, until the new institutional structure becomes operational.

(v) Urban Logistics in and around Guatemala City




                                                 31
74.     The government can reduce the urban transit effect for long-distance trips that want to
bypass Guatemala City. In the interest of trade, the most compelling need is probably for the
corridor connecting the Western Highlands with the Caribbean port at Santo Tomás de Castilla.
Approaching Guatemala City from the west on Highway CA1, those trucks would be well served
by a relatively short ‘bypass’ around the city’s outer northern suburbs to reach Highway CA9
north of the capital17. Traffic coming from the Escuintla coastal lowlands (on Highway CA9)
could readily link into CA1 to the western end of this bypass via existing roads in the City’s
outer suburbs over a short distance.

75.    At least two options for a complete ring road (‘anillo’) have been defined and are being
evaluated, one about 25 km (average radius) out from the city center with a total length of 170
km, the other 65 km out with a total length of about 400 km. However, their primary objective
seems to be to promote orderly expansion of the City –an initiative developed under the on-going
Guatemala Urban Infrastructure Project supported by the municipal government of Guatemala
City and the World Bank. They have little obvious connection with the trade corridors, much of
whose long-distance traffic needs far less than a complete ring.

76.      Study of the feasibility of a light rail system for passengers, which could use the existing
right of way of the old railway track crossing Guatemala City, is included as a priority for 2015
among the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects of ANADIE18. Alternatively the
Government should consider the development of a Rapid Bus Transit (BRT) system, which
would require a smaller investment and offers other advantages over light rail. Either system
could have an overall positive effect on city congestion and only an indirect effect on freight
travel times.

77.    Action No. 5: Construct a partial bypass of Guatemala City or comparable
solution to avoid traffic jams and restricted hours for trade trucks in transit. One such solution is
ANADIE's proposed toll-road through the city center on the old railway right-of-way. Long-
distance truck traffic already suffers long delays, and trucks from the Escuintla region and El
Salvador, heading for Puerto Santo Tomás, are already numerous, leaving little doubt as to the
demand for a solution. But as to the supply side, the capital cost is bound to be high and
vulnerable to technical surprises, so it may take 4-6 years before it is completed and traffic
begins to benefit. It has been said that traffic from the Altiplano (Northwest) region to Puerto
Santo Tomás is insufficient in quantity to justify the high cost of constructing a partial ring
around the north side of Guatemala City. However, it may be limited in quantity precisely
because of the traffic jams and restrictions imposed on operating hours, which are more
damaging for perishable fruits. This chicken-and-egg problem warrants study.

(vi) Air Transport: Enhancing Air Freight Services
78.     In the last few years freight value traded by air has grown rapidly from 1 to 10 percent of
the value of Guatemala’s traded goods. The air transport sector has done well, having
implemented major reforms in the past five years. There are no policy restrictions on air
liberalization. From a transport logistics point of view, La Aurora airport has enough room to
expand and improve its capacity, should the use of air freight for export of high-value fruits,

17
   One government source has identified such an alignment that would require construction of a new road, through
hilly terrain, of 50-55 km, partly through outer suburbs, partly through lightly forested countryside.
18
   Alianzas Publico Privadas, Presentación Agencia y Portafolio de Proyectos


                                                        32
flowers and other products be intensified in the future. Given Guatemala’s growing production
and export (mainly to the USA and Europe) of high-value perishable produce, the Government
can facilitate infrastructure improvements of La Aurora and stimulate more private investment
and participation in the cargo storage and handling of the airport.

79.    At the same time, in line with the Government’s policies for tourism development,
market studies to assess demand for better services to tourism sites, especially Tikal and Antigua
Guatemala, may be considered (see Annex 7).

80.     Action No. 6: Improve aviation safety through minor investments in runway repairs
and navigational aids: Repave Guatemala City (La Aurora) runway and taxi-way, install or
upgrade air navigational aids at La Aurora and five regional airports (Retalhuleu,
Quetzaltenango, Cobán, Flores and Puerto Barrios) to allow safer operation in bad weather and
(for the first time at the provincial airports) night-time landing. While this will be primarily
justified through increased passenger traffic, capacity for carrying freight in the passenger planes
will also grow.

(vii) Upgrading of High Traffic, Poor Quality Rural Roads for Farm Access
81.      Roads linking areas that are the source of exports (farm produce as well as manufactured
goods) to the first node in the supply chain (facilities for packaging, cooling -where warranted-
and consolidating shipments) warrant improvement, as well as initiatives to build trust and
facilitate the commercial relations between farmers, producers and traders.

82.     Worldwide, reliable roads and bridges in farming areas, especially in highlands, are
essential during harvest seasons, but often in bad condition. Special initiatives may be warranted
to channel adequate budget into this subsector, to set priorities, but also to ensure motivated,
responsible management of funds for their construction and maintenance. Experimentation with
community-based initiatives may be warranted; the World Bank can make available international
good practice. It may also show that packaging and consolidation facilities are inadequate or
warrant bringing closer to the farm gate.

83.      Experience over the past decade under the Bank-supported First and Second Rural and
Main Roads Projects in Guatemala, targeting this very link in the supply chain, has shown the
limited capacity of institutions involved in upgrading rural roads. Such weaknesses were
manifest as to securing financing, managing procurement of civil works contractors, and carrying
out maintenance. Thus it is hard to separate the narrower objective of upgrading rural roads in
areas growing perishable fruits and vegetables, from the broader issue of strengthening the
institutional capacity of road agencies for all of Guatemala.

84.     Action No. 7: Improve tertiary road networks serving areas where perishable fruits
and vegetables are grown for export. The main economic benefit will be the avoidance of
large losses between the farm gate and the nearest trader’s warehouse for packaging,
refrigeration and/or load consolidation.      The main beneficiaries will be mostly low-
income/small-scale farmers, concentrated in the Highlands (north and west of Guatemala City) --
and the exporters to whom they sell their produce. This may require a decision of political will.
For this purpose, is it feasible to think of a large increase in the roads capital budget (i.e.
construction and improvement), or must it depend on reallocation within the present MCIV level


                                                33
of funding? A basis for estimating the financing needed is 500 km of tertiary network at (say)
US$100,000-200,000 per km for upgrading existing alignments with better drainage and some
new or improved bridges.

85.     Farmers may continue growing the same quantities, but losses will be much reduced as
soon as road improvements are complete, over relatively short distances. Or if farmers are
already discouraged from even planting perishables, they may only be persuaded over a few
years to plant more, as they see the more reliable access to the processing plants.

(viii) Strengthening the Institutional Capacity of Road Agencies, with particular attention
     to road maintenance
86.    Road maintenance: part of a broader problem: Among the functions of road
management, maintenance is always the weakest, everywhere. In this respect Guatemala is no
exception. For that reason it ranks high as a contributor to poor trucking performance.
However, solutions are hard to separate from broader institutional weaknesses in the roads
ministry: how to plan and prioritize improvements, mobilize budgets, award contracts and
oversee implementation of works.

87.    Fragmentation of responsibilities: One of the most important challenges is that there
are several institutions in the subsector: the Direccion General de Caminos (DGC), COVIAL,
municipalities and various funds created which have intervened on the road network without
collaborating with the MCIV or DGC. There is a need to consolidate, clarify responsibilities, and
improve collaboration between the DGC and COVIAL in terms of planning and network
maintenance (inventory, transit, planning, research, and prioritization).

88.     The need for reform and modernization: To fulfill its key role, the DGC requires a
series of actions to reform and modernize. Currently it lacks facilities to do basic tasks such as
updating the inventory of the road network, traffic measurements on key routes, measuring road
condition, prioritizing and planning needed annual interventions. DGC’s structure does not
provide a framework for efficient work and would benefit from updating with the creation, in the
medium to long term, of a modern autonomous or semi-autonomous road agency. That would
require training of employees, and be less vulnerable to large-scale changes of personnel when
governments change –that is, greater continuity of management. A reform of its statutes may be
needed to enable it to pay salaries competitive with the private sector. The agency would have
an annual agreement with the Minister of Communications and Infrastructure with certain
performance indicators. This strategy would make management of the road network more
effective.

89.     Improvement of procurement and project implementation: The weaknesses in the
procurement process, mainly in project preparation, the award of contracts, and the use of a bill-
of-quantities system, give contractors strong incentives to increase those quantities. Internal
delays in the DGC to meet some existing standards or requirements deter efficient execution of
contracts. No attempt has been made to develop types of contract systems that give the owner
(DGC) and the contractor incentives to collaborate better, allocating risks to the party that is best
able to handle them. We encourage DGC to explore performance-based contracts, tied to
compliance with certain levels of service standards, rather than inputs. Such Rehabilitation and
Maintenance Contracts (CREMA) have been used in countries such as Argentina and Brazil with
excellent results in terms of network condition at reasonable prices. There are also other types of


                                                 34
contracts for implementing priority projects that could be explored to improve efficiency in the
sector, including public-private partnerships (PPP) in the development and maintenance of the
road network.

90.     Natural disasters: An important factor to consider on the current state of road
infrastructure in Guatemala is the effect of natural disasters: Hurricane Mitch in 1998, Hurricane
Stan in 2005, the Pacaya Volcano eruption and Agatha Storm in 2010. These and other events
have impacted the fragile infrastructure, and have directly affected the mobility of the population
and domestic production. They have also disrupted implementation of planned investments, as
funds had to be reallocated urgently to address the damage.

91.     Action No. 8: Improve road maintenance throughout the country and strengthen the
institutional capacity of road agencies. The latter is probably a precondition for the former, as
maintenance is intimately tied to the broader governance and institutional capacity of the road
agencies. This is a difficult institutional issue that goes far beyond trade flows and logistics. See
Annex 5 for more specific recommended actions.

(ix) Transport Budgeting, Planning and Management Criteria
92.     Tax revenues of only 12-13% of GDP, the Guatemalan norm in recent years, are well
below the international average. The capital (investment) portion is only about one quarter of the
total budget. When spending has to be trimmed, investment budgets generally get cut more
readily than current budgets, from which government salaries are paid.

93.     The current low level of fiscal income presents a dilemma about funding expansion and
upgrading of transport infrastructure in these key corridors. Is it a politically feasible option to
think of further raising tax on gasoline and diesel fuel, or on motor vehicles, part of which would
be dedicated to the maintenance of roads and bridges budget –extending the funding mechanism
already used for funding road maintenance through COVIAL? The World Bank can also offer
international experience on such an option.

(x) Should the Railway be Revived?

94.     In the Bank’s view, international experience suggests that freight traffic likely to prefer
rail over road in the main corridors will remain, for the foreseeable future, below the threshold of
about 3 million tons per year that would justify the heavy up-front investment to re-instate a
freight railway line and operation in the Puerto Quetzal-Guatemala City-Puerto Santo Tomás
corridor. (It is rare for rail to take more than 25-30% of all freight in a corridor of comparable
distance, in the absence of major mineral traffic.) The Bank is willing to offer its experience if
the government seeks its advice on how to explore this issue further (see Annex 8).

95.     Action No. 9: Conduct a study to assess the economic and financial viability of
reviving the railway for freight. Since much of the remaining track and other infrastructure
have deteriorated beyond repair, any reconstruction of the railway will have to be comprehensive
and many bridges will need to be replaced. The cost will therefore be substantial and it is
doubtful that potential traffic could reach the threshold of about 3 million tons per year
commonly seen to be a minimum needed to make construction of a freight line economically and
financially viable.



                                                 35
VIII.     Matrix of Recommended Activities

      96.     The actions recommended above for a National Transport and Logistics Strategy are
      brought together in the following table. The list identifies the agencies expected to take the lead
      in implementing each activity. It shows whether each such activity is seen as short-, medium- or
      long-term, and the categories into which it falls: policy, infrastructure, legislation or regulatory
      changes, public-sector management, or mobilizing public awareness and support. It also gives
      the number of the paragraph of this document that expands on its nature and objective.

      97.     It is hoped that the Guatemalan government will find these actions and related activities
      helpful as it designs and implements a development strategy whose objective is to promote
      international trade and thereby to reduce poverty, integrate its diverse regions more closely, and
      address social goals (especially in the western highlands).
      MATRIX OF RECOMMENDED ACTIVITIES

                                                                            Rep.     Categ-      Initiator/ Tim
Nº   Recommended Activity
                                                                            para.     ory       Lead Agency -ing
  A. REDUCE WAITING TIMES AT BORDER CROSSINGS
 1 Devise and launch program of actions to reduce waiting times at           58     pol, psm,   Congreso,       S,
   borders (including launching of Single Window for border control                 mob         SAT, MAGA       M
   agencies)
 2 Set up website reporting queues at border crossings                       61     mob         Truckers        S
                                                                                                union
 3 Arrange study tours to countries known for efficient border processing     -     psm         Customs         S
 4 Affirm commitment to use of risk management techniques for border         58-    pol         Customs         S
   controls                                                                  59,
                                                                             65
 5 Apply the concept of ‘authorized economic operator’ (AEO) –which          58     psm         Customs,        M
   SAT is already developing-- and ‘green channel’ for accelerated                              Chamber of
   processing of border clearance for vehicles so pre-cleared.                                  Commerce
 6 Delegate powers for SPS border controls to Customs                        58     pol, psm    MAGA, MSP       M
 7 Accelerate negotiations with Customs of El Salvador & Mexico to           62-    pol, psm,   SAT             M
   reach agreement on reciprocal speeding up of border processing on         65     mob
   above principles
 8 Develop program to design, acquire land, and construct parking areas      59     inf         ??              ?
   near borders
         B. IMPLEMENT REFORM OF PORT SECTOR
 9 Review and update proposed legislation for setting up National Port       69     pol, psm,   PRONACOM,       S
   Authority                                                                        mob         MCIV (?)
10 Arrange study tours to countries already operating under the national     70     mob         PRONACOM        S
   port authority/landlord port model                                                           MCIV, traders
                                                                                                associations
11 Secure approval and enactment of port reform bill                         71     pol, leg,   Traders         M
                                                                                    mob         associations
     C. MAINTAIN and IMPROVE EXPORT CORRIDORS
12 Designate a network of export corridor highways to reflect their          81     mob         PRONACOM/       S
   economic priority                                                                            DGC



                                                         36
13 Promote closer consultation among road agencies and local community                  84  mob,           Municipal       M
   leaders about road network priorities, programming of improvements                       pol, inf,      governments
14 Promote experiments in community-based (self-help) road maintenance                 91 mob,             Munic govts,    M
                                                                                            psm,           COVIAL
15 Prepare action plan for strengthening maintenance of entire road                   86,89 mob,           DGC,            M
   network: devise and maintain road condition inventory and regular                        pol, psm,      COVIAL          -L
   traffic counts, review standards, lobby for larger budgets, strengthen                   inf
   maintenance management skills
16 Strengthen institutional capacity of DGC & COVIAL: review salary                   88,93 psm            DGC,            M
   scales, recruit and train managers, devise performance-related                                          COVIAL          -L
   management system and remuneration
17 Devise disaster management program, publicize, enlist support of local               90    pol, inf,    MCIV            M
   governments, secure funding                                                                psm
18 Tighten procurement oversight, review public procurement rules                       89    psm          MCIV            M
19 Devise pilot operation of performance-based road maintenance                         89    psm          DGC/            M
                                                                                                           COVIAL
20 Promote PPP transactions for private participation in road projects                  66    psm          ANADIE          M
21 Revisit proposals for partial bypass of Guatemala City                              74-    inf, psm, DGC, gobierno      M-
                                                                                       77     mob       Ciudad Guate       L
            D. ENHANCE AIR FREIGHT SERVICES
22 Define and develop program to improve safety at La Aurora and 5                     78-    inf          DGAC            M
   national airports: resurface La Aurora runway & taxiway, and improve                80
   navigational aids for landing in poor visibility and night flying
      E. STUDY REVIVAL OF RAILWAY FOR FREIGHT
23 Devise and carry out feasibility study for possible re-introduction of             94,95 pol, psm,      PRONACOM,       S
   freight railway (state-run or private) on all or part of former FEGUA                    mob            ANADIE
   right-of-way

      Abbreviations:
      Categories: pol = policy, inf = infrastructure, leg = legislation, reg = regulatory, psm=public-sector management,
              mob = mobilize public awareness
      Timing: S = short-term (<1 year), M = medium-term (1-4 years), L = long-term (5-10 years)




                                                               37
Annex 1: Suggested Trade-Supporting Investments in Transport and
Logistics

                                                                                          Unit     Estimated
    Category         Trade-Supporting Public Investments              Quantities          Cost       Cost
                                                                                        ($million) ($million)
1   Border          Redesign of border control layout to ease     Tecún Umán                     2          4
    crossings       flow, add parking                             (MEX) & Pedro de
                                                                  Alvarado (SAL)
                                                                  border stations
2   Ports'          New cargo handling equipment, enlarged        Puerto Quetzal &              10        20
    handling        storage areas, improved land access,          Pto Santo Tomás
    capacity        dredging of approach channel
3   Tertiary        Improvement of rural roads & bridges in       500 km,                 roads 0.4      210
    roads           Altiplano fruit- & vegetable-growing          50 small bridges      bridges 0.2
                    areas
4   Guatemala       Either (a) Toll road thru city center using   30 km, 4-lane                    5     150
    City partial    railway RoW, or (b) partial ring-road,        divided
    bypass          either (b1) south or (b2) north of city
5   Road main-      (a) Rehab, periodic & routine                 2,000 km, 5 years           0.04       400
    tenance &       maintenance in pilot areas to test
    disaster mgt    performance-based approach
6                   (b) Planning for emergency response to        10 key depots                    3      30
                    floods & volcanic activity, thru supply of
                    equipment for clearing blocked roads &
                    repairing bridges
7 Other             Expanding trade corridor highways to 4-       c. 200 km, various               2     400
  intercity         lane divided (where traffic warrants)         locations
  capacity
8 Air               Resurfacing runways & installing/             La Aurora & 5                           15
  transport         upgrading air navigational aids and           domestic airports
  safety            lighting
                                                                                         TOTAL         1,229
                                                                                         Per year        246
                   Assumptions:                             Conclusions:
               GDP ($ million)          $50,000        Transport as % of GDP/year           0.5%
               Govt budget ($ mil.)      $5,500         Transport as % of budget            4.5%
                       capital
               11% of- GDP                25%        Transport as % of capital budget       18%
                     - current            75%




                                                         38
Annex 2: Strategic Workshop of June 10, 2014

1.       On June 10, 2014 a strategic workshop was held in Guatemala City, at which a draft of
this paper was disseminated and discussed. It invited leaders in both the import/export business
community and relevant government agencies to contribute their views and recommendations on
priorities, strategic thinking, public awareness, identification of champions for reforms, and
mobilization of support among stakeholders. The workshop was hosted by the National
Competitiveness Program (‘Programa Nacional de Competitividad‘– PRONACOM). The
ministers of finance, economy and transport attended. At the end of the day a delegation of
PRONACOM’s leaders, the above ministers and the World Bank presented its conclusions to the
President of the Republic.

2.      In putting together this document, the World Bank team brought some elements of
novelty on: (i) how to address transport reforms holistically, in the context of logistics corridors,
(ii) identification and quantification of the avoidable logistics (including transport) costs, based
on their weight in the cost components, and (iii) prioritization of reforms and investment in the
sector.

3.     At the workshop PRONACOM presented the Strategy, while the World Bank team
offered international expertise on how to address the logistics bottlenecks through projects
embodying the corridor approach; the landlord port model; freight logistics in Guatemala
(drawing on the Bank’s 2013 paper); and successful performance-based maintenance contracts
(CREMA), etc.

4.     The workshop noted that there was a wealth of older and recent strategies, plans, studies
and other papers that address almost all the challenges in the transport sector in Guatemala and
propose sets of meaningful recommendations. It recognized that these needed to be prioritized
and addressed gradually. One of the strategic objectives of the workshop was to foster an open
debate on what might motivate the implementation of recommended program changes and
reforms, and how to overcome possible obstacles to taking action.




                                                 39
Annex 3: Guatemala Logistics Performance Index (LPI)19

International Scorecard
1.      The international score uses six key dimensions to benchmark countries' performance and
also displays the derived overall LPI index. The scorecard allows comparisons with the world
(with the option to display world's best performer) and with the region or income group (with the
option to display the region’s or income group's best performer) on the six indicators and the
overall LPI index.
2.     The logistics performance (LPI) is the weighted average of the country scores on the six
key dimensions:
           (i) Efficiency of the clearance process (i.e., speed, simplicity and predictability of
           formalities) by border control agencies, including customs;
           (ii) Quality of trade and transport related infrastructure (e.g., ports, railroads, roads,
           information technology);
           (iii) Ease of arranging competitively priced shipments;
           (iv) Competence and quality of logistics services (e.g., transport operators, customs
           brokers);
           (v) Ability to track and trace consignments; and
           (vi) Timeliness of shipments in reaching destination within the scheduled or expected
           delivery time.
3.     The scorecards demonstrate comparative performance—the dimensions show on a scale
(lowest score to highest score) from 1 to 5 relevant to the possible comparison groups—of all
countries (world), region and income groups. On the scale from 1 to 5, Guatemala compares with
Germany (the number 1 country with the highest LPI) as follows:




19
     Source: Connecting to Compete


                                                   40
   Figure A1: Country Score Card – Guatemala 2014




                   Source: World Bank, LPI 214 (Country Score Card: Guatemala)

4.      The figure shows that Guatemala’s weakest indicator relative to Germany – but also
relative to its own LPI indicators – is the quality of trade and transport related infrastructure
(59%). Timeliness of shipments is the best LPI indicator (74%).




                                               41
Annex 4: Reform of Guatemala’s Port Subsector
1.      Three ports serve the needs of Guatemala’s imports and exports by sea, Puerto Quetzal
on the Pacific, and Santo Tomás de Castilla and Puerto Barrios on the Atlantic. Together they
move about 12 million tons, including about 1.3 million TEUs. The management structure of the
first two of the three ports that serve the import/export of goods in Guatemala is through state
owned ports managed and operated by presidentially appointed controllers (interventores) and
with limited part of operations carried out by the private sector (for instance operating cranes).
This can best be described as the tool port model. The third port is managed and operated by the
private sector (but on public land and infrastructure). Interestingly, their concession is not
directly with a public body, but through a rail road concession, which only recently has been
taken back into public hands. Broadly speaking, the physical conditions of the ports are
acceptable or good.
2.      Worldwide, reforms and improvements of management of port sectors have
overwhelmingly been through conversion from the tool or service port models of management of
the sector (which represents the arrangement in Guatemala) – where port authorities own the
land, basic port infrastructure, superstructure and equipment and provide port service directly
and with limited private sector involvement – to a landlord port sector model, where the public
port authority owns the port land and basic infrastructure, but where through well-structured and
transparent PPP arrangements most port operations are concessioned to the private sector. The
private sector brings its own equipment, know-how and systems, and employs its own staff.
3.      The role of the Landlord port authority is as technical regulator, port planner and
marketing, collection of data and statistics, representing the country’s port sector interest
internationally, and to be the public sector entity dealing with the private operator. Often, the
port authorities are national, particularly in countries with only a handful of ports, while in others
they can be regionally or even municipally based.
4.      Guatemala does not have a national port authority, but some technical functions normally
played by a port authority are in the hands of the two public ports. However, there is a void of
responsibilities when it comes to undertaking some other functions normally performed by a port
authority. For example, there is no body responsible for development of a national strategic plan
for the port sector and to guide its implementation, nor to apply specific and uniform technical
regulations and carry out marketing of the port sector at large. And in the case of the
concessioned port, there appears to be no entity at all with any port authority related
responsibilities. It is understood that a bill for the creation of a national port authority has existed
for the last 7 years, but has not yet been passed by Congress.
5.      In comparison with international good practice, three features in the Guatemala port
sector seem to need to be addressed and strengthened:
       (a) Create the appropriate institutional framework. The overall management of the
       sector needs strengthening. There is a lack of global strategic vision and, no less
       important, lack of oversight of the sector. Management of the sector and its investments
       are limited to the narrow view of each individual port. Internationally, the widely
       preferred model is a Landlord port authority, which manages the maritime sector and


                                                  42
       owns the ports, but relies on the private sector for almost all ground operations. Under a
       landlord port authority model most of the time marine services are maintained by the
       authority, although there are successful exceptions.
       (b) Use PPP agreements strategically. Although the private sector plays various roles
       in Guatemala’s port operations, recent international best practice is based on using PPP
       arrangements strategically (mostly through concessions), to raise sector performance
       appreciably. The strategic objectives that countries have pursued through the PPP
       approach vary, but typically they aim to improve operational performance, stimulate
       business growth in the ports, attract transshipment cargo, attract private investment in
       ports, and reduce corruption --or some combination of these factors. In general, the use
       of PPP agreements would help to optimize the economic benefit for Guatemala.
       However, since these concessions translate into long-term commitments, it is essential
       that the concessions are professionally prepared, based on successful international
       experience.
       (c) Access to the port. The three ports have problems in ensuring access to the port,
       particularly the two ports in the city of Puerto Barrios, where long-term solutions seem to
       be needed to relieve the traffic congestion caused by the location of the ports in the town.
       Furthermore, most of the cargo passing through the town comes from or goes to
       Guatemala City and beyond. It is reported that the heavy container traffic delays road
       traffic and presents safety risks.
6.      Puerto Quetzal. The port is managed by the Puerto Quetzal Company, an autonomous
government agency, with operation of some equipment in private hands. It is a multi-purpose
port serving mainly Pacific Ocean trade. In 2012 about 325 thousand TEUs moved through the
port, equivalent to about 5 million tons of cargo.
7.     The port has recently completed negotiation of a leasing agreement with Group TCB
[Barcelona Container Terminal] for developing and operating a new container terminal. This
deal has attracted some criticism in the country that could have been avoided, if it had employed
a more competitive and transparent process.
8.      Puerto Santo Tomás de Castilla. The port is managed by the Santo Tomás de Castilla
National Port Company (EMPORNAC), an autonomous government agency. In 2012 just over
500,000 TEUs moved through this port, carrying about 3.4 million tons. The port has five
mobile cranes and works 24 hours a day. It also has a cruise terminal that is not separate from
the port’s other functions, but it has a building to receive and process the passengers. The quay
is 604 meters long and the option to extend it by a further 300 meters is being explored, to be
dedicated to the carriage of grain. About 35 % of its traffic goes to El Salvador.
9.      A preliminary study shows that there may be two main areas for development that present
a challenge: the width (90 meters) and depth (9.8 meters) of the access channel that is only a few
miles long but has problems of access to the land (the port is surrounded by the city of Puerto
Barrios).
10.    Puerto Barrios Port Terminal. This port is operated by the private sector on the
Atlantic coast of Puerto Barrios. It is operated by Chiquita Brand International and Cobigua



                                               43
under a lease agreement that began in 1990 for a period of 25 years, followed by an extension for
a period until 2040. Although it specializes in the export of bananas and melons, it is a
multipurpose port handling general cargo, grains and liquids. Traffic moving through the port is
a little over 300 thousand TEUs per year by volume and about 2.5 million tons. The harbor has
no cranes and relies entirely on the ships’ cranes for loading and unloading. The port has the
only container scanner in Guatemala. The port uses the same channel as Puerto Santo Tomas de
Castilla and faces similar limitations due to on-land congestion.




                                               44
Annex 5: Strengthening the Institutions Managing Guatemala’s Roads

Strategic and Institutional Framework

1.      The public policy focused on the development of road infrastructure should aim to
provide a safe road infrastructure and ensure good levels of service. The accumulation of
physical capital and implementation of necessary reforms in the subsector would have the effect
of raising the profitability of invested capital and promote socio- economic development and
competitiveness of the country's regional and international levels. In strategic terms, the DGC
has a Road Development Plan for 2008-2017 with a total budget of 24,000 million quetzals.
However, the implementation of this plan depends on the priorities of each government.
Regarding the level of general infrastructure, there Multimodal Infrastructure Works Plan
prepared with the support of PRONACOM in 2007. This plan is at a general level and does not
go much into detail that would be required in terms of strategies, plans and development sub-
sector of road infrastructure.
2.     The Ministry of Communications, Infrastructure and Housing (MCIV) is the governing
body of the transport sector in the country. In terms of responsibility for road heritage, the two
most important institutions under the Ministry are: (i) the General Directorate of Roads (DGC),
responsible for strategic planning, supervision of construction, rehabilitation, and improvement
of the road network; (ii) the executing Road Maintenance Unit (COVIAL), responsible for
administering the fund for road maintenance as well as programming and maintenance
monitoring. The DGC has 14 regional areas that are responsible for important rural roads outside
the administration of the municipalities.

State of the Road Network
3.      The DGC estimates that, of the approximately 16,000 km of road network recorded
(excluding unregistered rural roads), an estimated 40 % of the network is in good condition, 35%
in fair condition and 25% in disrepair. In terms of coverage of the road network, road density
indicators indicate that approximately 0.13km/km2, Guatemala is similar to that of its neighbors
in Central America except Costa Rica (0.74km/km2) position. Using the indicator km/1,000
inhabitants, Guatemala with 1.12 km/1,000 inhabitants has some room to increase their coverage
to the population, since most neighboring countries have a value of 3 km/1,000 inhabitants.

Current Projects
4.     Current efforts are focused on the improvement and expansion of the main road network
(CA-1, CA-2, CA -9, cross north), and paving entrances to municipal. Financial institutions
involved the sector include the World Bank, IADB, BCIE, BNDES (Brazil), and JICA (Japan)
and others. For example, sections of the CA-2 highway (from the border of Mexico to the border
of El Salvador) are being funded with $400 million ($280 million from BNDES and $120
million from BCIE). There is also interest in financing with the cooperation of other countries,
such as Mexico.




                                               45
Initial Impressions of the Main Challenges
Fragmentation of responsibilities
5.       One of the most important challenges in the sub-sector is that there are several
institutions in the sub-sector and there is a fragmentation of responsibilities in the road network
(role of the DGC, COVIAL, municipalities and various funds created to have been involved in
the road network without collaborating with the Ministry or DGC). There is a need to
consolidate, clarify responsibilities, and to improve collaboration between the DGC and
COVIAL in terms of planning and network maintenance (inventory, transit, planning, research,
and prioritization).
Institutions in need of reform and modernization
6.      To fulfill its key role, the DGC requires a series of actions to reform and modernize.
Currently no facilities to do basic activities such updates; inventory of the road network, traffic
measurements on key routes , road condition measurement , prioritization and planning of
interventions required annually. The structure of the DGC does not provide for an efficient work
and would benefit from some updating in terms of creation in the medium to long term, a modern
agency (autonomous or semi-autonomous). That would require training of employees, and
ensuring that there are not many personnel changes depending on the change of government. It
would also benefit from a reform of the law so that payments competitive with private sector
salaries were met. The agency would have an annual agreement with the Minister of
Communications and Infrastructure with certain performance indicators. This strategy would
improve the efficiency of the management of the road network in the country. It would be
prudent activity also further investigate the structure and role of the different institutions (DGC,
COVIAL) and determine which would be the best structure in the country.
Weaknesses in procurement and project implementation
7.      There are weaknesses in the procurement processes, mainly delays in project preparation,
procurement processes and the use of designs based on bills of quantities and prices that
ultimately result in the interests of contractors to increase those amounts. Internal delays in the
same DGC to meet some existing standards or requirements do not lead to an efficient execution
of contracts. No recruitment systems have proven to increase collaboration between client and
contractor and allocation of risks to the party that is in better condition to handle. Search -based
solutions such as contractual compliance with certain levels of service (standards) and no
contracts of inputs could lead to greater efficiency in the sector. Examples of how the CREMA
contracts (Rehabilitation and Maintenance Contracts) have been used in countries such as
Argentina and Brazil with excellent results in terms of network condition and handling prices.
There are also different types of contracts and implementation of priority projects that could be
explored to improve efficiency in the sector, including public -private partnerships (PPP) in the
development and maintenance of the road network.
Natural Disasters
8.      Finally, an important factor to consider especially on the current state of road
infrastructure in Guatemala is the effect of natural disasters - Hurricane Mitch in 1998, Hurricane
Stan in 2005, the Pacaya Volcano eruption and Agatha Storm 2010 and some recent adversity.


                                                46
Previous events have impacted the fragile infrastructure, and have directly affected the mobility
of the population and domestic production. These impacts have also affected investment plans,
as should reallocate funds urgently to recover the damaged with high unplanned infrastructure
investments.




                                               47
Annex 6: Public-Private Partnerships in Transport and Logistics: ANADIE

1.      In 2010 the Guatemalan Government set up the Agencia Nacional de Alianzas para el
Desarrollo de Infraestructura Económica (National Agency for Partnerships to Develop
Economic Infrastructure). Known by its Spanish acronym ANADIE, the agency’s strategic
objective is to develop economic infrastructure and provide services to society that would
strengthen the economy and enhance the quality of life of the population through equity
participation and the business and financial technological capabilities of the private sector.

2.       Specifically, ANADIE was created to:
        Develop and coordinate with the competent authorities, plans, policies and standards for
         partnership-type contracts for the development of economic infrastructure.
        Ensure proper use and performance of such contracts by state institutions that are
         interested in hiring through this type of contract.

3.      In its start-up phase, ANADIE has identified a portfolio of projects that would contribute
to making Guatemala more competitive in its international trade. Their total project value is
estimated at almost $3 billion. This annex summarizes the definition and main parameters of
five of them:
     (a) Intermodal ‘dry port’ at Tecún Umán at the border with Mexico
     (b) Widening Pan-American Highway (Highway CA-2) to four lanes
     (c) Freight railway serving the Pacific coastal region
     (d) Toll highway to facilitate access to Guatemala City’s center
     (e) Containers and tourism at Sto Tomás de Castilla.

(A) Intermodal ‘dry port’ at Tecún Umán at the border with Mexico
Estimated investment: $30 million
Planned call for bids: mid-2014
4.     The project site is an area near Guatemala’s Pacific coast within 2-3 km of the Mexican
border where the Pan-American Highway (CA-2) crosses into Mexico. This is the only crossing
open for goods. In 2013 about 2 million tons of goods crossed between Mexico and Guatemala;
40% of entering goods stayed in Guatemala, 60% were in transit to other Central American
countries. Of bilateral trade between Mexico and Guatemala, imports to Guatemala make up
three-quarters and exports from Guatemala one quarter.
5.     On the Mexican side, some 40 km from the border, is the city of Tapachula (population
about 300,000). It is served by a local railway that connects with the Mexico’s national network,
whose business is freight, including substantial flows to and from the USA—traffic which has
grown substantially since Mexican Railways were privatized in 1995-97.
6.       The link to the Guatemalan border, damaged by a hurricane in 2005, is being restored,


                                                 48
and plans include extending the line across the border into Guatemala at Tecún Umán ending at a
proposed freight logistics terminal (‘dry port’). The terminal would be built and operated by a
private firm.
7.      Since Mexico and Guatemala do not allow each other’s’ trucks to ply within the other’s
territory, this terminal would allow truckloads and containers to be off-loaded from Mexican
trucks and trains and reloaded onto Guatemalan trucks, and vice versa, within a ‘free zone’
controlled by Guatemalan Customs.

(B) Upgrading Guatemala’s part of the Pan-American Highway as a 4-Lane Toll Road
Estimated investment: $90 million
Planned call for bids: late 2014
8.     ANADIE is also exploring a possible project to upgrade the coastal highway (CA-2) from
Tecún Umán via Retalhuleu and the Escuintla area to the Salvadorian border at Pedro de
Alvarado, a total distance of 300 km, of which about 220 km is not yet 4 lanes. In addition to
passenger traffic, it could expect to attract substantial freight traffic. The potential catchment
area includes some of Guatemala’s largest agricultural estates (sugar, palm oil, vegetables) as
well as several manufacturing plants. It would be tolled. Bidding for private-partnership co-
financing would go to the bidder asking for the smallest capital contribution by the Guatemalan
government.

(C) Pacific Freight Railway
Estimated investment: $150-200 million
Planned call for bids: early 2016
9.     ANADIE is also exploring the viability of rebuilding the derelict railway line parallel to
the above highway. Extending the Mexican connection at the same gauge (standard gauge), it
would use the right-of-way of FEGUA, which ceased operations in 2007. It might be limited to
the coastal plain, the Escuintla region being home to manufacturing plants and Puerto Quetzal,
Guatemala’s biggest port. It might attract co-investment by the operator of a proposed natural
gas pipeline within the same right-of-way, to bring natural gas from the PEMEX terminal at
Salina Cruz (on Mexico’s Pacific coast) to Guatemala City, a distance of about 730 km.
10.     This seems worth exploring further, starting with a detailed assessment of the potential
demand for such a dedicated freight line –especially if the parallel highway is to be upgraded at
about the same time. The PPP approach that ANADIE is promoting creates favorable conditions
for a large industrial firm or trading chain to take the main ownership role and thereby bear the
market risk.

(D) Toll Road to Facilitate Access to Downtown Guatemala City
Estimated investment: $200 million
11.    This highway, 30 km in length, would also use the old railway right-of-way --normally
30m wide, though encroached by squatters in some sections. This allows room for 2x2 lanes
highway, which would be tolled. Its main benefit is that, not only would it add 4 lanes with
grade-separated intersections to the total of main arterials serving the city center, it would allow


                                                49
access to it with a minimum of traffic jams, far fewer than on existing arterials, which are all toll-
free and have very few grade-separated intersections. Consideration is also being given to
installing a light-rail passenger line in the center of the right-of-way.

(E) Containers and Tourism Facilities at Puerto Santo Tomás de Castilla
Estimated investment: $250 million




                                                 50
Annex 7: Air Transport’s Contribution to Trade Facilitation

1.     Air transport’s share in Guatemala’s imports and exports is very small in physical terms,
and even in value terms it is well below 1%. But air transport is important for high-value
exports; while the average value per ton of exports by sea is $740 and by land $835, by air it is
$11,000. More than half of the current volume of air freight (imports and exports) is carried on
passenger planes. Dedicated freighter aircraft are limited, mainly to the express carriers (Fedex,
UPS and DHL). For this reason the technical needs as well as the economic and financial
considerations of freight are closely tied to passenger movements.

2.     Over the past 10-15 years air transport throughout Central America has performed well.
In 1997 the TACA group, of which Guatemala’s Aviateca was a member, met the performance
and safety standards that enabled them to achieve code sharing status with American Airlines
and to negotiate open-skies agreements with the USA. This implied opening their air transport
markets to other US operators, which in turn helped expand traffic over the following years.
Guatemalan tourist traffic grew on average 17% per year between 2003 and 2009.

3.     It has also benefited from major institutional reforms. The step-by-step integration of
Aviateca with TACA (El Salvador) and AVIANCA (Colombia), as well as other Central
American airlines, has been successful and has enabled rapid expansion of routes and traffic.
Today in Central America there are effectively no policy restrictions on air liberalization.

4.     In parallel, Guatemala City’s airport, La Aurora, underwent a substantial renewal,
upgrading and expansion during the past decade. In 2013 air freight arriving in La Aurora was
26,000 tons and 32,000 tons were exported. It has cold-storage facilities. It now has enough
capacity to accommodate foreseeable expansion of air freight for export of high-value fruits and
flowers, mainly to the USA and Europe.

5.      It is unlikely that Guatemala has any freight flow that alone would justify substantial
upgrading of the secondary airports. At the same time, in line with the Government’s policies
for tourism development, market studies to assess demand for better services to tourism sites,
especially Tikal and Antigua Guatemala, may be considered.

6.     Nonetheless the airports will benefit from some further infrastructure improvements and
more private investment and participation in cargo storage and handling. The runways and taxi-
ways at both La Aurora and Mundo Maya (serving Tikal) need resurfacing and improved
approach lighting, as well as improved fire-fighting vehicles and equipment.

7.     Several of the secondary airports need improved air navigational aids, to allow safe
operation during poor daytime visibility and at night.

8.     The cost of such a program has been estimated at $15 million.




                                               51
Annex 8: A Possible Railway Link to Mexico and the USA

1.      In the World Bank’s view, international experience suggests that freight traffic likely to
prefer rail over road in the main corridors will remain, for the foreseeable future, below the
threshold of about 3 million tons per year that would justify the heavy up-front investment to re-
instate a freight railway line and operation in the Puerto Quetzal-Guatemala City-Puerto Santo
Tomás corridor. In the absence of major mineral traffic, it is rare for rail to take more than 25-
30% of all freight in a corridor of comparable distance. Traffic through these two ports is now
about 13 million tons per year.

2.      However, the Public-Private Partnership approach (see Annex 6) offers the large
advantage that it puts responsibility for much of the investment required, as well as the demand
risk, onto the private investor/operator who would be the government’s partner.

Mexican experience with privatization of railway freight operations20

3.      Into the early 1990s Mexican state-owned railways had been very unsuccessful and
incurred large deficits. Deregulation of road freight transport in 1989-90 enabled truckers to take
market share from the railways, and made the railways losses even larger. In 1995-6 the
Government ceased all intercity passenger operations and put the network up for bid among
freight operators, who would assume full responsibility for both track and train operations. The
result was that major parts of the network were awarded, under 30-year concessions, to two large
USA-based railway companies (solely freight). Concessions for other lines were awarded to
Mexican companies, again solely for freight. One or two local lines that attracted no bidders
remained in the public sector.

4.      In the 17 years since the new companies started operating, Mexican rail freight traffic has
almost doubled. The share of land freight carried by rail, as opposed to road, has risen from 19%
to 25%. Average tariffs are slightly higher than in the United States and Canada –not surprising,
considering that the US railroads specialize in dense, long-distance flows of coal, other minerals
and bulks, and transport of containers that take advantage of economies of scale, leaving shorter
and less dense flows to road transport.

5.      A bill currently in the Mexican congress would give the government limited powers to
regulate tariffs where necessary. The operators would be required to offer smooth interchanges
between their networks; and new competitors would be allowed to use the existing lines even
though they do not have to invest in their maintenance.

6.     Given the importance likely to be attached to interconnection with the Mexican network,
the Guatemalan government would have to be willing to allow Mexican companies to bid for any
concession as currently being contemplated.


20
     Source: Economist magazine, March 15, 2014


                                                  52
Annex 9: References and Bibliography

                                         FEG
ANADIE (2014): Presentacíon Agencia y Portafolio de Proyectos, marzo 2014

CATRANSCA (2008) “Actualización del Estudio de Costos del Transporte Terrestre por
    Carretera y Tarifas Sugeridas”, Cámara de Transportistas Centroamericanos
    “CATRANSCA”, 2008

Centro de Investigaciones Económicas Nacionales, Guatemala 2011 “Infraestructura en
       Guatemala: Lineaminetos de Política Económica, Social y de Seguridad 2012-2020”

Dirección del Comité Civico “Compromiso Ciudadano” (2011). “Plan Ciud Guatemala 2020+ -
       Ciudad + Ciudadania: Compromiso Ciudadano”. Doing Business, 2014, Understanding
       Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises, World Bank/International Finance
       Corporation (2014)

Economist Intelligence Unit, 2014. Guatemala: Country Report

Hummels, D., V. Lugovskyy, and A. Skiba (2009). “The Trade Reducing Effects of Market
    Power in International Shipping.” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 89

IDB (2013). “Assessment of Port Performance and Port Connectivity Study in Belize, Central
      America and the Dominican Republic”, IDB Technical Note No. IBD-TN-512, 2013.
      Guerrero and Abad, eds.

Nathan Associates (2008) “Estudio de Factibilidad para un Nuevo Terminal de Contenedores en
      Puerto Quetzal, Reporte Final”, Nathan Associates, presentado a Empresa Portuaria
      Quetzal, 2008

OACI (2008) “Plan Maestro del Aeropuerto Internacional La Aurora”

Osborne, T., M. Pachon, and G. Araya (2014). “What Drives the High Price of Road Freight
      Transport in Central America? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6844

PRONACOM (2007) “Plan Multimodal de Obras de Infraestructura” – Dr. Joan Cabezas

PRONACOM (2009) “Diagnóstico de la cadena de valor del sector logístico marítimo y
    propuestas para mejorar la competitividad del comercio exterior de Guatemala”, Eduardo
    Lugo

SIECA (2009) “Estado de Situación de la Integración Económica Centroamericana”

World Bank (2014). Connecting to Compete – The Logistics Performance Index and its
      Indicators


                                             53
World Bank (2012) “Logistics in Central America – The Path to Competitiveness” - Economics
      Unit, LAC, World Bank (2012)

World Bank (2012) “Agro-Logistics in Central America – A Supply Chain Approach
      (Background Paper)” – Economics Unit, World Bank (2012)

World Bank (2012) “Resultados del Customs Assessment Trade (CAT-R), preparado para la
      Administracíon Aduanera de El Salvador”

World Bank (2013) Policy Note on Transport and Logistics in Guatemala. Economics Unit,
      Sustainable Development, LAC

World Bank (2013) “Supply Chain Analyses of Exports and Imports of Agricultural Products:
      Case Studies of Costa Rica, Honduras and Nicaragua”

World Bank (2013) Logistics Cost Study of Transport Corridors in Central and West Africa

“World International Trade Statistics”

“El Sistema Portuario Nacional en apoyo al comercio exterior 2013” – Comisión Portuaria
        Nacional Guatemala




                                             54
Annex 10: Map




                55
