                                                                         93623




                       CASE STUDY
            Garanti Bank SA:
    Combining SME Banking Excellence
      with a Proposition for Women
         Entrepreneurs in Turkey




March 2014

This Case Study was prepared by IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.



                                                                                 1
This report, based on sources IFC considers reliable, does not guarantee accuracy nor purport to
be complete. This information shall not be construed, implicitly or explicitly, as containing any
investment recommendations. Accordingly, IFC is not registered under the U.S. Investment
Advisers Act of 1940.

This information does not constitute an offer of or on behalf of IFC to purchase or sell any of the
enterprises mentioned, nor should it be considered as investment advice. The denominations and
geographical names in this publication are used solely for the convenience of the reader and do
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of IFC, the World Bank, or other
affiliates concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, area, or its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its boundaries or national affiliation.

Any views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the World Bank or the International Finance Corporation.

The report is prepared by Andrew McCartney and Ulugbek Tilyayev of IFC Advisory’s Access
to Finance Team.




                                                                                                  2
                                 Acronyms
ATM –      Automated teller machine
CASA –     Current account/savings account
CSR –      Corporate Social Responsibility
CSR –      Customer Service Representative
EBRD –     European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EU SBA – Small Business Act for Europe
EVP –      Executive Vice-President
GEM –      Global Entrepreneurship Monitor
IFI –      International financial institution
IT –       Information technology
L/G –      Letter of guarantee
MSME –     Micro, small and medium enterprises
NGO –      Non-governmental organization
NPL –      Non-performing loan
OD ACC – Overdraft account
OECD –     Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPIC –     Overseas Private Investment Corporation
POS –      Point-of-sale terminal
RM –       Relationship Manager
RoAA –     Return on average assets
SME -      Small and medium-sized enterprises
TL –       Turkish lira




                                                                    3
                         Table of Contents
1.   INTRODUCTION…….………………………………………………………………….....5
2.   BACKGROUND.…….……………………………………………………………..………6
3.   UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT IN TURKEY………………………………..…….6
         a) A large and underserved SME market…………………………………..………...6
         b) Low female workforce participation in Turkey…...................................................7

4.   SME BANKING PLATFORM MARKET LEADERSHIP…………….………………….8
         a) A tiered segmentation approach using size, structure and product usage.…..……9
         b) “Same Pocket” relationship management model………………………................10
         c) Synergies leveraged across Garanti Group…….……….………………………...11
         d) Customized Product packages for different sectors of SME……….…………….12
         e) Optimized credit model for efficiency………………………………….………...12

5.   FORMATION OF GARANTI PROPOSITION TO WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS….….13
         a) Why did Garanti decide to target Women Entrepreneurs (WE)?............................13
         b) Identifying Women Entrepreneurs in the portfolio…………………………….....14
         c) Segment positioning within Garanti………………………………………..……..14
         d) Garanti’s three pillar proposition for Women Entrepreneurs………..……………15

                      1) Pillar I - Financial Support…………………………………….…………15
                      2) Pillar II – Educating Women Entrepreneurs…………….……………….17
                      3) Pillar III – Encouraging Women Entrepreneurs……................................18

            e) Developing partnerships to support Women Entrepreneurs……………………...19
            f) Garanti Bank as an employer of choice for women…...…………….……………20
            g) Garanti Bank and Corporate Social Responsibility………………..……………...21
            h) Performance of the Women Entrepreneurs Business to date……..…………..…..22

6.   CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FROM IFC…………………….……...23




                                                                                                            4
   1. INTRODUCTION

Garanti Bankasi (Garanti) is a regional pioneer in offering products and services specifically
targeted towards women entrepreneurs as a specific market segment. In 2006, Garanti created a
Women’s Entrepreneur Support Package specifically designed to help Turkey’s women
entrepreneurs to establish and grow their businesses. This was followed up with the creation of
Women Entrepreneur Gatherings, in 2007, which provided additional training and educational
tools and new networking opportunities. And in 2013, Garanti began collaborating with Bogazici
University, a top university in Turkey, to offer an intensive mini-MBA training program for
women entrepreneurs. Garanti also launched Turkey’s first Woman Entrepreneur of the Year
award, an initiative that showcases women who have successfully grown their business,
encouraging more women entrepreneurship in the country.

This case study (the “study”) explores how Garanti leaders decided to focus on women
entrepreneurs. It also documents and analyzes the bank’s efforts to build a profitable and
sustainable “women in business” franchise, through its three-pillar approach, including financial
support, client education, and the encouragement of entrepreneurship. The case study also
provides insights into how Garanti tapped into, and integrated with its highly innovative, market
leading SME Banking franchise to more effectively target women in business. The study
concludes with an objective assessment of the results of the program to date, offering
suggestions from IFC specialists on how Garanti may further scale up its women in business
initiative in the next phase of development.




                                                                                               5
      2. BACKGROUND

Established in 1946, Garanti is Turkey’s second largest private bank, with consolidated assets
exceeding $104 billion.1 Garanti is an integrated financial services group operating across all key
business segments, including corporate, commercial, SME, payment systems, retail, private and
investment banking. It also maintains subsidiaries that cater to pension and life insurance,
leasing, factoring, brokerage, and asset management. The bank has an international footprint,
particularly in Europe, with full subsidiaries based in the Netherlands, Romania, and Russia.

Garanti provides a wide range of financial services to 12 million customers across a distribution
network of 988 domestic branches. The bank has invested heavily in a large network of
alternative channels, including 3,992 ATMs, an award-winning Call Center, and internet, mobile
and social banking platforms, all built on cutting-edge technological infrastructure.

Garanti’s strategy has long focused on small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Turkey, a
segment that drives growth and employment. Today Garanti is a market leader in the SME
segment, with approximately 1.5 million customers. In 2012, Garanti provided the equivalent of
$7.2 billion in lending to SMEs.

In 2006, Garanti became the first bank in the region to offer products and services specifically
targeted towards women entrepreneurs, in line with a new Turkish government policy supporting
women entrepreneurship.

      3. UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT IN TURKEY

           a) A large and underserved SME market

Turkey's economy is heavily reliant on its SME sector to provide growth and jobs, with micro,
small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) accounting for nine out of every 10 SMEs (Figure 1).
Figure 1 also emphasizes MSMEs as the leading job creator and economic value add into the
Turkish economy job. Concentration is also highest in the micro and small enterprise segments.

            Figure 1: Comparing SME Sector in Turkey and EU




              Source: EU SBA Factsheet, 2012 (note: “Value added” is a share of contribution to the country’s GDP)



1
    Data is as of September 30, 2013. Garanti Bank is jointly controlled by Turkish Doğuş Holding Co. and Banco Bilbao Vizcaya
    Argentaria S.A. (BBVA) of Spain under the principle of equal partnership. Having shares publicly traded in Turkey, the UK
    and the USA, Garanti Bank has an actual free float of 49.94%.


                                                                                                                            6
Turkey has adopted a standard definition for SMEs, namely firms with between one and 49
employees are classified as micro and small, and those with 50 to 250 employees are considered
medium-sized. Financially, SMEs must have less than the equivalent of $23 million in annual
sales and the same for total assets (Figure 2). MSME enterprises dominate the Turkish market,
with the segment, according to the 2012 EU SBA Factsheet on Turkey, representing 99 percent
of all businesses, 70 percent of all jobs, and almost 72 percent of business revenue.

                Figure 2: Standard SME Definition adopted across Turkey




                Source: Garanti Bank, 2013




      b) Low female workforce participation in Turkey

Turkey’s female labor force participation has increased in recent years, but still lags. In 2012,
less than 30 percent (29.5 %) of working-age women in Turkey either had jobs or were looking
for work, according to the Turkish Statistics Institute’s Women in Statistics study. This
represents the lowest figure across all OECD countries (Mexico, by comparison, is at 43
percent). Meanwhile, female literacy is above 92 percent, and the share of economically active
women in the population (ages 25-64) is high, at over 58 percent.

The reality is that nearly half (49.8%2) of the women employed in Turkey are unpaid female
family workers. This can be explained by the fact that close to 60 percent of Turkish women live
and are employed in rural areas, where businesses are often run as a male-dominated family
enterprise. A report issued in 2012 by the World Economic Forum3 ranked Turkey 129th out of
130 countries – next to last – in terms of the economic participation of women, and 108th in the
educational attainment category.



2
    Women in Statistics 2012, Turkish Statistical Institute.
3
    First published in 2006, the report examines four critical areas of inequality between men and women in 130 economies around
    the globe (over 93% of the world’s population):
        Economic participation and opportunity – outcomes on salaries, participation levels and access to high-skilled
          employment
        Educational attainment – outcomes on access to basic and higher level education
        Political empowerment – outcomes on representation in decision-making structures
        Health and survival – outcomes on life expectancy and sex ratio
    Thirteen out of the 14 variables used to create the index are from publicly available “hard data” indicators from internation al
    organizations, such as the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Development Programme and the World
    Health Organization.

                                                                                                                                  7
Figure 3: Turkey Credit Gap for formal
SMEs by gender (in $ bln.)
                                                                     According to the IFC Enterprise Finance Gap
                                                                     Database study (2011), over 200,000 formal
                                                                     SMEs in Turkey – 38 percent of the total –
                                                                     are owned and/or run by women. Of these
                                                                     firms, over 54 percent are either un-served or
                                                                     underserved in terms of finance, with an
                                                                     average unmet financing need of $56,207 per
                                                                     firm. The potential credit need of this gap
                                                                     group is estimated at over $11.5 billion,
                                                                     representing a significant opportunity in the
                                                                     Turkish market (Figure 3).
Source: IFC Enterprise Finance Gap Database, 2011



                                              Figure 4: Entrepreneurial Perceptions for Women and Men:
Figure 4 shows how Turkey                     See good opportunity in entrepreneurial activity (in %)
fairs on the opportunity ratio.
The higher the ratios, the more
women in a particular country
are motivated by the desire to
become an entrepreneur, as
opposed to being driven to it
because of few employment
opportunities.

Being employed and having a
social network that includes
other     entrepreneurs    are
stronger predictors of women’s
entrepreneurship          than
educational    attainment   or
household income.
                                                    Source: GEM, 2012 Women and Entrepreneurship Report


Although there are a number of financial institutions in Turkey that provide active non-banking
support to SMEs (a training program to support government directed lending by one of the
largest state-owned financial institutions; a dedicated SME Academy run by one of the private
banks), none of them, until recently, looked at women entrepreneurs as a separate, potentially
profitable segment.




                                                                                                                 8
        4. SME BANKING PLATFORM MARKET LEADERSHIP

As IFC’s research on gender finance demonstrates, a bank looking to excel at doing business
with women entrepreneurs must have a mature and sophisticated SME banking platform on
which to build. Garanti is no exception, with SMEs representing a key part of its strategic focus
for some 15 years. Garanti was one of the earliest adopters of an organizational structure
dedicated to targeting SMEs – from its head office, down to regional offices and into its vast
branch network. With around 1.5 million MSME customers as of the end of 2012, Garanti Bank
is one of the leading private sector banks for smaller businesses in Turkey. The bank continues to
expand its SME customer base, adding almost 120,000 new customers in 2012, despite highly
competitive market conditions.

Garanti’s SME Business – Key Indicators (as of Sept 2013)

            RoAA                                                    2.1%
            Loans to Deposits                                       83.4%
            NPLs                                                    3.28%
            Non-interest income/ Total income                       42.4%

            a) Tiered segmentation approach using size, structure, and product usage

Garanti has developed a tiered segmentation approach toward the SME market (Figure 5),
distinguishing between “mass” (non-borrowing clients4), “small,” and “medium-sized” segments
across three ownership structure categories, namely: corporations, sole traders and
shareholders/individuals who own a business. Importantly, the bank uses its own definition of
SME as opposed to that of the regulators, adopts multiple criteria (including annual sales
turnover, account volume, and the size of credit limits) to establish three distinct tiers within
their SME banking business.

                        Figure 5: Garanti Bank: 3-Tiered Segmentation Approach
                                        MEDIUM
                          Annual Turnover                                  TL 3 - 10 Mln or
                                                                           TL 200 - 600k
                          Banking Volume                                   TL 200k - 2 Mln
                          Credit Limit
                                         SMALL
                          Annual Turnover                                  TL 500k - 3 Mln or
                                                                           TL 30 - 250k
                          Banking Volume                                   TL 0 - 200k
                          Credit Limit
                                             MASS
                          Annual Turnover                                  < TL 500k or
                          Banking Volume
                          Credit Limit                                     < TL 30k
                                                                             TL 0

                        Source: Garanti Bank presentation, 2013 (based on October 2013 criteria)




4
    “Mass” category client typically is a non-borrowing for business purposes. When such a client applies for a business/commercial loan he/she is
    transferred to a “Small” category. Nevertheless, owners of “Mass” category businesses can have consumer loans.

                                                                                                                                                 9
       b) “Same Pocket” relationship management model

Garanti Bank has a 1,600-person team of dedicated relationship managers (RMs) deployed
across 973 branches looking after the small and medium-sized business segments. The mass
segment is served by a separate team of Customer Service Representatives in the branches, and
the bank uses an innovative Same Pocket Model, designed to capture both the business and
personal banking needs of SME clients through a single point of contact (i.e. the RM). This helps
build strong customer loyalty and ensures cross-selling opportunities and more effective risk
management. Internal data analytics also confirm that the Same Pocket Model not only expands
opportunities for profit and helps grow the business, but also helps effectively manage risk. As
Figure 6 below shows, banking volumes and customer retention are by many multiples,
significantly higher under this approach.

                  Figure 6: Garanti Bank: Opportunities of Same Pocket Model




                Source: Garanti Bank presentation, 2013


The crucial factors of the Same Pocket Model are Garanti Bank’s in-depth customer knowledge
and its ability to focus all customer services (personal and business) through a single RM. In
IFC’s experience, this is in contrast to standard international practice; such services are typically
split across two or more different business divisions, such as retail and corporate banking.

At Garanti, RM productivity is high by international standards, with a tiered coverage
model mirroring tiered segmentation (Figure 7).

 Figure 7: Garanti Bank: relationship management coverage model by segment
      Segment                          Role in                         Total Coverage                           Coverage
        Tier                           Branch                        (Customers per FTE)                  (Customers per FTE) –
                                                                                                            Average Performer
  Medium SME             ME Relationship Manager                                242                              50-70
  Small SME              SE Relationship Manager                                450                                 80-150
  Mass                   Customer Service - Branch                              1275                                  500+
 Source: Garanti Bank presentation, 2013 (Average Performer data is from IFC internal analysis of global clients portfolio)


RM productivity is also driven by a range of sales and profitability-focused targets, which differ
by segment tier. Targets include: volume generated, loan sales, customer acquisition, profit per
customer, customer efficiency (a proxy for wallet share) and client interaction requirements,
which are also represented in the metrics. For example, an RM for the small SME segment is


                                                                                                                                  10
supposed to make four sales calls to existing and potential clients every day, while a medium-
segment RM makes three calls.

       c) Synergies leveraged across Garanti Group

The ability to quickly develop and rollout convenient and effective products is at the core of
Garanti’s success with the SME segment. Successful product development is a result of smart,
regular market research, close interaction with SMEs, and feedback from business line staff.

Garanti Bank has a team dedicated to developing products across business lines, which
coordinates its work with product development teams within each business line. New
product development is led by the business line that develops the initial concept. The product
development team is in regular contact with sales teams at the regional and branch levels, getting
valuable input on various aspects of the new product. A central marketing unit within the SME
Head Office is responsible for managing referrals with group subsidiaries like Garanti Payment
Systems, Garanti Mortgages, and others. This approach creates synergy between business lines
and leads to greater efficiency (Figure 8).

       Figure 8: Examples of Cross Business Line & Group Synergies with SME Division
                                              Retail Business Line:
                                                salary payments
                                                CASA accounts
  Commercial Business Line:
    special L/G agreements                                           Corporate Business Line:
    payment management tools                                           cash management models (ex,
    special credit card                      SMEs                       “Direct Debit System”) to
    auto dealer relations                     Demand deposits          finance large corporations and
                                                                         their distributors
    receivables financing                     New clients
    inventory financing                       Volume and profit
    purchases financing                       Loyalty
    Source: Garanti Bank presentation, 2013



Being a part of a diversified financial-industrial group, Garanti Bank enjoys strong synergies
through partnerships and close interaction with the group’s subsidiaries in finance and banking.
The group’s subsidiaries are active in asset management, payments, insurance, factoring, leasing
and mortgage. Further, all subsidiaries are supported by Garanti Technology, a fully functional
IT Center for the group.

Garanti Bank reports that close cooperation with amongst its subsidiaries has helped the bank
significantly increase profits through its SME segment:

       Insurance Products: SMEs represent over 20 percent of the bank’s insurance commissions.
       Commercial Credit Cards: SMEs represent 84 percent of new card sales.
       Salary Payments: 58 percent of salary payments come from SMEs.
       POS – Cash Management: 67 percent of SMEs banked at Garanti have POS terminal
        services.

                                                                                                    11
    d) Customized Product packages for different sectors of SME

The majority of SMEs in Garanti Bank’s portfolio fall into the mass and small segments. For
most firms (over 90 percent), their financing requirements do not justify a more tailored and
customized approach. For this reason, Garanti has adopted a sector-based approach toward SME
products and services.

Based on in-depth market research, the bank has identified specific product and service needs for
each target sector, and developed proposals and a set of complementary liability and fee-based
services. The bank has 17 product support packages for each targeted SME sector, including
manufacturing, agriculture, services, tourism, exporting companies, and importantly, women
entrepreneurs. The sectors were selected based on their potential in terms of profitability and
risk-return (see Figure 9).

                   Figure 9: Examples of product bundles offered by Garanti Bank
                                                SME product bundles
 Segment         Proposition                          Loans                              Services
                 • Improve company's production       •   Women entrepreneur loan        Checking acc, OD ACC, POS, credit
 Women             capacity or improve its service    •   Business premises loan         card, LG's, foreign trade services,
                 • Brand new package for women        •   Auto loan                      SME pension plan, insurance
                                                      •   Cash loan                      factoring
                                                      •   SME project finance loan
                 • Flexible cashflow and FX support   •   Tourism support loan           Checking acc, OD ACC, POS, credit
 Tourism           for agencies, suppliers, cafés,    •   Business premises loan         card, LG's
                   and restaurants                    •   Commercial vehicle loan
                                                      •   Fuel management system
                 • Support for those that want to     •   Machinery loan                 Checking acc, OD ACC, POS, credit
 Manu-             grow and expand abroad             •   Cash loans                     card, LG's, foreign trade services,
 facturing                                            •   Expo participation loan        SME pension plan, export insurance
                                                      •   Certificate acquisition loan
                                                      •   Business premises loan
                                                      •   SME support loan
                 • Investment and production          •   Tractor and harvester loan     Ekin card, agriculture insurance,
 Agriculture       financing on terms that suit the   •   ST production loan             SME pension for farmers
                   harvest period                     •   M and LT support loan
                                                      •   Greenhouse loan
                                                      •   Warehouse receipt loan
                 • Use loans at discounted rates      • Tradesmen support loan           Checking acc, SME insurance, tax
 Tradesmen       • Meet client's financing needs as   • Loan via POS                     collection
                   well as collections and payments   • Commercial vehicle loan

Source: Garanti Bankasi website




     e) Optimized credit model for efficiency

Garanti Bank’s leading position in the SME segment is supported by a well-designed and
highly efficient credit process, which offers three primary capabilities:

        decentralized underwriting and delegated approval authority depending on rating, loan
         amount, collateral, and customer type;
        a sales team as the first line in risk assessment; and
        an application process handled through an automated loan origination system (LOS)
         through which application data is entered, transferred, accumulated, and updated on a
         regular basis.

                                                                                                                               12
The credit process is tiered, and uses traditional financial analysis as well as sophisticated
scoring and rating tools depending on client category and financing needs. Applications from
small- and mass-segment SMEs go through a retail-style credit process, supported by statistical
scoring for mass and a simplified rating for small. Applications from medium-segment SMEs go
through a commercial credit process based around higher loan amounts and/or higher levels of
sophistication in terms of loan product requested (project finance, options, trade finance).
Garanti Bank uses an internally-developed simplified rating tool to underwrite applications from
medium-segment clients.

Garanti’s turnaround times are some of the fastest in the industry, with time-to-yes
decisions for small and mass clients made in as few as three hours, and disbursements in a single
day. For medium-segment clients, time-to-disbursement can be as quick as one day for existing
clients, while new client applications are processed within a week.


5. FORMATION OF GARANTI PROPOSITION TO WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS

      a) Why did Garanti decide to target Women Entrepreneurs (WE)?

Garanti began to focus on women entrepreneurs as a customer segment in 2006. At this point no
other Turkish financial institution was focusing on this area of the market, though international
interest in this sector had increased.

Garanti Bank’s strategic vision was to become the bank of choice for women entrepreneurs by
providing women entrepreneurs “the managerial and consultancy support needed to help them
reach a competitive level in global markets.”

Market research showed that women saw no financial service provider in the Turkish market that
understood their needs and challenges. The research identified a number of key principles the
bank used to develop its Women in Business Proposition. These were as follows:

Expectations from their bank:
    More relationship management needed, including creating a partnership.
    Better understanding of WE’s needs and differentiated solution delivery.
    Banking business processes should be as simple as possible.
    WEs are price sensitive and want low interest rates and service fees.

Approach to financial support:
    Financial solutions should not only support WE’s business cash-flow, but also production
      capacity, product quality, and sustainable business development.

Assessing the opportunities:
    WEs are confident in their own skills and more likely to know other entrepreneurs.
    WEs are more alert to the existence of unexploited opportunities.
    WEs are emotionally connected to their business.
    WEs are more focused on long-term sustainability.


                                                                                              13
         b) Identifying Women Entrepreneurs in the portfolio

Garanti identifies women entrepreneurs based on a combination of ownership and management
criteria. According to the bank, a women entrepreneur is any company or sole proprietor that is
at least 20 percent owned by a woman or group of women, or any business where a woman or
women are effectively running the business at the top management level. WE identification is
made at the opening of an account, at which time the WE is asked for commercial registration
documents providing shareholder specifics. Supplementary checks through the Turkish Trade
Registry Gazette confirm and identify the ownership and management structure, as required.

A key challenge with this definition is that, in Turkey, SME shareholding structures are often ill-
defined. In addition, details related to shareholders and gender are not always captured during the
account opening. Typically if these details are missing it becomes very difficult to track the full
women in business portfolio. Garanti has overcome this challenge via data cleaning, with RMs
responsible for following up with clients to complete client data on file.

Figure 10: Garanti Bank: Customer Base: WE shares in SME Segment*

    # of Women Owned                 34,662            Profit                         12%
    Companies
                                                       Deposit                        10%
    # of Sole-Trader                 105,551
    and Self-Employed                                  Customer Loan                  11%
    TOTAL WEs                        140,213           # of Customers                12.5%

Note: * This analysis is done within the customer group of women-owned companies (>50% shareholding,
sole-traders and self-employed) who benefited from cash loans.


         c) Segment positioning within Garanti

Similar to what IFC has seen globally with leading players such as Westpac in Australia, Garanti
does not manage WEs as a separate segment within the Bank. Instead it incorporates them into
the main SME Banking business as a marketing sector. Although, there is a specific WE Support
Package designed and branded for women (“Black Shoe” brand), women entrepreneurs are
managed like other SMEs. The bank has no RMs dedicated to women, nor are there any specific
targets provided to them or new skills provided for more effective support for women.5 The bank
does not use gender champions or ambassadors within the network, as IFC has seen in other
successful providers. Instead, WE ambassadors are located in regional hub-offices, promoting
and organizing WE events. Subsequent new leads and opportunities developed through such
events are channeled to RMs for follow up.

Organizationally, the WE business is integrated into the SME Banking business line. The WE
initiative has to date been led by the Head of Entrepreneurship Banking for the SME department
and supported by the corporate communications team. This is interesting to IFC, given the


5
    RMs in Garanti Bank branches only have volume-based and number of products targets which do not provide strong incentive to proactively
    push WE segment business.

                                                                                                                                         14
potential scale of the opportunity for the bank in this sector and the typical need for dedicated
resources in marketing and communications support.

     d) Garanti’s three-pillar proposition for Women Entrepreneurs

Garanti’s proposition for WEs initially started with the development of a WE Package that
bundled several products (predominantly credit products) together. This has evolved over time
into a value proposition based around three main pillars to support WEs:
     Pillar I – Financial Support
     Pillar II – Education
     Pillar III – Encouragement

               1) Pillar I - Financial Support

Garanti designed a support package of predominantly credit products to address the basic
financing needs of WEs. The bank does not develop separate products for women, per se, as the
bank believes fundamental financial needs are the same for men and women entrepreneurs. The
only difference in the lending products is based around small pricing concessions (see Figure
11).

Figure 11: Garanti Bank’s WE Product Package
                                    Women Entrepreneur Commercial Loan
                                    SME Project Loan
                                    Overdraft
                                    Foreign trade services
                                    Letter of credit
                                    POS
                                    Pension Program for Women Entrepreneurs
                                    Leasing
                                    Business Credit Card
                                    e-commerce (vPOS)
                                    Insurance (covers critical illness)
                                    Gold secured loans for Wes
                                    Factoring
    Source: Garanti Bank, 2013


Contrary to IFC’s global observations, Garanti has found that women are just as price
sensitive as their male counterparts. This is different to the commonly held assertion that
women are more loyal customers who believe in strong relationship management and are willing
to pay for it. For Garanti, credit is deliberately priced aggressively, as women have been found to
be more sensitive to price, and more likely to “shop around,” at least initially, compared to their
male counterparts. This may be related to a “culture of subsidy” in Turkey, and the perception
that government subsidies are potentially available to support a loan to a woman entrepreneur.
This deviation from global norms might also be due to high levels of female education in Turkey
or the urban-based woman entrepreneur segment the bank tends to acquire. Collateral policies
remain gender-neutral, however, with the same credit policy parameters adopted for male and
female entrepreneurs. Other than price, Garanti makes no other customization at an individual
credit-product level for women.


                                                                                                15
Women and men customers at Garanti differ significantly in terms of product usage patterns.
Women tend to have a strong affinity for savings and insurance products and a risk aversion to
full credit products, though credit remains a powerful hook product for cross-selling (see Figure
12).

The concept of savings is also gaining ground in Turkey, although maturities remain rather short
term, averaging one to one and a half months. This is because SMEs tend to re-invest or utilize
funds for other purposes on a discretionary income basis. The bank, in conjunction with the
Group’s pension company, has developed a pension plan to tap into the observed savings habit of
women, and to encourage longer-term savings. The plan combines a pension plan with
educational insurance in one installment and has proven very popular with WEs.

Women also show a high propensity for buying insurance. The figures indicate that women
are more risk averse and want the security afforded by both life and non-life insurance products.

                                 Figure 12: Garanti Bank:
                Product Usage – Product Penetration of WE Loan Customers

                             Non-Life Insurance            41%

                             Life Insurance                60%

                             Credit Card                   62%

                             Internet                      58%

                             ATM                           88%

                             POS                           23%

                             Overdraft                     17%

                              Source: Garanti Bank, 2013


The bank effectively leverages government-funded guarantees and financial support for
WEs, particularly from the main two support agencies which female entrepreneurs can access:
KOSGEB (Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Development Organization) and KGF (Credit
Guarantee Fund) which provide credit guarantees for SMEs and offer special programs for WEs.

The bank launched a gold loan product in 2013, aiming to capitalize on gold’s appeal to
women. The collecting of gold is a cultural habit in Turkey, and women begin to accumulate
gold jewelry from birth. As such gold can represent a valuable alternative source of collateral for
women. Banks have recently been establishing gold accounts to incentivize customers to
physically store gold outside the home. While this product has not been designed specifically for
WEs, and has only recently been rolled out, it is an example of innovative product design that
considers and takes advantage of cultural and social norms to make it easier for women to access
finance.




                                                                                                16
           2) Pillar II – Educating Women Entrepreneurs

The bank views the education and entrepreneurial encouragement of women as key to its
proposition. The aims in educating women entrepreneurs are three-fold:
    To provide information on essential subjects needed to run a business.
    To encourage female entrepreneurs in exploring and identifying new business
       opportunities through networking.
    To support the development of personal and business management skills needed to
       successfully run a business.

“Women Entrepreneurs need more encouragement to move their business to the next level,
beyond what they have already achieved. Through our support value proposition, we encourage
them to grow their existing business.” – Senior Manager Responsible for Women
Entrepreneurship at Garanti Bank, Istanbul, Turkey

Women Entrepreneur Gatherings provide a sustainable method to provide business education
to WEs across Turkey. Garanti Bank began organizing WE Gatherings in the regions in 2007, in
conjunction with KAGIDER, the Women Entrepreneurs Association of Turkey and a Garanti
partner. Gatherings are typically held in 5 cities each year, with local Garanti branches helping
organize and advertise the events. In general, such events host on average of 150-200
participants, including around 30 percent non-clients. The local press and KAGIDER’s own
network are extensively leveraged to advertise and promote the event in the community.

A typical one-day event is co-branded as Garanti Bank and KAGIDER jointly, with the focus on:
            Marketing
            Financial needs
            Entrepreneurship in a changing environment
            Presentation of local role models (selected from local WEs and most active
              members of KAGIDER)
            How to embrace the digital platform (e-commerce)

Over the past five years, the gatherings have been successfully rolled out in 24 cities, reaching
over 4,500 WEs.

Garanti initially developed a formal training program for WEs jointly with KAGIDER, but this
proved to be very costly and difficult to organize. In September 2012, however, Garanti and
Bogazici University established Turkey’s first WE Executive School to provide a mini-MBA for
female entrepreneurs. Given the time constraints of WEs, the course lasts only about one and a
half months, and takes place in a different city each quarter. The course (syllabus, Figure 13)
requires 100 hours of classroom time, followed by an examination to ensure certification.




                                                                                              17
             Figure 13: Garanti Bank- Boğaziçi University: Mini-MBA Contents
                                            Subject / Module                 Hours
                         Institutional and individual motivation               5
                         A financial perspective on managing a company         10
                         Institutionalization                                  5
                         Positive Thinking                                     5
                         Innovative Management Skills and Entrepreneurship     5
                         Turning Problems into non-Problems                    5
                         Equal Practices / Good Practices in Companies         5
                         Management’s place in the Global Village              5
                         Corporate Management and Human Resources              5
                         Legal Matters in SMEs                                 10
                         Stress Management under Uncertainty                   5
                         Continuity in Customer Relations                      5
                         Success Factors in International Trade                10
                         Problems in Family Businesses                         10
                         Change Management                                     5
                         Visionary Identity in Organizations                   5
                                                 TOTAL                        100
                         Source: Garanti Bank, 2013


As of November 2013, more than 467 businesswomen – about 70 percent of all attendees – have
completed the program and earned certificates from Boğaziçi. To date the training courses have
been conducted in Istanbul, Izmir, Ankara, Antalya, Denizli and Gaziantep, with two more cities
planned before the end of 2013. A list of attendees is passed on to regional RMs, which
represents a strong business development component of the initiative. After two years, Bogazici
plans to perform research to assess the impact of the training on WEs in Turkey.

Women entrepreneurs are offered this training program for free, yet it is proving difficult to find
sufficient numbers in the market willing to give the time and meet strict eligibility criteria. Pro-
active campaigning through RMs in branches supported by strong partnership ties with local
chambers of commerce can help Garanti to overcome this challenge. In IFC’s experience, such
schemes are costly, difficult to scale and hampered by traditional social norms. The program
offered by Garanti today is cost-shared (50 percent) by an IFI as part of $60 million loan for on-
lending to women entrepreneurs. Yet the bank needs to clearly articulate the business case for
offering such education and ensure that the training can remain available on a stand-alone and
sustainable basis. A key challenge with this initiative is how to achieve sufficient scale in a cost-
efficient manner and make a material difference to the market. This is an issue IFC frequently
encounters, one in which technology and alternative channels (e.g. mobile, internet) could assist.
Looking ahead, Garanti plans to introduce training programs involving e-learning and remote
teaching tools in partnership with Bogazici.

           3) Pillar III – Encouraging Women Entrepreneurs

Research performed by Garanti Bank has demonstrated a strong need for women in Turkey to be
encouraged to manage and grow their businesses. Garanti’s creation of a Woman Entrepreneur of
the Year (WEY) award in Turkey is a key part of this encouragement process.



                                                                                                  18
The bank manages the WEY award in conjunction with KAGIDER and the local Ekonomist
magazine. The competition aims to draw public attention to women entrepreneurship, boost WE
numbers in Turkey to match those of developed countries, and celebrate WEs’ contributions to
the Turkish economy.

Within the scope of the competition, success stories of women doing business all over Turkey
are evaluated and presented with the intention of promoting the winners as role models. There
are four specific nomination categories for the competition (Figure 14).

       Figure 14: Woman Entrepreneur of the Year Award: Nomination Categories




        Source: Garanti Bank, Competition Web Site 2013


The evaluation criteria vary based on category, but in general applicants are assessed against
factors such as risk-taking, customer relations management, marketing activities, financial
structure, local economic impact, environmental consciousness, and innovative social solutions.

In 2006, the inaugural competition drew 108 applicants. In 2012, more than 6,000 WEs
competed for this honor, demonstrating the popularity of the competition and Garanti Bank’s
dominance in the WE space. Garanti Bank’s branches assisted by helping source potential
candidates, following up, and preparing shortlisted candidates. RMs in branches are also
incentivized to nominate qualified candidates into the competition by offering a one-on-one
lunch with the SME banking EVP. Some 75 percent of competition applicants are already
Garanti Bank clients.

      e) Developing partnerships to support Women Entrepreneurs

Central to Garanti Bank’s strategy is the concept of the WE ecosystem, in which the bank is at
the center of an extensive network that supports and promotes WE in Turkey (Figure 15).
Garanti Bank has a close affiliation with KAGİDER, jointly organizing the WE Gatherings and



                                                                                            19
the WEY competition. The bank also supports a number of local NGOs across Turkey to ensure
a regional presence.

Garanti Bank collaborates with top universities, such as Boğaziçi and Middle East Technical
University, to develop training and market research. As a bank of choice for WE, the bank has
positioned itself to actively collaborate on policy-making with the Ministry of Family Planning,
KOSGEB, KGF, and TOBB (the Union of Chambers of Commodity Exchanges of Turkey). The
Bank also works closely with IFIs, such as OPIC and EBRD, to provide additional sources of
funding and technical assistance to support WEs.

Over the last three years, Garanti Bank has been an active member of the Global Banking
Alliance for Women (GBA), a consortium of 31 member institutions working in 135 countries to
build innovative, comprehensive programs that provide women entrepreneurs with vital access to
capital, markets, education, and training. Garanti Bank is collaborating with other members on
identifying and sharing global best practices in the delivery of financial services to women. In
September 2013, Garanti Bank hosted the 12th Annual GBA Summit, in Istanbul.

                           Figure 15: Garanti Bank: Women Entrepreneurs Ecosystem




                       Source: Garanti Bank, 2013


           f) Garanti as an employer of choice for women

In IFC’s experience, banks that excel with WEs are themselves employers of choice for women.
Banks strive to achieve this goal by measures such as promoting gender balance at all staffing
levels or creating a women’s association and mentoring programs for women leaders.

Today, nearly 60 percent of Garanti’s 18,000 employees are women. This is one of the highest
proportions IFC has come across. Further, after a 2012 audit6, PricewaterhouseCoopers found no
gender discrimination at the bank.


6
    Under the Technical Assistance of the World Bank, KAGİDER (the Women Entrepreneurs Association of Turkey) has been developing the
    Gender Equality Model for Turkey since 2010. The Turkish version of the model (FEM) focuses on Equal Opportunities in the work place.
    The objective of the Certification under this program is to help the private sector focus on key elements integral to promoting gender equality

                                                                                                                                               20
In terms of gender balance in the workforce, Garanti’s representation of women at various staff
levels are in line with the practices of peers from Western countries: non-managerial positions at
60 percent, managerial positions at 50 percent, and top management at 20 percent.

While the bank does not have a women’s association, it caters to the networking needs of women
employees through a “Kalemetek” internal website. This is a platform through which women
employees are able to share knowledge and information, discuss women-related issues, and meet
virtually meet with successful colleagues.

While the bank does not use gender-specific advocacy scores to assess female employee
satisfaction, a yearly employee satisfaction survey is performed with the findings shared with
management team and directors. These are then used to better address employee needs going
forward.

       g) Garanti Bank and Corporate Social Responsibility

Garanti aims to “achieve long-term sustainable growth” by continuously creating value. The
bank believes that sustainability needs to be a core part of Garanti’s decision-making
mechanisms and business processes. In 2012, Garanti Bank established a full-time Sustainability
Team under the Project and Acquisition Finance Department to enhance the efficiency of its
organizational structure for sustainability. To better inform stakeholders on how it will integrate
environmental and social factors into its business processes, Garanti published its first
comprehensive Sustainability Report in the first quarter of 2013, as part of a Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI).

Women are a key focus for CSR, with the program designed as a role model in combining a CSR
program with business targets. A number of initiatives performed to date have been joint
initiatives between the CSR and the SME Banking teams. This includes, for example, the
Boğaziçi University Mini-MBA program discussed above, which provides free entrepreneurial
education for women. Thus far, the focus has been on women who already have businesses.
Starting in 2014, the program will be expanded to include women who are not formally
employed, with a heavy focus on financial education and IT literacy.

Garanti Bank has sponsored the International Women Entrepreneurship and Leadership Summit
organized by the Women Entrepreneurs Association of Turkey (KAGIDER) since its inception.
The 3rd summit, held November 8-9, 2012, focused on "The Rising Power of Women in the New
World Order," attracting expert speakers and leaders from around the world.

The bank is very active on the Garanti Facebook page, using the tool to reach out to women on a
range of issues. No financial institution in Europe has more Facebook followers (or “likes”) than
Garanti according to the bank sources. The bank’s page dedicated to WEs (Figure 16) addresses
innovations in Turkish Commercial Law, angel investing, financial and economic news, SMEs,
and more.


 in the workplace, marketplace and community. The project also aspires to promote gender equality in employment and earnings, enhance the
 productivity of women in the Turkish labor force and to promote equal opportunity procedures in the business world.



                                                                                                                                     21
        Figure 16: Garanti’s Facebook page dedicated to women entrepreneurs




        h) Performance of the Women Entrepreneur Business to date

As of September 2013, the Bank had 140,213 customers enrolled in the WE Program,
representing just less than 10 percent (9.35 percent) of its SME customer base and $900 million
in outstanding cash loans.

Evidence from the data analytics team at Garanti supports the notion that women make profitable
SME customers. Indeed the difference in profitability is strongly positively correlated with the
size of entrepreneur, so that as a women entrepreneur grows her business the value of that
relationship grows significantly for the Bank also. This can be seen in Figure 17, which shows
that the average profitability differential between average for SME and female entrepreneurs
increases nearly six-fold between a Medium versus a Mass SME.

It is still not totally clear what is the main drivers are for this difference in profitability levels are,
although variations in the level of efficiency or product usage are very telling of the fact that on
average, WEs at Garanti consume more financial services (see below). The efficiency ratio in
Figure 17 below represents an internally defined ratio, based around product usage across the
main ten product groupings in the Bank. Anecdotal evidence collected by Garanti also suggests
that women- entrepreneurs work with two and very rarely three banks, and prefer to have one
“main banker” to hold most of accounts and conduct the majority of the transactions. They also
respond well as customers to a dedicated relationship management model, which allows them to
deal with a single point of contact in the Bank. This appears to result in far higher wallet shares


                                                                                                        22
being maintained for women entrepreneurs, and by definition, higher profitability per
relationship.

Figure 17: Garanti: Customer Efficiency and Profitability: Women vs. Men
            Women       SME                       Women          SME
Efficiency   2.31       2.16        Av. Profit
Ratio                               per SME
 Medium      4.36       3.71        Medium       TL12,467      TL9,213
  Small      3.29       2.93         Small        TL3,706      TL3,165
  Mass       1.91       1.74          Mass        TL1,512      TL1,427
Source: Garanti Bank, October 2013 (results of data analytics exercise)


A commonly held belief globally is that women entrepreneurs are generally a better credit risk
than their male counterparts. This does not seem true for Garanti Bank however. Indeed,
discussions with credit analytics specialists at the bank confirmed that not only were there no
appreciable differences in NPL rates between the two sexes in the portfolio, but that the Bank’s
statistically developed risk assessment tools have been developed with no gender related
parameters. To the extent that Garanti today has a market representative portfolio of male and
female entrepreneurs, we may assume that for the Turkish market at least, gender is not likely to
be a major predictor of default.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FROM IFC

     A. IFC acknowledges Garanti’s pioneering efforts in the introduction and growth of
        the women entrepreneur banking segment within Turkey and the region more
        broadly. While other banks are beginning to roll out similar products, Garanti Bank has
        acted as a role model for its peers and as such can take wider credit for the promotion of
        this segment.

          The bank has made significant progress since 2006 in developing a viable proposition for
          women entrepreneurs in Turkey. The fundamental strength of the bank’s SME
          Banking business platform has allowed the Bank to tap effectively into the women
          entrepreneurs market in Turkey.

     B. Garanti Bank has understood the importance of moving beyond purely an access to
        finance view of the WE market to also provide encouragement and consultancy support
        for women entrepreneurs. This can be seen in the initiatives around women gatherings,
        and the new mini-MBA in conjunction with Boğaziçi University.

          The WE business represents only a small portion of the bank’s business, and a
          significant opportunity remains to achieve further scale in coming years. Greater
          emphasis needs to be placed on profitability and sustainability of WE businesses, through
          improved analytics and CRM to create a level of transparency in terms of performance.
          While there are social objectives related to the support of women entrepreneurs, it must
          remain a profitable business proposition, just like any other.



                                                                                                23
   As the business scales up, there may be a need to embed specific targets for WEs into the
   network and assign dedicated staff to manage the sector. IFC has observed that other
   banks globally have adopted champion and ambassador roles in their networks. This may
   be worth considering, if it has not already been done.

C. The WE market in Turkey, like the SME market more broadly, has significant variability
   both in terms of current and potential value per customer to the bank. Going forward,
   there may be a need to create more scalable advisory platforms to support the educational
   needs of small and mass-segment WEs, perhaps through e-learning and webinars (which
   Garanti Bank is already looking into). Such steps should go hand-in-hand with greater
   tiering of the offering based on current and potential client value. The risk is that the
   current model may not differentiate enough, particularly when it comes to non-
   financial advisory.

D. Garanti Bank clearly has a strong sustainability framework. But as a large buyer of
   products and services in Turkey, the bank has an opportunity to take a more supplier-
   inclusive, diversity-friendly approach to procurement across the Group. This could
   include establishing a supplier diversity program that includes a core component to
   encourage women-owned SMEs as suppliers, contractors, and sub-contractors of goods
   and services along the Group’s value chain. As this case study was bring prepared for
   printing, Garanti Bank became the partner of WE Connect International, opening its
   doors for greater supplier diversity and inclusion.




                                                                                         24
