                                                                                                                     93624

                                                                        Approach Paper
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                      Financial Inclusion – A Foothold on the Ladder Toward Prosperity?
                                    An IEG Evaluation of World Bank Group Support for Financial Inclusion
                                                 for Low-Income Households and Microenterprises
                                                                          June 27, 2014




                                Introduction

                                1.       Financial inclusion—the availability of an array of financial services to the poor – has
                                become a growing focus for policy makers, development partners, and other key stakeholders
                                as a means to promote shared prosperity and reduce poverty. According to World Bank Group
                                data, 2.5 billion adults worldwide are “unbanked” and close to 200 million 200 million formal
                                and informal micro, small and medium enterprises in developing economies lack access to af-
                                fordable financial services and credit. 1 Experience suggests that financial inclusion has the po-
                                tential to accelerate growth and to enhance shared prosperity and conversely that lack of access
                                to finance can lock people into poverty traps and inequality. 2
 Public Disclosure Authorized




                                2.      In late 2013, President Kim of the World Bank Group declared universal financial
                                access by the year 2020 an aspirational goal of the World Bank Group, a goal that is “within
                                reach—thanks to new technologies, transformative business models and ambitious reforms.” 3
                                For the World Bank Group, financial inclusion is now the main means through which financial
                                development contributes to its objectives with regard to poor households and entrepreneurs.
                                With the formation of a new Global Practice Group on Finance and Markets and the general
                                reorientation and reorganization of the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation
                                (IFC) to enhance focus on attaining the twin goals, understanding the lessons of recent World
                                Bank Group experience is critical.

                                3.      The poor in particular are often excluded from financial services, but at the same time
                                depend on such services to smooth their volatile (and low) incomes, protect against vulnera-
                                bilities or just facilitate day-to-day transactions. Because of the circumstances they live in, the
                                poor face specific constraints to accessing financial services which warrant systemic as well as
                                tailor-made interventions. In light of the Bank Group’s central goal of fighting poverty – reaf-
                                firmed by the 2013 strategy’s dual goal of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared pros-
                                perity – this evaluation will focus on poor households and micro and very small enterprises
                                (MVSEs). 4 It will analyze the Bank Group’s interventions in light of the needs and constraints of
                                the poor with regard to accessing financial services.


                                                                                                                         1|P a g e
4.      Financial inclusion is high on the global development agenda. With the creation of the
Consultative Group for Assisting the Poorest (CGAP) in 1995, the world got its first global part-
nership of leading organizations seeking to advance financial inclusion. In 1997 the first Global
Microcredit Summit took place and 2005 was the International year of Microfinance. As of 2008
the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, a network of financial policy makers, has aimed to increase
access to appropriate financial services among the poor. In 2011, the Alliance drafted the Maya
Declaration—a measurable set of commitments by developing country governments to expand
financial inclusion—which has now been signed by more than 80 countries. The Group of
Twenty (G20) created the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) in 2010, an inclusive
platform for all G20 countries, interested non-G20 countries, and relevant stakeholders to carry
forward work on financial inclusion. At their summit in St. Petersburg in September 2013, the
G20 leaders endorsed the G20 Financial Inclusion Indicators developed by the GPFI to track
progress toward financial inclusion. The United Nations designated Queen Maxima of the
Netherlands as Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance for Development.

5.       This evaluation is particularly timely and relevant, as it will review the experience of
the World Bank Group, not only at a time of reorganization and renewed strategic focus, but
also with a view toward informing the post-2015 development agenda. The year 2015 will be
the window from which the development world looks beyond and capitalizes on the momen-
tum generated by the Millennium Development Goals thus far. Even though the Goals did not
address financial inclusion, the post-2015 development agenda will likely show financial inclu-
sion having a larger role in global development efforts to combat extreme poverty and boost
shared prosperity. This evaluation will inform the strategic discussion in and outside of the
World Bank Group about the role of financial inclusion and the ways the Bank Group can sup-
port it.


Background, Context, and Motivation

DEFINING THE CHALLENGE
6.       “Financial inclusion” is about offering access to formal financial services. All those
without a bank account – or access to any other financial services – with a formal financial insti-
tution such as a bank, credit union, cooperative, post office, or microfinance institution are
among the financially excluded. In practice, there is a continuum of inclusion spanning those
who use no financial services, those who use only informal services, those who use some mix of
informal and formal services, and those who use exclusively formal services. Recent concepts of
financial inclusion do not only refer to access, but also the usage and quality of financial ser-
vices. 5 Even those with access to some formal financial service may be partially excluded by
lack of access to others. It is also important to note that some people are voluntarily excluded
from the financial system because they have no rewarding use of it or are content with informal
alternatives.

                                                                                         2|P a g e
7.      The poor are far more often excluded from formal financial services. Of the 2.5 billion
“unbanked” people, most live in developing countries. An estimated 59 percent of adults in
developing countries are unbanked, compared to only 11 percent in developed countries.
Amongst them the poor are hit the hardest: Of those living on $2 per day, fully 77 percent lack a
bank account. Figure 1 visualizes the gaps in financial inclusion in terms of formal account pen-
etration across the globe. Household income, education, and whether one lives in a rural area
are factors that are strongly related to the extent of financial inclusion, even more so in develop-
ing countries (World Bank. 2014). 6


Figure 1. Global Map of the Financially Excluded – Formal Account Penetration




Source: Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper 2013.

8.      The poor face tremendous financial challenges and require access to financial services
to meet essential needs, more so than the non-poor. Poor families are more likely to send one
of their members to far-away cities or even abroad, in the hope they would send home money—
creating the need for money transfers (remittances). The income of the poor is not only lower,
but also more volatile. People who live on average on $2 per day, make $4 one day, $2 the next,
and $0 the day after, as they rely on a range of often unpredictable jobs and often lack salaried
employment; or big earnings even come only once a season with, for instance, harvest income
(Banerjee and Duflo 2008, Murdoch 1995). Portfolio of the Poor (Collins and others 2009) found
that managing day-to-day cash flow was one of the main three drivers of financial activities of
the poor. Transforming irregular income flows into a dependable resource to meet daily needs a
central challenge for the poor. Access to formal financial institutions can bring needed reliability

                                                                                          3|P a g e
to their financial lives: formal financial institutions take savings and pay out loans in the
amount and when they promised, show respect to their clients, and are less likely to demand
bribes, making their services more dependable and reliable. This may be as important as im-
proving the livelihood of the poor – and the first may pave the way for the second. Box 1 de-
scribes an example how even poor families engage in managing their finance, as documented in
Portfolio of the Poor (Collins et al. 2009).




Box 1. Household Profile – Hamid and Khadeja, Dhaka, Bangladesh
The story of Hamid and Khadeja is one of 250 “financial diaries” that Collins and her research team recorded in Bangladesh,
India, and South Africa as part of their effort to study how the world’s poor live on $2 per day. These diaries are a detailed – and
to date the only available comprehensive – record of how the poor manage their finances.
Hamid and Khadeja live in a Dhaka slum with their son. Hamid is a reserve motorized rickshaw driver; Khadeja supplements his
unpredictable income with earnings as a seamstress. On average the couple earns $70 per month or $0.78 per person per day.
Despite their modest income, they have reserves in six different instruments (see table below). During the year the researchers
recorded their finances, the family “pushed” $451 of their income into savings, insurance, and loan payments, and “pulled” out
$514 of savings, or by taking out a loan or guarding money for others. Their total turnover of $965 was, in fact, larger than their
annual income of $840. Although their net worth was negative, the amount was small relative to their total annual income, and
hence they could service their debt.
                     Table. Hamid and Khadeja’s Closing Balance Sheet, November 2000
                           Financial Assets $174.80                    Financial Liabilities $223.34
                     Microfinance savings account $16.80            Microfinance loan account $153.34
                     Savings with a moneyguards $8.00               Private interest-free loan $14.00
                     Home savings $2.00                             Wage advance $10.00
                     Life insurance $76.00                          Savings held for others $20.00
                     Remittances to home village >$30.00            Shopkeeper credit $16.00
                     Loans out $40.00                               Rent arrears $10.00
                     Cash in hand $2.00
                                                       Financial net worth –$48.54
The household’s balance sheet includes a microfinance loan that Khadeja took out to buy gold—a secure, reliable asset that she
could use in the event Hamid could no longer support her. Khadeja felt that she didn’t have the self-discipline to save up for the
gold on her own, so a microfinance loan was the only way for her to acquire a large enough sum to purchase it. The fact that the
loan could be repaid in small weekly payments made it manageable, and being accountable to the microcredit provider meant
she would repay, but the interest rate on the loan meant that she was essentially paying to save. Khadeja would likely have been
better served by access to a commitment savings product that held her accountable to save in the same way her microfinance
loan held her accountable to repay.
Source: Collins and others. 2009.


9.     In summary, financial inclusion has the potential to benefit the poor through an array
of channels. One key benefit is facilitating day-to-day financial transactions through affordable
payment systems which are of particular importance due to many poor households relying on
remittances from family members. A second key benefit can be managing day-to-day resources
through credits and savings to smooth consumption, particularly valuable for poor households
with unpredictable – on often only seasonal – incomes. A third benefit is protecting against vul-

                                                                                                                      4|P a g e
nerabilities such as illnesses or unemployment through primary savings or insurance, but also
credit and remittances. A final key benefit can be making investments to improve the condition
of housing or to enhance the productivity of a very small or micro enterprise through savings or
credit are other common potential benefits of financial inclusion. (Center for Financial Inclusion
2009, Collins et al. 2009, Banerjee and Duflo 2007). While informal services may make up for
part of these benefits, they may be unreliable, risky, costly, and unsafe. (Roodman 2012; Collins
and others 2009).

MIRACLE OR CURSE – WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION INTERVENTIONS

10.     After more than 30 years of being an integral component of the international devel-
opment agenda, the verdict is still out on the effectiveness of inclusive finance interventions.
The evidence on development outcomes is mixed and partially inconclusive to date. A prelimi-
nary review of systematic reviews (SRs) of impact evaluations (IEs) of microfinance have sug-
gest a limited, positive impact of microcredit under some circumstances, a positive but limited
impact of micro savings, and an insufficiency of evidence on payments and insurance to draw
firm conclusions. These preliminary findings, presented in Box 2, will be deepened and updated
as part of the research efforts for this evaluation. See Table 1 for details on SRs reviewed.

11.       Major gaps exist in the literature on the conditions under which microcredit may be
beneficial to the poor and on the impact and conditions for impact of micro savings, micro-
payments and insurance (with the exception of weather-based insurance for smallholders,
which is somewhat better researched). Several of the SRs are critical of the literature for its lack
of rigor (including numerous instances of selection bias) and consistency in methodology, and
at least two find that less rigor is associated with findings of more positive outcomes.

12.     While this evaluation will not be able to remedy gaps based on lack of rigorous im-
pact evaluation, it can provide a structured basis to refine some of the learning from the liter-
ature to understand better, based on World Bank Group experience, what works better under
what circumstances, in what combinations and in what sequences. It is unlikely that the same
recipes should prevail for all sub-groups within the financially excluded (whether by gender,
location, region or activity), nor that the same combination and sequence of activities apply irre-
spective of the state of development of the financial system and related country systems. Thus
the contextual understanding that emerges from the case studies and portfolio review can add a
great deal of qualification and specificity to the learning from the literature.




                                                                                          5|P a g e
Box 2. Preliminary Findings from Systematic Reviews of Impact Evaluations of Financial Inclusion
A preliminary analysis of Systematic Reviews (SRs). Looking at a first group of SRs, approved by the International
Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), yield the following picture: One of the most comprehensive SRs of evidence (Du-
vendack et al.) finds benefits to businesses of microcredit but finds “no good evidence” of the benefits at the level of
household well-being. A second broad SR (Stewart et al, 2012) finds that microcredit and micro savings can reduce
poverty but often do not, and that there are many unanswered questions on the impact of micro-leasing, microcredit
and micro-savings on the poor. An SR of microfinance in Africa (Stewart et al., 2010) finds mixed evidence on micro-
finance -- positive effects on some household outcomes (e.g. nutrition), but negative on others (e.g. education) -- and
no benefit for job creation and the potential to increase poverty. It concludes that micro savings is “overall more effec-
tive” in reducing poverty. An SR on microfinance to farmers (Nankhuni et al) finds positive impacts on production for
some value chains in some contexts, with benefits for consumption and poverty as well. Credit combined with training
and technical advice appeared to work better. An SR on social programs in Latin America and the Caribbean (Cole et
al.) finds a mixed impact of microcredit. An SR of micro-insurance for smallholder farmers finds mixed results and sug-
gests combining supply and demand-side measures. An SR focusing the impact by gender (Yoong et al.) finds “heter-
ogeneous” but “beneficial” effects of microcredit to women “in terms of schooling, expenditures, assets, height-for-age
in children and measures of women’s empowerment” although other studies find no impact on women’s empowerment
or fertility.
Other meta evaluations: An IFC meta-evaluation on job creation (not listed by 3iE) (Paniagua et al., 2012) finds that
improving access to microcredit can lead to enterprise expansion in rural settings and that collective loans appear most
effective. A second, too new to review, systematic review (Maitrot, et al., 2014) finds a significant positive impact of
microfinance on per capita income, but no impact on expenditures. It finds benefits are only short-term and that more
rigorous studies of the impact on the poor suggest negative or insignificant outcomes. Major gaps exist in the literature
on the conditions under which microcredit may be beneficial to the poor and on the impact and conditions for impact of
micro savings, micropayments and insurance (with the exception of weather-based insurance for smallholders).
Banerjee (Banerjee 2013) concluded in his recent literature review that taking the body of work together, there appears
to be some evidence that as long as the credit is reasonably priced, microcredit leads to business creation and/or some
amount of expansion. There is a lack of strong evidence linking this business creation to increases in consumption.
There is also no evidence of substantial gains along other dimensions of welfare, such as education and health. High–
interest loans, by contrast, are used for different purposes, for example, to deal with some urgent need, a broken vehi-
cle, or just no money for food. A study by Roodman finds that the strengths of microcredit appears not to lie with lifting
people out of poverty, but rather in giving the poor more control over their finances. In other words, it is about “helping
poor people manage the uncertainty of being poor” (Roodman 2012). A literature review by Cull et al (2014) find that
microcredit benefits some businesses, but finds no consistent welfare benefits at the household level.
Lack of rigor in previous evaluations: Adding to the complexity, the literature increasingly points out the weaknesses
and flaws of previous research that came up with conclusions that microcredit reduces poverty (Roodman and Mor-
duch 2009). Flaws related to the selection of control groups, self-selection issues or failures to account for displace-
ment effects—that is, the tendency of increased economic activity of one type being associated with reduced economic
activity of another type (Bateman 2010). Several of the SRs are critical of the literature for its lack of rigor (including
numerous instances of selection bias) and consistency in methodology, and at least two find that less rigor is associat-
ed with findings of more positive outcomes.
Sources: Duvendack et al., Stewart et al, 2012, Paniagua et al. 2012, Nankhuni et al , Cole et al., Yoong et al., Banerjee 2013,
Maitrot et al. 2014, Roodman and Morduch 2009, Roodman 2012, Bateman 2010




                                                                                                                      6|P a g e
  Table 1. Systematic Reviews of Financial Inclusion Interventions




                                                                                                                        Payments

                                                                                                                                   Insurance
                                                                                                              Savings
                                                                                                     Credit




                                                                                                                                               Other

                                                                                                                                                       3IE?
Title Authors (Year)                                                            Types of Studies


                                                                               Pipeline designs;
What is the evidence of the impact of microfinance on the well-being of        with/without;
                                                                                                      ≈                                                 Y
poor people? Duvendack M. et al (2011) EPPI* 7                                 before/after;
                                                                               panel; longitudinal
Do Micro-credit, Micro-savings and Micro-leasing Serve as Effective
Financial Inclusion Interventions Enabling Poor People, and Especially         RCTs (3) QEs,
                                                                                                      ≈         ≈                               Ø       Y
Women, to Engage in Meaningful Economic Opportunities in Low- and              IEs (14)
Middle-Income Countries? 8 Stewart R. et al (2012) EPPI*

Do Poor People’s Access to Formal Banking Services Raise their In-
                                                                               RCTs, QE, ECs          +         +         Ø                     Ø       Y
come? Rohini P. et all (2012) EPPI* 9

What is the impact of microfinance on poor people? A systematic review
                                                                               Impact studies         ≈         +                                       Y
of evidence From Sub-Saharan Africa Stewart R. et al (2010) EPPI* 10

Meta-Evaluation Of Private Sector Interventions in Agribusiness: Finding
Out What Worked in Access to Finance and Farmer/Business Training              IEs                    +                                         +       Y
Nankhuni, F. and Paniagua, G. (2013) IFC 11
Do we know what works? A systematic review of impact evaluations of
social programs in Latin America and the Caribbean Bouillon C. P. et al        IEs                    ≈                                         +       Y
(2007) 12
The Effectiveness of Index-based Micro-insurance in Helping Smallhold-         5 RCTs, 1 QE, 7
                                                                                                                                     ≈                  Y
ers Manage Weather-related Risks Cole S. et al (2012) EPPI* 13                 EC
The impact of economic resource transfers to women versus men. A
                                                                               RCTs, QE, QA           +                                         ≈       Y
systematic review. Yoong J. et al (2012) EPPI* 14

Meta-evaluation on job creation effects of private sector interventions.       RCTs, focus
                                                                                                     ++                                         ≈       N
Paniagua G. and Denisova A. (2012) IFC 15                                      groups, IEs

‘What do we know about the impact of microfinance on poverty? A Sys-
                                                                                                      +
tematic Review’ by Mathilde Rose Louise Maitrot and Miguel Niño-               NE, QE, RCT                                                              N
                                                                                                      ≈
Zarazúa (Brief 2014, UNU-WIDER ReCom) unpublished 16

Note: 3iE refers to a systematic review that was reviewed and abstracted by the International Institute for Impact Evaluation.
Legend:
  ++     Strongly Positive        ≈    Mixed Results             -    Mildly Negative
  +      Mildly Positive         Ø     No Impact                --    Strongly Negative
 RCT Randomized                  QE    Quasi-experimental      EC Econometric
 NE      Non-experimental       QA     Qualitative              IE    Impact Evaluation (general




                                                                                                                                     7|P a g e
TODAY’S MULTIDIMENSIONAL CONCEPT OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION
 13.    The modern history of financial inclusion likely started with the foundation of the
 Grameen Bank in Bangladesh in 1983. Reports about what the modern world now calls “fi-
 nancial inclusion” date back to 850 B.C. Homer, the ancient Greek epic poet of the Odyssey and
 Iliad, wrote about eranos, a communal meal in which participants contributed a share of the
 food and in which a person in need could ask each of the others to lend him small sums – a
 precursor of what developed later into rotating savings and credit associations. However, mi-
 crofinance as we know it today is likely to have taken shape only 2800 years later, in the 1980s
 and 1990s. Initially focused on credit, microfinance got traction as a mainstream development
 tool over these years and received increasingly visibility – culminating in the award of the No-
 bel Peace Prize to Mohomed Yunis, founder of the Grameen Bank in 2006.

14.     Today, leading policy makers have settled on a broad-based concept of financial in-
clusion. Financial inclusion encompasses four basic financial services—savings, payment, cred-
it, and insurance. 17 Secondly, these services should be designed in a manner accessible to tradi-
tionally excluded groups, including to the poor, women, minority groups and those difficult to
reach, for example, rural dwellers. Thirdly, provision of these services ought to meet adequate
levels of quality, that is, should be affordable, available, and stable and follow minimum stand-
ards of consumer protection. Fourthly, these services should be provided by a range of institu-
tions to allow for choice and competition. Figure 2 portrays the current concept of financial in-
clusion, which is based on the recently developed vision of the G20 and the Center for Financial
Inclusion (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion 2012; Center for Financial Inclusion, un-
dated).

Figure 2. The Four Dimensions of Financial Inclusion




Source: Based on Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion 2012.


                                                                                        8|P a g e
15.     This evaluation will adopt this broad-based concept – with a special focus on the
poor. The evaluation’s primary attention will be on payment, savings, credits and insurance as
the key building blocks of the financial inclusion agenda. Assessment criteria for outcomes will,
in line with this framework, comprise not only access, but also quality features, and the extent
of choice and competition of the provision of financial services. From a demand perspective, the
evaluation will also try to capture financial literacy and consumer protection, both of which
relate crucially to information failures that may suppress market development. Case studies
may elaborate other factors that restrain demand, including aspects of local investment climates
that limit profitable opportunities for microenterprises. The evaluation’s focus is primarily on
the poor, given the Bank Group’s poverty reduction goals, and in this respect applies a some-
what narrower concept. In the following chapter, Figure 8 sets out the Theory of Change for
Bank Group financial inclusion interventions building precisely on this concept and associated
features.

IMPLEMENTATION FACTORS FOR FINANCIAL INCLUSION

16.     To deliver on the promise of implementing this broad-based financial inclusion
agenda a range of implementation factors matter. To ensure financial inclusion also extends to
more than just credit, to safeguard banking system stability while allowing MFIs and other fi-
nancial service providers to prosper, and to enable access also to the poor, women and monito-
ries, several factors will be considered. IEG will factor these implementation issues in when de-
signing the evaluation scope and questions, as outlined in the following paragraphs.

Tailoring the Inclusive Finance Agenda for the Poor

17.     The focus of inclusive finance started out with credit and only gradually embraced
other services, despite their usefulness for the poor. With a growing realization that poor
households and small firms need broader financial services than just credit, the original focus
on credit provision of the 1970s gradually gave way to a more comprehensive concept that also
included savings, and later payments and insurance. This broader view emerged in the late
1990s and gained traction in the early 2000s. The initial focus on credit has simple reasons.
Credit is easier to regulate than deposit taking (savings); credit also requires discipline; that is,
the client is compelled to repay at regular intervals (while most schemes do not compel savers
to make regular deposits). Investors traditionally also used to prefer credit because it is more
attractive to many investors and donors “than less capital–intense savings and insurance pro-
grams: with the same efforts, an investor looking to disburse large amounts in the least amount
of staff time could place $10 million in a lending projects or $1 million in a savings projects”
(Roodman 2012).

18.   However, saving is also important for the poor, as it allows them to accumulate the
needed sums for investments and for income smoothing and risk mitigation. “Whatever cred-


                                                                                           9|P a g e
it can do, savings can, too. Both can finance investment, pay for consumption, and help families
through health crises. This is why poorest households can and want to save” (Roodman 2012, p.
102). Mobilizing local client savings, however, is not cheap, despite the low interest rate many
financial institutions pay for small-scale savings (if any at all). This is because of high mobiliza-
tion and transaction costs. Bulk loans from national or global financial institutions, including
from the World Bank Group, are likely cheaper. Paradoxically, it may be cheaper to provide
poor people with credit than to take care of their savings. An increased mobilization of savings
in the local currency would also make MFIs more impervious to foreign exchange fluctuations,
reduce their need for hedging, or reduce the foreign exchange risk passed on to customers. Fi-
nally, it may also make financial markets less vulnerable, as international funders tend to with-
draw funding to frontier markets during crises.

19.     Similarly, despite the evident value of insurance to poor people, micro-insurance
schemes are still a niche product. In principle, insurance resembles savings in that they both
entail regular pay-ins and an occasional payout; however, for insurance, the payout occurs only
after a specified event, for example, death, injury, or crop loss. From a regulatory point of view,
insurance raises similar prudential concerns as savings, requiring more attention than credit.
Additional barriers to wider application of insurance to the poor have to do with “adverse se-
lection” (people who know they are likely to need coverage are more likely to buy insurance),
“moral hazard” (insured people may behave in ways that make payouts more likely), complexi-
ty of the insurance product, and misunderstanding (why purchase a policy that might never
return a cent?) (Roodman 2012). Nonetheless, there is an emerging literature on crop (or
“weather” insurance that suggests potential benefits to smallholders.

20.     In this evaluation IEG will look at the role of the World Bank Group in shaping the
financial inclusion agenda to the needs of the poor. An important question is whether the
World Bank Group has done enough to ensure that markets develop for the full range of finan-
cial services – and not only for credit. It will be particularly interesting to determine if other
Bank Group tools (advisory work and AAA, for example) balance the rather heavy emphasis on
the lending and investment side on credit 18 and have thus paved the way for a broader inclu-
sive finance agenda that is more aligned with the needs of the poor. Country case studies
should be especially useful for shedding light on this alignment. Data about outcomes of inclu-
sive finance interventions are scarce and uneven; this evaluation will not only report on the out-
comes of World Bank Group’s interventions, but it will also take stock of the current literature
with a view to informing the Bank Group’s future research agenda.

Regulation, Competition, and Consumer Protection

21.     The growth of microcredit also revealed its weaknesses, pointing at the need to em-
bed financial inclusion in a regulatory framework. When skewed incentives toward credit
provision interact with weak oversight, policy interventions, and local conditions to create a
crisis of overindebtedness, the potential to hurt millions of poor customers is high. A series of

                                                                                         10 | P a g e
repayment crisis demonstrated this: 1999 in Bolivia, 2008, and 2009 in Bosnia, Morocco, Nicara-
gua, Pakistan and 2010 in India (Andhra Pradesh). To deliver on the promise of financial inclu-
sion, intermediaries need to be regulated and supervised properly, consumer abuse be checked
and consumers educated. The environment in which financial services providers operate needs
to be conducive to innovation and to new business models while it preserves the stability of the
system. As financial inclusion extends increasingly also to saving, the challenge is to find the
right balance between ensuring the protection of small savers and keeping the providers ade-
quately capitalized and supervised, which the international standards of the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision try to achieve. (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 2010; CGAP
2011). Similarly, the standards on anti-money laundering and the financing of terrorism have
also adapted requirements for low-risk, small-value accounts (for example, simplified know-
your-customer requirements) and transactions that nevertheless still provide for the prevention
of financial abuse while preserving the integrity of the financial system. Yet many countries lag
in adopting these more inclusive regulatory standards and practices. Also innovative technolo-
gies (including mobile payments) give rise to a plethora of new regulatory issues.

22.     Competition among the service providers is essential to induce efficiency gains and
innovation—potentially also benefitting the consumer through lower cost of services (e.g. lower
interest rates). In competitive markets where several microfinance institutions contest for mar-
ket share, lowering interest rates is one of the ways to attract new customers or retain and deep-
en relationships with existing ones as happened, for example, in Bolivia, where rates dropped
from about 40 percent per annum in 1992 to around 15-20 percent in 2004, or in Uganda, where
rates dropped from about 40 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2004 (CGAP 2013; Roodman 2012).

23.    Furthermore, consumer protection matters, in particular when dealing with those who
tend to be less financially literate and less experienced with formal financial services. Thus it
is important that regulators enforce requirements to disclose relevant information in a manner
that could be understood by poor clients and that allows them to make informed decisions, pre-
vents unfair and deceptive practices and provides for recourse mechanisms.

24.    Bank Group can act as intellectual leader and convener in the policy and regulatory
arena, influencing international standards, to establish good practice. Its capacity to convene
policy makers set an agenda and inform the process through its own research and knowledge
products can influence the advancement of the financial inclusion agenda, both of Bank Group’s
own operations and of others.

25.     IEG will assess the role the World Bank Group has played with regard to fostering
sound and regulatory frameworks and capable institutions for ensuring growth and stability,
competition, and consumer protection. 19 This will cover their work through relationships with
individual countries, through specific projects as well as their, above mentioned, potential lead-
ership role in international fora. IFC investments and MIGA guarantees also play an important
role in this space. Their financial support to bank and nonbank institutions can have demon-

                                                                                       11 | P a g e
strated effects, show-casing that regulatory frameworks are sufficiently robust and potentially
motivating other investors to follow. Similarly, IFC advisory work has the potential to improve
the operations of bank and nonbank institutions and hence to leverage, among other things,
efficiency gains and improve the financial health of these institutions.

The Importance of Financial Literacy

26.     Most individuals are ill equipped to take advantage of new financial opportunities
and responsibilities, underscoring the importance of financial literacy (OECD/INFE 2012;
World Bank 2013). Financial literacy is a combination of awareness and knowledge about finan-
cial services and their risks plus the skills, attitudes, and behaviors necessary to make sound
financial decisions and ultimately achieve individual well-being (OECD/INFE 2012). To reflect
the increased focus on behavior (for example, poor self-control and procrastination) rather than
simple knowledge, the term “financial capability” has come into use to extend the concept be-
yond the narrower idea of “financial literacy.” Financial education is also considered as the first
line of defense and protection for consumers of financial products as a complement to appro-
priate regulatory measures. Hence, financial education is identified as a key pillar of financial
reform and a complement to regulation of market conduct and consumer protection. This
recognition has notably led to the development of a wide range of financial education initiatives
by public authorities, regulators, and various other private and civil stakeholders over the past
years, with widely differing levels of effectiveness. 20

27.    In this evaluation IEG will therefore assess the work of the World Bank Group in
financial literacy, in particular how far it helped advance the financial inclusion agenda. The
World Bank Group addresses financial literacy through a range of activities, including research,
diagnostic reviews, AAA, and advisory work. IFC is active in this area through its Access to
Finance and Sustainable Business Advisory Services.

Technology and Mobile Money
28.    Technology has the potential to become a major leverage point in financial inclusion.
Using the infrastructure of mobile phone providers can bring down transaction costs – one of
the key impediments for financial inclusion. The mobile money scheme M-PESA 21 in Kenya is
often cited regarding the use of mobile phones as a payment instrument, currently serving
around 70 percent of Kenyan adults. But there are also other technologies geared toward lower-
ing transaction costs or overcoming other constraints: card and mobile-based technologies, bi-
ometric identification for the purpose of facilitating borrower identification, and harnessing
“big data” to assess the creditworthiness of potential credit applications are all innovative tech-
nological approaches.

29.     New technologies and their associated business models, however, bring new chal-
lenges. Licensing and regulating these new service providers and their new products and ser-
vices to ensure that prudential regulations and supervisions standards are met, and expanding

                                                                                        12 | P a g e
deposit insurance to cover savings held on mobile money accounts (or other solutions) are
among the most important regulatory challenges these new technologies raise. Furthermore,
determining whether the telecom or banking regulator is in charge becomes a prominent issue.
If a major player, for example, a telecom provider, is allowed to exert market power unchecked
(for example, by drastically limiting access to the telecommunications network and exercising a
quasimonopolistic grip on the market), prices of payment services are unlikely to fall because of
the lack of competition – hence not sharing the consumer surplus with the customers. For the
network operators themselves, network coverage matters, of particular concern in rural areas.
Scaling up to be commercially viable is another important success factor; to increase the cus-
tomer base for mobile money quickly, significant up-front investments are necessary to increase
acceptance of a new payment system.

30.    IEG will analyze to what extent the World Bank Group has leveraged technology and
mobile banking in advancing the inclusive finance agenda. The preliminary analysis of World
Bank Group activities in this areas revealed that the Bank Group has engaged mainly in tele-
communication and mobile financial services (MFS). IFC has worked on a number of mobile
money and MFS-related projects through Investment and Advisory Services. In the evaluation
IEG will report on the World Bank Group’s role, assess in how far it has been a trend-setter with
regard to identifying, experimenting with or replicating innovative technological solutions in
financial inclusions, and will assess the outcomes.

Gender

31.     Despite the current emphasis of microfinance institutions on women, gender differ-
ences are still strong when it comes to financial inclusion. Microfinance institutions have a
tradition of prioritizing women in their lending portfolios because of early experience indicat-
ing that women are more reliable in paying back than men in the late 1980s. Today in Bangla-
desh, for example, among the two largest microcredit providers, about 97 percent of Grameen
borrowers and 92 percent of BRAC borrowers are female. Yet there is a persistent gender gap in
the developing world (World Bank 2014). According to Findex data, 47 percent of women and
55 percent of men worldwide have an account at a formal financial institution. Looking at only
developing countries, the gender gap is wider: among adults living below the $2-a-day poverty
line, women are 28 percent less likely than men to have a formal account. In certain regions
(South Asia and the Middle East and North Africa) and countries (Guatemala, Jordan, and Paki-
stan) the financial access gap is significantly higher for women, up to 40 percent. (Demirgüç-
Kunt, Klapper, and Singer 2013). Evidence from the literature also points to the consequences of
relative financial exclusion, for example, women having to pay higher interest rates, being re-
quired to collateralize a higher share of their loan, and having shorter-term loans (Bardasi and
others 2007). Women are being financially excluded for a wide array of reasons, including une-
qual legal rights (Almodovar-Retaguis, Kushnir, and Meiland, undated)., restrictions to own


                                                                                      13 | P a g e
assets, and prominence of customary law over constitutional law which, especially in rural are-
as, predominantly favors men over women. (Amin, Bin-Humam, and Iqbal, undated). At the
same time, gender targeted inclusion initiatives can have unintended consequences, which will
also be considered.

32.      IEG will assess how well the World Bank Group has put in place a framework for
mainstreaming gender concerns in its financial inclusion agenda. A preliminary analysis con-
ducted for the preparation of this approach paper revealed that the World Bank Group has ad-
dressed gender dimensions of financial inclusion through its lending and technical assistance by
increasing access to finance and markets, partnering with financial institutions in several coun-
tries, reducing gender-based barriers in the business environment, supporting the development
of business skills and financial capability training for women, establishing microfinance pro-
grams, and working on building the business case for creating opportunities for women.

RATIONALE FOR THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S INTERVENTIONS
33.     The rationale for World Bank Group support for financial inclusion lies with its abil-
ity to improve how markets work by overcoming limitations to market demand and supply
so more and better financial services are provided to the poor. The financially excluded cite
specific barriers for not using financial services. For example, banks are too far away or ac-
counts are perceived as too expensive, potential clients lack the necessary documentation or the
trust in the bank, and or religious reasons (Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper 2013). These reasons
can in broad brush be grouped into supply-side factors and demand-side factors (Beck and de la
Torre 2007).

Figure 3. World Bank Group Interventions and Their Effect on Supply and Demand of Financial
Services for the Poor




Source: Adapted from Beck and de la Torre 2007.



                                                                                      14 | P a g e
34.      The Bank Group’s development interventions can be seen as working to shift out the
supply and/or demand curves, visualized in Figure 3, to yield more formal services (to more
households and micro and very small enterprises, or MVSEs), potentially at lower prices. 22
Supply-side interventions would seek to deliver more services at any given price and/or reduce
the price of services for a given quantity, shifting the supply curve out from S1 to S2. For exam-
ple, if IFC investments encourage microfinance institutions (MFIs) to expand their supply of
microcredit, the supply curve would shift out. If the Bank’s policy consultations with a govern-
ment led to reforms that made lending in small amounts cheaper or more secure, supply could
also shift out. Demand side interventions seek to increase the quantity of services demanded at
a given price. Consumer financial education and entrepreneurship assistance programs provide
potential examples where entrepreneurs or households may, given improved knowledge and
opportunity, shift their demand from D1 to D2. Interventions that remove non-financial barriers
to successful microentrepreneurship (for example, an improvement in the electricity supply or
establishment of macroeconomic stability) could also shift the demand curve for financial ser-
vices out, although these factors are generally outside the scope of the evaluation. An added
benefit of these shifts is the increase in consumer surplus (not shown) to poor households and
microentrepreneurs consuming financial services. Interventions that do not shift supply or de-
mand may be seen as lacking a sustainable effect on the market for financial services, and hence
on financial inclusion.

WORLD BANK GROUP’S STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS IN INCLUSIVE FINANCE

35.     The World Bank Group's 2007 Financial Sector Strategy set out the agenda and de-
fined a business model for the Bank Group to engage in financial inclusion. The strategy
noted that the development mission of the World Bank Group "leads it to focus on market and
institutional infrastructure"—the legal basis, market standards and systems (including pay-
ments). Access to finance "for the underserved" is one of two areas of "special attention through
well-defined initiatives." CGAP is identified as leading on microfinance, focusing on "sound
policies and best practices" with a “an increasing emphasis on the regulatory and market devel-
opment implications of the use of modern technologies (e-banking, phone-banking)." The strat-
egy makes note of the need to use more systematic diagnostics, including Financial Sector As-
sessment Programs (FSAPs), Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs), and
IFC microdiagnostics. The plan was to do an FSAP stock taking and to develop a set of "con-
sistent diagnostic-based indicators."

36.      The new 2013 Bank Group strategy lays out a role for WBG in financial inclusion. It
mentions the priority of access to finance in poor and fragile and conflict-affected situations
(FCS) that "new products are likely to emerge to meet the needs of the 2.5 billion people who
still do not have access to formal financial services." It recognizes the central role of the private
sector in job creation as a means of poverty alleviation. Microenterprises are mentioned only in


                                                                                           15 | P a g e
a box on IFC, noting that IFC’s sector focus has shifted to increase the program share of micro,
small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). Financial inclusion is, however, not explicitly men-
tioned.

37.      By contrast, IFC has strongly emphasized financial inclusion (which includes SMEs)
and microfinance. For example, the 2013-15 Roadmap lists as one of five strategic focus areas:
"Developing local financial markets through institution-building, the use of innovative financial
products and mobilization, focusing on micro, small and medium enterprises." Its Develop-
ment Goal 3a is “Increase access to financial services for micro/individual clients." In declaring
IFC's goals, it emphasizes its "strong focus" on MSMEs and its continued "lead in innovation in
microfinance" including in technology, products, and policy "to help financial intermediaries
reach a greater number of people in a more cost-effective way by effectively combining Invest-
ment Services and Advisory Services." In the 2013-15 Roadmap, IFC replaced the IDG of "help-
ing MSMEs increase their revenues" (an outcome or even an impact) and focused on an existing
Development Goal: "increase access to financial services for SMEs clients and micro/individual
clients.” A major reason was its difficulty in measuring MSME revenues. IFC plans to continue
to increase financial inclusion within the context of the World Bank Group approach to respon-
sible financial inclusion through a range of investment, advisory, and Treasury activities, a lead-
ing role in the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, and leveraging its client network
for financial inclusion. IFC’s advice and investment in this area often go hand- in-hand. The
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency’s (MIGA) strategy does not enunciate any goals re-
garding financial inclusion or microfinance, although some of its guarantees have facilitated
institutions that provide microfinance among their services.

38.     World Bank Group President Kim lifted financial inclusion to the highest strategic
relevance in October 2013 by declaring the World Bank Group’s commitment to achieving
universal access to financial services by 2020. The emphasis of this commitment appears to be
on extending access to low-income workers and poor families. It remains to be seen how this
broad goal will be translated into practice, and the relative emphasis placed on access to a range
of financial services versus basic transaction services, such as receiving government payments
electronically.

39.     Operationally, the World Bank Group has deployed a wide range of services and
products, through the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA. In a preliminary portfolio review, IEG
identified 884 inclusive finance projects committed between FY07 and FY13 (an average of 125
projects per year), with a total commitment value of $9 billion (an average of $1.3 billion per
year) (Table 2). 23 IFC accounted for the highest share of financial inclusion projects, both by
number of projects (65 percent) and commitment value (49 percent). World Bank’s lending ac-
counts for 32 percent of total Bank Group projects and 45 percent of commitments. MIGA’s rela-
tive share is only three percent of projects and 6 percent of value (measured by gross exposure)
(Figure 4).

                                                                                        16 | P a g e
Table 2. Coverage of Evaluation – Inclusive Finance Projects Approved/Committed FY07-FY13
                                                                             Financial Inclusion
 Institutions                                      All Projects                                    % Financial Inclusion
                                                                                  Portfolio
 WB Lending (IBRD/IDA)                                 2,275                        145                    6%
 WB AAA (ESW/TA)                                       7,152                        142                    2%
 IFC Investments                                       2,064                        242                    12%
 IFC Advisory Services                                 1,611                        331                    21%
 MIGA Guarantees                                        197                         25                     13%
 Total Number of Projects                             13,299                        885                    7%
 Sources: World Bank and IEG.
 Notes: AAA = analytic and advisory activity; All figures are preliminary.



Figure 4. World Bank Group Portfolio in Inclusive Finance – Relative Weight , FY07-13
                         By Numbers                                          By Commitment/Gross Exposure Value




Sources: World Bank Group and IEG databases.
Notes: Volume/commitment for each of the institutions is as follows: World Bank Lending = share of Financial Inclusion
components to total IBRD+IDA+GRANT amounts identified using sector and thematic flags and their respective percentages;
World Bank AAA = total cumulative cost delivered; IFC Investment = total original commitments; IFC Advisory = total funds
managed by IFC; MIGA = gross exposure. All figures are preliminary.All figures are preliminary.


40.     The Bank Group’s financial inclusion portfolio has been identified in a coordinated
manner, based on clear project coding. Following this preliminary identification process, the list
of financial inclusion projects will be submitted to Bank Group management for comment and
subsequently finalized. IEG's literature review and interviews with key staff knowledgeable on
the World Bank Group’s support to financial inclusion revealed the main issues to be consid-
ered by the evaluation and informed the portfolio selection criteria (Box 3).




                                                                                                               17 | P a g e
Box 3. Identification of World Bank Group Financial Inclusion Portfolio
For World Bank Lending and AAA, using Business Warehouse, IEG downloaded a list of all Bank Lending projects
and analytic and advisory activities (AAA) approved between FY07 and FY13. Given that projects may contain up to
five sectors and up to five thematic codes, IEG developed a preliminary list of Financial Inclusion projects by isolating
those which contained at least one of such relevant sector codes such as: Payments, Settlements, and Remittance
Systems (FG); Microfinance (FH) & MSME-Finance (Expired - FE); Credit Reporting and Secured Transactions (FR);
General Finance (FZ) and thematic codes such as: Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (96); Other
Financial Sector Development (98) & Other Financial and PSD (Expired - 44).
For each of these projects, IEG systematically reviewed relevant appraisal documents to identify the project's intention
to promote financial inclusion. In addition, IEG performed a series of systematic keyword searches utilizing IEG's com-
ponents database which includes component descriptions of all WB Investment Lending approved since the late 1990's
as well as the DPAD database of Prior Actions for DPLs. Keywords used include, but are not limited to, microfinance,
microcredit, access to finance, micro-insurance, mobile, remittance(s), payment(s), deposit(s), and inclusion.
For IFC Investment, using IFC’s Management Information System (MIS) extract, IEG filtered projects by commitment
dates FY07-13 and also screened and filtered out rights issues, B-loans, and so on. IEG isolated projects which were
coded as containing one of the following key sector codes using the variable " Sector Code" (O-AA; O-AC; O-AD; O-
AE; O-AI; O-AK; O-CA; O-CB; O-FA; O-HA; O-IH; O-JA; O-JB; O-JC; O-JD; O-LA; O-LB; O-MA; O-MB; O-MC; O-ME;
O-MG). The vast majority of these codes are clustered in the Financial Markets Industry Group.
In addition, IEG utilized the "SME Type" flag to exclude those projects which were coded as "SE" or "ME" and that
were not flagged as containing a micro component in the recent "Targeted Support to SMEs" evaluation database.
Thus, IEG reviewed projects with a relevant tertiary sector code and where the “SME Type” flag was coded as either
“MI” for micro or “N/A” for not applicable. For each of the identified projects, IEG systematically reviewed the Board
Report (as well as other project documents) to identify language describing the intention to promote financial inclusion.
For IFC Advisory Services, using IFC's Advisory Services Operations Portal (ASOP) project listing and project prod-
uct listing, IEG filtered projects with approval fiscal years between FY07-FY13. Given that projects may contain one or
more products, IEG developed a preliminary list of Financial Inclusion projects by isolating those which contained at
least one of such relevant products (A2F-Other; Agribusiness Finance; Business Regulation; Collateral Regis-
tries/Secured Transactions; Credit Bureaus; Discontinued Product- Other Payment Systems and Remittances; Farmer
and SME Training; GEM Access to Finance; Housing Finance; Insurance; Leasing; Microfinance; Retail Payments and
Mobile Banking; SBA-Other; SME Banking; Sustainable and Inclusive Investing; Trade Finance).
IEG also performed a series of systematic keyword searches utilizing ASOP memo listing fields such as PDO, project
description, and strategic relevance. In addition, IEG included projects that were identified as containing a micro com-
ponent in the recent "Targeted Support to SMEs" evaluation database. Keywords used include: microfinance, micro-
credit, access to finance, micro-insurance, mobile, remittance(s), payment(s), deposit(s), inclusion, etc.
For MIGA, using MIGA's operations portal, IEG retrieved a list of all projects for the period FY07-FY13. Although pro-
jects maybe composed of one or more contracts of guarantee that may be issued over time, IEG defines projects as
the collection of contracts of guarantee under one project identification, catalogued by the original fiscal year of issu-
ance. Thus, projects with multiple guarantees count as one project in the database, and project amounts reflect the
sum of all guaranteed amounts for each project. For the purposes of this evaluation, this includes projects that received
MIGA support for the first time between FY07 and FY13 or projects that received MIGA support for the first time during
the evaluation’s FY07-13 scope (this includes those projects that had received MIGA support in the years prior to the
evaluation’s scope). To determine which projects would be relevant to the evaluation, IEG began by reviewing each
project’s description via the Project Brief, available on MIGA’s website and identified projects with language within
these project briefs that describes the project's intention to promote financial inclusion.
Source: IEG.



                                                                                                          18 | P a g e
41.     Throughout the evaluation period, financial inclusion projects, as defined here, 24
accounted for approximately 3 percent of total World Bank Group commitments (Figure 5).
Again, for IFC, financial inclusion commitments represented the largest share of its portfolio
with 7 percent of IFC total investment commitments, for MIGA 4 percent of total gross exposure
value issued, and for the World Bank 2 percent of its total lending commitments. MIGA’s finan-
cial inclusion gross exposure, however, is driven largely by two master contracts with the Ger-
man-based ProCredit Holding Group, through 19 guarantees in 16 projects, for a total of $287
million. Excluding these master contracts, MIGA’s financial inclusion gross exposure would
represent just 2 percent of the institution’s total gross exposure for the period. 25

42.     World Bank commitments to financial inclusion exhibited a marked increase during
FY09 and FY10, likely in response to the global economic crisis. However, despite the fact that
World Bank lending commitments for financial inclusion were largest in absolute terms in 2010,
their relative share in its portfolio was the lowest, with almost 2 percent of total commitments.
By contrast, IFC’s investment portfolio in inclusive finance contracted in the aftermath of the
crisis by 55 percent, from $719 million in 2008 to $321 million in 2010; this potentially reflects
the limited opportunities for profitable private financial sector investment during this period.
Beginning in 2011, IFC commitments nearly doubled in 2011 and grew by an additional fifty
percent in 2012 as international financial markets stabilized, although the rest of the financial
inclusion and overall portfolios decreased in terms of commitments.


Figure 5. World Bank Group Portfolio Supporting Inclusive Finance, Trend FY07-13




                                                                                      …

Sources: World Bank Group and IEG databases.
Note: All figures are preliminary.




                                                                                       19 | P a g e
43.     Most World Bank Group activities are linked to the provision of credit (Figure 6). This
focus is even more pronounced when accounting for rural and housing finance, which typically
are linked to the provision of credit as well. Other important areas emerge, led by payments,
savings, and insurance. Financial inclusion historically emphasized credit. Only during the last
5-10 years did the concept broaden to include other services, that is, payments, savings, and
insurance. The trend in the World Bank Group portfolio can be seen in this context (see Section
“Implementation Factors for Financial Inclusion”).


Figure 6. World Bank Group Portfolio by Type of Financial Service Supported




                                                                                            …

Sources: World Bank Group and IEG databases.
Note: All figures are preliminary.

44.     IFC investment focuses almost exclusively on funding, that is, channeling money to
those bank and nonbank institutions that provide financial service to the bottom of the pyr-
amid (Figure 7). IFC does this either by investing in holding companies that then invest in these
bank and nonbank institutions or by investing in them (or lending to them) directly. Mean-
while, IFC Advisory Services play an important role by helping strengthen financial institutions
through technical assistance and capacity building. At a broader level, IFC Advisory Services
also provide a range of support in the areas of law and regulations, financial literacy, and finan-
cial infrastructure. The World Bank is engaged in a diversified set of activities, ranging from
creating an enabling environment to advising governments and firms to providing funds.

45.    Because the analytic and advisory activity (AAA) work of the World Bank is neither
coded nor evaluated in parallel to its lending or to IFC work, it requires special handling. At
the approach paper stage, the team has been able to identify some 140 AAA works of potential
relevance to financial inclusion. However, closer evaluation suggests that many of them will not
meet IEG’s selection criteria for the financial inclusion portfolio. Classifying and coding these

                                                                                        20 | P a g e
AAA works is a time-consuming process because of their lack of clear coding and difficulty
identifying key documentation; it will be completed during the evaluation period. One question
is how to treat “public goods” -- knowledge and analytic products such as FSAPs, which are
certainly relevant to financial inclusion but do not always treat it explicitly. In these cases, only
those projects with explicit treatment of financial inclusion will be included in the portfolio.
However, in country case studies, broader work that had a clear relation to country financial
inclusion strategy or to specific elements of the portfolio will be covered. For more detailed re-
sults of the preliminary portfolio review, see attachment B.


Figure 7. World Bank Group Support toward Enabling Environment, Advisory, and Funding




                                                                                             …

Source: IEG portfolio review.
Note: Projects may contain one or more components. All figures are preliminary



Purpose, Objectives, and Audience

46.    In this evaluation, the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) will assess how well the
World Bank Group has supported countries in advancing their financial inclusion agendas
from FY08 to FY13 with a view to informing the Bank Group in its quest to reach the Universal
Financial Inclusion Goal by 2020.

47.    The primary audience of this evaluation is the World Bank Group Boards of Directors
and Bank Group management and staff, but it is also meant to address the broader develop-
ment community, including policy makers, donors and the civil society. Through this evalua-
tion IEG intends to support World Bank Group management in its quest to leverage synergies


                                                                                         21 | P a g e
across the various units dealing with financial issues. In particular, the new Global Practice
Group on Finance and Markets and IFC’s Financial Institutions Group will be a critical target
audience. Given the reorganizations of both the Bank and IFC, the opportunity for strategic in-
put is ripe. Given that financial inclusion is high on the international development agenda – and
likely to gain more importance in the post-2015 development agenda – this evaluation also in-
tends to inform leaders as well as authorities and agencies dealing specifically with inclusive
finance programs. Last but not least, this evaluation addresses civil society organizations and
civil society at large, as, in particular, the poor members of the latter are the primary beneficiar-
ies of the financial inclusion agenda.

48.     IEG will address both learning and accountability objectives. The accountability as-
pects of the study will look at how fully World Bank Group projects achieved their stated objec-
tive—a potentially valuable input to adjusting and potentially scaling up Bank Group support
to financial inclusion in its pursuit of its Universal Financial Access Goal by 2020. Financial in-
clusion has, at least indirectly, been addressed by several previous IEG evaluations; for lessons
from these studies, see Box 4 along with key findings from special reviews of CGAP.


Box 4. What Have We learned about Financial Inclusion from Earlier IEG Evaluations?
In 2011, IEG examined microfinance (primarily credit) in the context of the poverty focus of IFC’s work. On
investments, the evaluation found that “effective interventions will involve complementary and well-coordinated ac-
tion” that addresses “both financial and non-financial constraints to growth, including a wide portfolio of financial
products and services.” For advisory, there was a need to establish “a careful balance between sectorwide ap-
proaches… and approaches that provide direct support for access to finance for households and firms.” This would
require not only coordination between investment and advisory, but also coordination with the World Bank and other
donors. To improve poverty impact, IFC should “re-examine the stakeholder framework” and clarify the “causal path-
ways, transmission channels, and underlying assumptions.” (IEG 2011)
In 2008, IEG looked at IFC’s financing of MSMEs through financial intermediaries in frontier countries. It found sev-
en “success drivers” for projects dealing with microfinance institutions: (i) sponsor and management quality; (ii) sup-
porting advisory services; (iii) MFI operational standard; (iv) MFI institutional equity (at initiation) and governance; (v)
MFI transparency; (vi) IFC work quality; and (vii) the existence of a specialized and supportive regulatory regime (and
associated regulatory supervision capacity), for MFIs. It found that IFC missed opportunities, pointing to: (i) the im-
portance of providing local currency loans; (ii) the important role of a savings deposit base as a sustainable source of
funds; (iii) poor households’ and MSME’s need for other banking services (remittances, savings, etc.); and (iv) the key
role of specialized and supportive regulatory regimes for success. (IEG 2008)
In 2006, IEG evaluated World Bank lines of credit, finding that they generally had poor outcomes and frequent
cancellations. Better outcomes for lines of credit were found to be associated with (i) stable macroeconomic condi-
tions; (ii) stronger financial sectors, including satisfactory competition, legal and regulatory and tax regimes, and lim-
ited state ownership; (iii) clear eligibility criteria for participating financial intermediaries; and (iv) use of only private
sector financial intermediaries. (IEG 2006).
IEG’s 2007 evaluation of the World Bank Group’s response to the global economic crisis found that few Finan-
cial Intermediary Loans (FILs) during the crisis were able to disburse rapidly, although loans to experienced institu-
tions, repeat loans, and loans to exporters did better. Some FILs, intermediated by large government-owned banks,
missed opportunities for deepening the private banking system. “… Continuous engagement with a country’s financial
sector … can provide the basis for quick intervention. … The absence … can seriously limit the effective design of


                                                                                                                22 | P a g e
operations at a time when new diagnostic work is not possible.” (IEG 2007)”
In 2013, IEG evaluated targeted support to SMEs. It noted that a weak business environment “can shift activity away
from formal firms toward smaller, informal microenterprises.” It found that “in low-income countries, more workers are
employed by micro and informal enterprises than by SMEs.” IFC’s definition for microenterprise overlaps with many
definition of SME. Some of the broad findings of the SME study may apply to the current evaluation, namely that a
critical challenge is to better root many activities now undertaken in a clear understanding of the characteristics and
dynamics of targeted enterprises, their role in the broader economy, and their actual and potential contribution to
jobs, growth, and shared prosperity; and to formulate clear strategies that connect interventions to intended out-
comes, accompanied by measurement systems that provide evidence of results. (IEG 2014)
The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), a “consortium of public and private agencies whose secretari-
at is located in the World Bank”, a thought leader in the area of financial inclusion and an important partner for several
leading donors, has not been rigorously evaluated. A 2008 IEG “review” found that while its achievements were “im-
pressive”, “weaknesses in CGAP’s monitoring and reporting system” made it hard to evaluate its contribution to alle-
viating poverty. While praising its collaboration with WBG, it cautioned against too close a relationship “which could
generate perceptions of unfairness and inequity on the part of other CGAP members.” The 2012 Universalia “Exter-
nal Mid-Term Review” of CGAP, also notes its major achievements and apparent impact, but suggests a need for a
more rigorous focus and framework by which to evaluate its impact: ““[CGAP should] articulate the theory of change
of the overall program…; review and revise…the results framework to ensure that it reflects the program logic [and]
develop a formal [M&E] process and indicators to guide an overall assessment of CGAP’s planned/actual cumulative
performance over time.”
Sources: IEG 2006, 2007, 2008(a), 2008 (b), 2011, and 2014 and Universalia 2012.



Evaluation Issues, Questions, and Scope
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND EVALUATION RESULTS CHAIN
49.     The above presented broad-based concept of financial inclusion together with the
rationale for the World Bank Group’s engagement forms the basis for this evaluation. Subse-
quently, financial inclusion refers to the full range of services (payments, savings, credit and
insurance), to specific quality features of delivery (for example, stability and affordability), in-
clusiveness (with special focus on the poor) and choice (offer of service by a range of institu-
tions) (Figure 2). The World Bank Group supports financial inclusion to improve how markets
work by overcoming limitations to market demand and supply so more and better financial
services are provided to the poor. (Figure 3).

50.    Figure 8 below brings these two concepts together, reflecting the implementation is-
sues described above and embedding them into the theory of change (or results chain) that
this evaluation will use. It links the various World Bank Group interventions with outputs and
intended outcomes (embodying the underlying theory of change connecting them). In sum-
mary, the World Bank Group deploys its instruments, including lending, investment services,
guarantees, advisory services, technical assistance, and analytic work to put in place the ena-
bling environment (see top box under outputs) for an inclusive finance agenda, as well as to
support the operation of bank and nonbank institutions through advisory services, investments,


                                                                                                            23 | P a g e
and lines of credit (see bottom box under outputs). These outputs are reflections of the above
raised implementation issues, that is regulation, competition, financial literacy, and financial
infrastructure, such as mobile payment systems. Jointly these outputs are anticipated to im-
prove the way markets work – by shifting supply and demand – and provide financial services
to the poor and MVSEs. Immediate outcomes will hence be assessed by the extent of which
markets provide more and better payment, saving, credit and insurance services to the poor and
MVSEs, taking into account gender issues. IEG’s evaluation is likely to shed the most light on
this level of outcomes. Such improved service provision should ultimately improve the liveli-
hoods of poor people and strengthen shared prosperity (final outcomes) both directly and due
to the role of financial inclusion as an enabler of other development outcomes. All of this is
supported by the Bank Group’s role as convener and leader in financial inclusion, contributing
to the knowledge agenda as well as joining policy makers in international fora to advance the
financial inclusion agenda.


Figure 8. Theory of Change for World Bank Group Financial Inclusion Interventions




Source: IEG.
Note: L/C = Lines of Credit.




                                                                                     24 | P a g e
EVALUATION QUESTIONS
51.     The overarching question that IEG seeks to answer in this evaluation is: Has the
World Bank Group been relevant, effective and efficient in creating better functioning markets
that provide improved access to and quality of financial services to the poor and microenter-
prises on a sustainable basis, globally and at the country level? This overarching question will
be addressed with a view to gaining an understanding how successful inclusive finance inter-
ventions can be replicated in different country contexts. For more details on the methodology,
see attachment C.

   Relevance

   1. Has the World Bank Group’s support for inclusive finance been relevant to client coun-
      tries and their poor populations’ priority needs, conditions and readiness for reform?

         a. Given the body of evidence from the literature and increasing number of impact
            evaluations, is there a sound economic rationale for World Bank Group to be active
            in financial inclusion?
         b. What are IFC’s, MIGA’s, and World Bank’s diagnostic and support instruments for
            inclusive finance and how do they relate to each institution’s corporate strategy?
            How do they differ from each other, and are they consistent and complementary?
         c. How strategically did the World Bank Group allocate its resources on financial in-
            clusion interventions to countries?
         d. How well did systemic interventions aiming to improve the enabling environment
            for financial inclusion address client countries’ constraints and priorities?
         e. How well did interventions that provided funding for the supply of financial ser-
            vices for the poor and underserved reflect the country’s enabling environ-
            ment/systemic factors?
   Did World Bank Groups interventions take into account the specific constraints and needs
   of the poor and other excluded groups, such as women or the rural poor?

   Effectiveness

   2. Has the World Bank Group been effective in its systemic interventions to create an ena-
      bling environment?

         a. To what extent have projects and project components that targeted the enabling
            environment for inclusive finance achieved their stated objectives? Have such in-
            terventions effectively addressed deficiencies in regulatory and oversight regimes;
            improved consumer protection regulations and enforcement thereof; contributed
            to enhancing the financial infrastructure (credit bureaus, collateral registers, and so
            forth); and enabled adequate competition?


                                                                                        25 | P a g e
     b. What can be learned from cases where the implementation of systemic interven-
        tions was particularly successful or failed? How do these lessons relate to the con-
        clusions of the literature and the existing body of impact evaluations?

3. Has the World Bank Group been effective in funding institutions that provide financial
   services to the poor and microenterprises, including funding through intermediaries or
   apex institutions? Has the World Bank Group been effective in advising these institu-
   tions in improving their performance?

     a. To what extent has such financial support through lines of credit, investments
        and/or guarantees helped increase the supply of financial services to the poor and
        microenterprises?
     b. To what extent was World Bank Group advice effective in improving the perfor-
        mance of financial service providers? Was such advice complementary to invest-
        ment / lending operations and in appropriate sequence?
     c. Is there evidence that World Bank Group interventions contributed to improved
        access to payments, savings, credit, and insurance for the poor and for microenter-
        prises? Has such access been of the needed quality and affordability, adequately
        protected consumers from deception or exploitation, and been embedded in a sta-
        ble financial system? And has such access led to increase in use?
     d. Is there evidence that the increased supply of financial services supported poor
        household to improve their livelihood, increase and/or smoothed their income
        and consumption, and/or allowed risk mitigation?
     e. Is there evidence that the increased supply of microfinance services supported mi-
        croenterprises to grow and increase their employment, sales, investment, or
        productivity?

Efficiency

4. Are World Bank Group interventions in inclusive finance efficient instruments, from
   both a program and institutional perspective?

     a. To what extent has support to inclusive finance reached the poor and microenter-
        prises at a reasonable cost? Do some approaches exhibit greater cost-efficiency than
        others?
     b. What is the utilization rate of support provided (for example, lines of credit, guar-
        antees, and other instruments for inclusive finance)?
     c. Are the activities profitable and sustainable? What is the profitability of IFC and
        mainstream MIGA activities? Are World Bank and all subsidized World Bank
        Group activities meeting the target rate of return? After World Bank Group inter-
        ventions, is there an enduring benefit in correcting market failure?


                                                                                  26 | P a g e
   Work Quality and Coordination - Working as One World Bank Group

   5. Is the World Bank Group effectively managing factors within its control?

         a. How well did country strategies reflect the World Bank Group’s research and
            knowledge about inclusive finance?
         b. Is the World Bank Group meeting its established work quality standards in prepa-
            ration, implementation, and supervision? How does performance vary by country
            conditions and the presence or absence of complementary or prior interventions?
         c. Are World Bank Group monitoring and reporting standards related to financial in-
            clusion interventions adequate for accountability and learning? Is Bank Group
            management using the resulting data to improve performance and outcomes?
         d. Are the three World Bank Group institutions leveraging synergies through ade-
            quate coordination and sequencing of interventions? To what extent have com-
            plementary interventions contributed to the effectiveness of assistance? Has the
            presence or absence of multiple activities and/or sequenced activities influenced
            outcomes?
         e. What can we learn from successful or failed World Bank Group coordination
            across the various units contributing to the inclusive finance agenda? Which mech-
            anisms of coordination (shared strategy, shared projects, formal or informal com-
            munication, etc.) are most and least effective?

EVALUATION SCOPE
52.     This evaluation will cover World Bank Group inclusive finance interventions during
the FY07–13 period. It will cover IFC investments and advisory services; MIGA guarantees; and
World Bank guarantees, lending and nonlending (AAA, including nonlending technical assis-
tance, economic and sector work, and reimbursable technical assistance). For analyzing trends
in operations (in terms of volume, number of projects) and design features, this study will focus
on projects committed, approved, or issued during FY07-13. For the assessment of results, IEG
will focus on projects that exited during FY07-13. That includes projects that were “closed” (for
World Bank) or reached “operational maturity” (for IFC and MIGA) during FY07-13 and were
subsequently evaluated (at the project level), hence including projects that were approved dur-
ing FY07-13 and were already evaluated, but also projects that were approved prior to FY07, but
evaluated during FY07-13. This provides a considerably longer history, with some evaluated
projects having originated as early as 1999. “Ongoing” projects, that is, those approved FY07-13,
that have not yet reached closure/operational maturity will be included mainly for the purpose
of answering questions of design, relevance, and general trends (and, of course, in the context of
case studies as part of the relevant program and context). In country case studies, ongoing pro-
jects will be considered to assess as to whether the Bank Group program addresses strategic
priorities at the country level and is hence relevant. Table 3 provides an overview of the World


                                                                                       27 | P a g e
Bank Group projects and interventions covered. The activities of the World Bank’s Develop-
ment Economics Department and of CGAP will not specifically be evaluated, but the team will
be attuned to apparent gaps in knowledge, research and advocacy evidenced in the course of
the evaluation, and will note these in the final report and look for evidence of relevance or in-
fluence on operations in the case studies.

53.     The focus of this evaluation will be on payments, savings, credit, and insurance.
These four basic services are the key building blocks of today’s financial inclusion agenda and
will hence receive primary attention. Neighboring concepts of agriculture finance or risk mitiga-
tion for the poor through sovereign disaster risk policies will not be subjects of this evaluation,
as they are either driven by different context factors, or only indirectly affect the poor, or are
mainly geared toward the middle class. Note also that in the area of housing finance, most “af-
fordable mortgage” activities are not oriented to the base of the pyramid or even the bottom 40
percent, so the relevant portfolio of “micro-mortgage” support is tiny.

Table 2. Coverage of Evaluated Material – Inclusive Finance Projects Approved FY07-FY13
                                           Financial Inclusion         Evaluated Financial
Institutions                                                                                         % with Evaluation
                                                Portfolio               Inclusion Projects
WB Lending (IBRD/IDA)                             213                           95                           45%
WB AAA (ESW/TA)                                   142                            0                            0%
IFC Investments                                   274                           57                           21%
IFC Advisory Services                             339                           83                           24%
MIGA Guarantees                                    25                            0                            0%
Total Number of Projects                          993                          235                           24%
Sources: World Bank and IEG.
Notes: An additional 108 projects evaluated between FY07-FY13 were identified for the purpose of this evaluation though they
were approved prior to FY07. AAA = analytic and advisory activity; ESW = economic and sector work; TA = technical assis-
tance. All figures are preliminary.

54.     Broad-based macroeconomic or financial sector interventions that only indirectly af-
fect the inclusive finance agenda do not fall within the scope of the evaluation. The success of
financial inclusion interventions hinges on a wide variety of factors that pertain to macroeco-
nomic stability, banking, securities, and insurance market development in general, including
the depth and width of these markets and factors of governance and transparency. These factors
are acknowledged as important, but interventions targeting these other factors will not be as-
sessed per se. In addition, factors outside the financial sector may influence opportunities for
the poor to make use of financial services to improve their well-being. The primary focus of this
evaluation are interventions aimed at strengthening the enabling environment and/or the pro-
vision of financial services to the bottom 40 percent, through funding support, advisory work or
other means.




                                                                                                               28 | P a g e
Evaluation Design

55.     The evaluation questions will be answered through a combination of the following
methodologies: (i) a comprehensive literature review, (ii) a review of policy and strategy doc-
uments at country and corporation levels, (iii) a portfolio review of World Bank Group projects
and activities, and (iv) 15 country reviews of which 10 will be desk reviews based on portfolio
data and Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report Reviews, and 5 purposively selected
country case studies including a field mission. The approach will be nonexperimental, combine
qualitative and quantitative methods and draw on external and internal research data, such as
the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, household survey data where financial inclusion varia-
bles have been included and the data of Microfinance Information Exchange (MIX). MIX is a
nonprofit organization that facilitates collection and exchange of public data designed for mi-
crofinance practitioners, reporting on some 1,650 MFIs (in 2011). Using the MIX data IEG will
better understand the practices and performance of microfinance institutions, as well as observe
their response to the global financial crisis and longer-term trends over time.

56.     IEG will conduct a portfolio analysis to identify and categorize the characteristics,
objectives, and components of the activities covered by this evaluation and to analyze their
results. World Bank Group activities will be integrated into a database to assess their compo-
nents and objectives for strategic relevance and complementarity. This database will represent
the basis for the subsequent analysis of results achievement, when the various success indica-
tors from IEG microevaluations will be added to these data. Complementary data of the World
Bank Group’s own monitoring and evaluation systems will be used as well, with the under-
standing that these have not been subject to an independent IEG validation. 26

57.    Relying primarily on the available microevaluation data, IEG will analyze results
achievement at project closure for World Bank lending projects and at the point of opera-
tional maturity for IFC and MIGA projects. For World Bank projects, Implementation Comple-
tion and Results Reports and their IEG reviews will be the primary source of results infor-
mation, complemented by Project Performance Assessment Reports and conducted for about
one-quarter of projects two years after their closure. For IFC Investment Services and MIGA,
this evaluation will largely rely on Extended Project Supervision Reports, Project Evaluation
Summaries, and Project Evaluation Reports conducted at operational maturity, usually about
two years after financial closure. To the extent monitoring data are available for IFC’s invest-
ments throughout the entire lifetime of the investment; these will be used to extend the assess-
ment of sustainability beyond maturity in the context of mission country case studies.

58.     At the country-level the coherence of the solutions developed by the WBG will be
covered through country reviews. IEG will carry out these studies to identify drivers of success;
assess nonlending and advisory work, including AAA that might have provided diagnostics of
the country's financial sector and its inclusiveness or barriers to inclusiveness; and address is-

                                                                                       29 | P a g e
sues of complementarity, sequencing, and synergies. A key question as the Bank Group moves
to a new, more integrated ‘solutions bank’ model (recognizing that this level of integration was
not the prevailing model during the evaluation period) is the extent to which critical constraints
and opportunities were identified through regional, country-level or subnational diagnostics,
the extent to which activities were aligned to an identified country results framework and to the
comparative advantage of respective World Bank Group institutions, and the extent to which
performance information was used for mid-course correction and learning. Country Assistance
Strategies and their Completion Report Reviews (CASCRs and CASCRRs) will be used to assess
the question whether the Bank Group has mobilized the best solutions and personnel in combi-
nations appropriate to country needs.

59.     To this end, IEG will conduct 15 desk-based reviews of which five will be developed
into in-depth country case studies involving field missions. Desk reviews will be based on
available portfolio data, project records and micro evaluation evidence. IEG’s missions to five of
these countries will allow IEG to systematically assess additional country specific drivers, gath-
er information on effects to the beneficiaries (Box 5), and assess the sustainability of interven-
tions in the longer term, that is, beyond project closure.


Box 5. Beneficiary Analysis in Field-based Country Case Studies
Field-based country case studies will provide an opportunity to assess development outcomes at the beneficiary level.
The Theory of Change (Figure 8) defines as immediate outcomes the access to financial services, including for the
poor and MVSEs, meeting quality criteria of availability, stability, convenience etc. Final outcomes are welfare effects,
such as income smoothing, investments in health and education, or productive investments. The beneficiary analysis
will attempt to provide insight into what drives both of these, depending on the availability of data. IEG will make use of
internal and external data that report on financial inclusion and associated welfare effects, such as national household
survey data where available. For the beneficiary analysis conducted for the five field based case studies, the primarily
focus will be on qualitative methods (as an attempt to undertake a statistically representative assessment in only five
countries would have limited inferential value). Focus groups and a series of structured interviews will be will be utilized
parallel to more formal, rigorous approaches to data collection and analysis.
In the context of beneficiary analysis, IEG also plans to use the data generated by the World Bank’s Enterprise Survey
between 2008 and 2013. During this time the World Bank conducted 17 comparable surveys of informal and microen-
terprises, reflecting the experience of 4,246 of these enterprises in Africa and Latin America. IEG will utilize these data
to better understand the practices and constraints of MVSEs, their sources of finance, explanatory factors for their
access to finance, and the relationship between access to finance and firm-level growth of sales and employment,
controlling for other internal and external explanatory factors..
Source: IEG.


60.     The selection of country cases will first be criteria-driven with subsequent purposive
selection of field-based cases. Given the above rationale, country case studies can only be a
fruitful source of knowledge, if they address countries with a certain minimum number of Bank
Group financial inclusion interventions. This does not imply that interventions in countries with
overall lower activity levels are less important. Indeed they may yield equal insight and provide


                                                                                                             30 | P a g e
opportunities to learn from innovative approaches; however, as all projects will be analyzed at
the portfolio level, the evaluation will give them due consideration. Selection of the larger
group of 15 desk review countries follows a criteria-based sampling methodology. Applying
these criteria to all 116 client countries (in financial inclusion), yields a list of 13 eligible coun-
tries. To achieve a better regional balance, one additional country was added for the MNA
(Lebanon) and ECA regions (Kyrgyz Republic), bringing the total number of desk reviews to 15
countries with a significant financial inclusion portfolio. (Table 4). In total, country cases will
cover 300 financial inclusion interventions of which 88 have been subject to project level evalua-
tions already. Selection criteria were:
     (i.)      Presence of at least three of the total five types of financial inclusion interventions
               (lending, investments, advisory, guarantees, AAA/technical assistance/economic and
               sector work);
     (ii.) Availability of at least one project level evaluation report for each of these types of in-
           terventions (for example ICRRs, XPSRs, PCRs, or PERs);
     (iii.) Complementary nature of interventions, that is, work that aims at improving the ena-
            bling environment and those funding micro finance institutions;
     (iv.) Geographic and regional considerations;
     (v.) Income level considerations, and
     (vi.) Maturity of the countries’ enabling environment for financial inclusion.

Table 4. Case Study Countries
                                    Income           WB            WB             IFC           IFC           MIGA
     Name           Region                                                                                                 Total
                                  Level (2013)     Lending         AAA        Investment      Advisory      Guarantee
 Ghana                AFR              LM            2 (1)           0            3 (2)            5 (3)        0          10 (6)
 Kenya                AFR               L            3 (2)           2            3 (0)            6 (1)        0          14 (3)
 Tanzania             AFR               L            3 (1)           2            4 (1)            7 (4)        0          16 (6)
 China                EAP              UM            3 (3)           1            15 (1)           15 (3)       0          34 (7)
 Indonesia            EAP              LM            5 (3)           1            7 (1)            8 (3)        0          21 (7)
 Azerbaijan           ECA              UM            2 (1)           0            7 (2)            5 (3)        0          14 (6)
 Kyrgyz Rep.          ECA               L            3 (2)           3            5 (0)            4 (1)        0          15 (3)
 Brazil               LCR              UM            9 (4)           2            11 (1)           4 (1)        0          26 (6)
 Colombia             LCR              UM            2 (2)           0            11 (5)           4 (2)        1          18 (9)
 Mexico               LCR              UM            11 (5)          0            8 (1)            4 (2)        0          23 (8)
 Lebanon              MNA              UM            1 (1)           1            1 (0)            4 (2)        0           7 (3)
 Morocco              MNA              LM            5 (3)           0            3 (1)            7 (3)        0          15 (7)
 Afghanistan          SAR               L            3 (1)           2            3 (1)            7 (2)        2          17 (4)
 India                SAR              LM            13 (2)          4            20 (2)           38 (7)       0          75 (11)
 Pakistan             SAR              LM            3 (1)           2            3 (1)            8 (4)        3          19 (6)
 Total Number of Projects                           68 (32)          20          104 (19)      126 (41)         6         324 (92)
 Sources: World Bank and IEG.
 Note: Shaded countries have been selected for field based studies. All figures are preliminary.


                                                                                                                    31 | P a g e
61.     The multiple country case studies design will allow answering the evaluation ques-
tions for both the “common case” as well as the “critical case”. Credit focused interventions
dominate the entire Bank Group portfolio in financial inclusion (Figure 6). The selected 15 coun-
tries represent a cross-section of both credit-dominated portfolios (the “common case”), for ex-
ample those of Morocco, Lebanon, Brazil etc.) as well as portfolios with relative high share of
interventions that aimed at broadening the financial inclusion agenda to also cover payments,
savings and insurance (the “critical case”), for example Tanzania, Indonesia or Mexico. These
two cases will allow investigating the requirements for broadening the financial inclusion
agenda as well as into success factors (Figure 9).

62.     Of these 15 countries, five were chosen for additional field studies, based on a pur-
posive selection: Azerbaijan, India, Indonesia, Mexico, and Tanzania. These five field based
case studies will take a look at historical context as well, at times dipping back farther than 6-7
years to understand context, especially when drawing from earlier CASCRs and the like. Con-
sideration for the purposive selection of these four countries are geographic and regional con-
siderations as the Bank Group portfolio is relatively evenly spread across most regions (see an-
nex B, Figure B.2). Beyond these considerations, the proposed field visit countries have the most
diverse portfolios which will enable the evaluation to test its hypothesis and evaluation ques-
tions on the spectrum of financial services. They are also rich in evaluated projects.


Figure 9. Diversity of Financial Inclusion Interventions in the Selected 15 Country Cases




Source: IEG portfolio analysis.
Notes: Highlighted countries were selected for field based cases. All figures are preliminary.



                                                                                                 32 | P a g e
63.      The case study design will also allow testing hypotheses for policy- focused interven-
tions and finance-focused interventions. These 15 countries provide an opportunity to learn
from portfolios that focus more heavily on policy advice (“upstream” advice) as well as from
those that provide mostly “downstream” support, that is, direct support in the form of technical
assistance and finance through financial intermediaries. The proposed five field-based case
studies are distributed across this spectrum with a slight emphasis on high- to mid-upstream
support and one case with where the support is mostly downstream. Such a grouping will ena-
ble to test hypotheses in parallel for upstream and downstream countries (Figure 10).

64.     The proposed 15 country cases will also provide an opportunity to zoom into areas of
special interest. Not only will these countries enable the evaluation to explore themes in depth
such as upstream advice through WB Lending, technical assistance, analytic work (including
FSAPs) and capacity building to financial intermediaries through IFC Advisory Services, and
direct investments in financial intermediaries through IFC Investment Services, but they will
also provide an opportunity to look at specific financial inclusion approaches such as IFC’s in-
vestment in (and advisory services to) holding companies that will in turn invest in MFIs or the
transformation of non-profit credit only MFIs into deposit taking institutions. Such investments
and advisory activities are present in several of the selected country case studies such as Azer-
baijan, Pakistan, and Tanzania.


Figure 10. Focus of Bank Group Financial Inclusion Interventions in the Selected 15 Country Cases




Source: IEG portfolio analysis.
Notes: Highlighted countries were selected for field based cases. All figures are preliminary.


                                                                                                 33 | P a g e
65.     Contribution analysis will be used in field-based country cases to help identify the
extent to which World Bank Group interventions actually contributed to the observed devel-
opment results. Mayne (1999) defines contribution analysis as "[a] specific analysis undertaken
to provide information on the contribution of a program to the outcomes it is trying to influ-
ence.” Contribution analysis attempts to explore and perhaps demonstrate what Hendricks
(1996) calls “plausible association”; whether “a reasonable person, knowing what has occurred
in the program and that the intended outcomes actually occurred, agrees that the program con-
tributed to those outcomes?” (Mayne 1999). Box 6 outlines how contribution analysis will assist
the evaluation in strengthening and substantiating the effects of World Bank Group activities on
observed outcomes and impact.


Box 6. Use of Contribution Analysis in the Financial Inclusion Evaluation
A central challenge in evaluating the World Bank Group’s program effectiveness in promoting financial inclusion is that
it is never the only cause of observed outcomes and impacts. Instead, activities contribute to observed outcomes that
are also influenced by local and global policies, events, and activities, both positive and negative. Contribution analysis
provides an explicit framework to consider the plausible association of interventions or programs to outcomes while
accounting for the various other factors that may have influenced observed outcomes.
Within a given context, where there is a challenge attributing outcomes to Bank Group activities, contribution analysis
starts from a theory of change with a clear results chain linking WBG activities to outcomes to impacts which explicitly
acknowledges any underlying assumptions, risks to the outcome, and other influencing factors outside of the direct
control of the World Bank Group. After gathering all existing evidence available to test the theory of change, the eval-
uator assembles and assesses the contribution story, relating observed actions of the intervention or program to the
observed outcomes. This begins to allow the evaluator to determine the credibility of the “story” and the main weak-
nesses. Further evidence gathering can explore areas where the story about the contribution of the intervention to
results is less credible or clear. For example, field work can clarify what occurred in what sequence, how reasonable
the initial assumptions in the theory of change were, and what the role of external influences and other contributing
factors was, all in service of determining the contribution of World Bank Group activities. Using this evidence, the story
can be strengthened and substantiated.
In the country case studies for this evaluation, IEG will pilot the application of contribution analysis using this se-
quenced methodology. After constructing the results chain for the interventions in a given country, the team will make
explicit the risks, assumptions, and other contributing factors that may influence observed outcomes and impact. Desk
work and interviews will establish the initial story about the contribution of the Bank Group program in each country to
observed changes in financial inclusion. The field missions will be used to validate this story and fill in missing infor-
mation required to understand how other (positively and negatively) contribution factors came into play and how rea-
sonable were the assumptions underlying the hypothesized results chain. In the end, the aim for each country is to
have a highly credible and well-evidenced account of the contribution of the World Bank Group program to financial
inclusion.
Sources: Mayne 1999, 2012.




                                                                                                            34 | P a g e
66.      In the context of country studies, assessing the Bank Group’s role as convener and
thought leader in financial inclusion will be central. One of the major contributions the Bank
Group has to offer is its convening power, which is its capacity to join policy makers in a coun-
try and shape its financial inclusion agenda. In the planned five field-based country case stud-
ies, this evaluation will take a structured approach and gather data on key areas from key in-
formants (for example other players in the financial inclusion space in these countries) to assess
in how far the Bank Group’s role of convener and thought leader contributed to the achieve-
ment of country level outcomes, as defined in the Theory of Change (Figure 8).

67.     The assessment of World Bank nonlending activities will have to follow a pragmatic
approach. The World Bank’s AAA, including economic and sector work, nonlending technical
assistance, trust fund support and reimbursable technical assistance, are not integrated in an
overall results framework. Therefore evaluation benchmarks, that is, “objectives” against which
these activities could be assessed, have not been established. In its evaluation, IEG will adapt a
pragmatic approach, that is, make reasonable assumptions about what nonlending work was
trying to influence. As many nonlending activities also lack proper documentation, the evalua-
tion will focus on the major pieces where sufficient documentation can be retrieved. In general,
results of nonlending will only be covered for countries that will be studied in depth in the five
country case studies—and to the extent that they are referred to in Country Assistance Strategy
Completion Reports Reviews. However, IEG will examine the patterns of World Bank self-
evaluation data on AAA work to see the extent to which they can help illuminate more and less
successful activities or aspects of the work. To augment its understanding of the World Bank
Group’s broader influence, IEG will add a case study to capture the WBG’s role as global con-
vener and thought leader in one major initiative.


Quality Assurance Process

68.    This Approach Paper has been peer reviewed to ensure relevance of evaluation ques-
tions and issues covered, adequacy of scope of the evaluation, and appropriateness of meth-
odology and so the evaluation will be accurate, credible, and impartial in its findings and
recommendations. Peer reviewers for the evaluation will come from outside IEG: Prof. Shawn
Cole, Harvard Business School; Eric Oldsman of Nexus Associates; and Leora Klapper, Lead
Economist, DECFP, World Bank (Approach Paper stage) with another World Bank Group peer
reviewer to be confirmed.


Expected Outputs and Dissemination

69.   The primary output of the evaluation will be the report to the Board’s Committee on
Development Effectiveness (CODE), which will contain the main findings and recommenda-


                                                                                       35 | P a g e
tions. Ultimately, the finished evaluation will be published and disseminated both internally
and externally. IEG will develop working papers, presentations, quick notes, blogs, videos, and
other products as appropriate for other audiences for the evaluation, including the key stake-
holders.

70.      Regular stakeholder interaction will be sought to enhance the evaluation process.
This will include consultation and outreach while the evaluation is under way and dissemina-
tion and outreach once the study is complete. During evaluation preparation, the team will so-
licit feedback and comments from stakeholders, in particular World Bank Group management
and inclusive finance practitioners in the industry and government agencies in client countries,
to improve the evaluation’s accuracy and relevance. The principles of transparency and partici-
pation will guide this process. Such stakeholder interaction will contribute important infor-
mation and qualitative data to supplement data, interviews, case studies, and other research.
Social media will be used to reach out to the broader development community and concerned
stakeholders, potentially including beneficiaries of financial inclusion initiatives. Consultations
will also be held during field missions with stakeholders including government counterparts,
bank staff, NGOs and other donors, private sector and beneficiaries.

71.     In addition to outreach during the evaluation process, IEG will implement an out-
reach plan once the evaluation is completed. IEG will launch the report both in Washington,
DC, and at a major international conference. The efforts will target key stakeholders, including
staff at headquarters and country offices, other multilateral development banks and donors,
government authorities, civil society organizations, and counterpart officials. Through these
means and relevant international fora, the team will seek to maximize awareness and the value
and use of findings and recommendations to strengthen development outcomes.


Resources

72.     Timeline and budget. The evaluation will be submitted to CODE by the end of FY15.
The budget for the study is estimated at $1,050,000, an amount consistent with other major IEG
sector studies.

73.     Team and Skills Mix. The skills mix required to complete this evaluation includes eval-
uation experience and knowledge of IEG methods and practices, including econometric and
portfolio analysis; familiarity with the policies, procedures and operations of IFC, MIGA, and
the World Bank; knowledge of World Bank Group and external information sources; and prac-
tical, policy, and academic expertise in key areas of inclusive finance, systemic policy work and
country dialogue and MFI finance. Because the product range is broad, the team must also en-
compass a number of members with diverse skills and experience.



                                                                                        36 | P a g e
74.     The evaluation will be prepared by a team led by Stefan Apfalter (co-task team leader),
Andrew Stone (co-task team leader), Anjali Kumar (advisor), Mariano Cortes, Jack Glen, Amit
Banerjee, Disha Zaidi, Takatoshi Kamezawa, Anqing Shi, Melvin P. Vaz, Jacqueline Andrieu,
Daniel Palazov, Victor David Malca, Feruza Akbarovna Abduazimova, and Nadia Asgaraly.
Together, this team affords substantial knowledge and experience on key subject matters as
well as on the respective institutions of the World Bank Group, as well as on evaluation meth-
odology. Thus, expertise in multiple IEG departments (including IEGPS and IEGCC) has been
mobilized, appropriate to the needs of the evaluation. The report will be prepared under the
direction of Andrew Stone, Head of Macro Evaluation, IEGPE, Stoyan Tenev, Manager, IEGPE;
and Marvin Taylor-Dormond, Director, IEGPE.




                                                                                    37 | P a g e
Attachment A

References
Almodovar-Retaguis N., K. Kushnir, and T. Meiland. Undated. Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in
        Using Property and Building Credit. pp. 2-3. Women, Business, and the Law. IFC,
        World Bank.
Amin M., Bin-Humam Y., and Iqbal S. Undated. Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in Accessing Busi-
          ness Environment Institutions. World Bank, IFC. p. 3. (Data used for March 2011).
Aycinena D., Martinez C., and Yang D. 2010. The Impact of Transaction Fees on Migrant Remittanc-
          es: Evidence from a Field Experiment Among Migrants from El Salvador, Diego Aycinena
          Francisco Marroquin University, University of Chile, and University of Michigan.
Ashraf N., Aycinena D., Claudia Martinez A., and Yang D. 2010. Remittances and the Problem of
           Control: A Field Experiment among Migrants from El Salvador. University of Michigan
Bardasi and others. 2007. cited in Promoting Women’s Financial Inclusion: A Toolkit. February
          2013. DFID, GIZ, p.14.
Banerjee A. 2013. Microcredit Under the Microscope: What Have We Learned in the Past Two Decades,
          and What Do We Need to Know? Annual Review of Economics 2013. 5:487–519.
Banerjee A. and Duflo E. 2007. The Economic Lives of the Poor. Journal of Economic Perspectives
          21 (1): 141-67.
 ---. 2008. What Is Middle Class about the Middle Classes around the World? Journal of Economic
            Perspectives 22 (2): 3-28.
Banerjee A. and others. 2009. The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.
          Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Economics.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 2010. Microfinance Activities and the Core Principles
         for Effective Banking Supervision.
Bateman, M. 2010. Why Doesn’t Microfinance Work?, pp. 42-49, Zed Books, UK.
Beck T. and de la Torre A. 2007. The Basic Analytics of Access to Financial Services. World Bank
           Policy Research Working Paper 4026, Oct 2006
Beck T. and Martinez Peria M.S. 2011. What Explains the Price of Remittances? An Examination
           across 119 Country Corridors, World Bank Economic Review.
Bruhn M., de Souza Leao L., Legovini A., Marchetti R., and Zia B. 2013. Financial Education and
          Behavior Formation: Large-Scale Experimental Evidence from Brazil. Working paper,
          World Bank, Washington, DC.
Cai H., Chen Y., Fang H., Zhou L. 2010. “The Effect of Microinsurance on Economic Activities:
           Evidence from a Randomized Natural Field Experiment.” Working paper, Depart-
           ment of Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Care. 2011. Do Conditional Cash Transfers Really Empower Women? A look at CCTs in Peru, Ecuador,
           Bolivia. Learning and Policy Series, Briefing Paper, Issue 02, December 2011. CARE
           International.

                                                                                         38 | P a g e
Center for Financial Inclusion. Undated. Financial Inclusion: What’s the Vision?
           http://centerforfinancialinclusionblog.files.wordpress.com/2011/12/financial-
           inclusion-whats-the-vision.pdf, retrieved on April 15, 2014.
---       2009. Mexico's Prospects for Full Financial Inclusion, by Elisabeth Rhyne, Anita Gardeva,
          David Levai. Action Center for Financial Inclusion, http://www.centerforfi-
          nancialinclusion.org/publications-a-resources/browse-publications/300-mexicos-
          prospects-for-full-financial-inclusion, retrieved on April 15, 2014.
CGAP. 2013. Microcredit Interest Rates and Their Determinants 2004-2011. Reports by CGAP and
         its Partners, No. 7.
———. 2011. “Global Standard Setting Bodies and Financial Inclusion for the Poor: Toward
        Proportionate Standards and Guidance.” White Paper.
———. 2010. Andhra Pradesh 2010: Global Implications of the Crisis in Indian Microfinance. CGAP
        Focus Note No. 67.
Cole, S., Paulson A., and Shastry G. K. 2012. Smart Money: The Effect of Education on Financial
            Behavior. Finance Working Paper 09–071, Harvard Business School, Boston, MA.
Cole, S., Gine X., and Vickery J. 2012. Can Financial Innovation Reduce the Costs of Weather Shocks?
            Evidence from Ex Ante Agricultural Investment in India. Unpublished working paper,
            Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA; World Bank, Washington, DC; Federal
            Reserve Bank of New York.
Collins, D. and others. 2009, Portfolio of the Poor – How the World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day, Prince-
            ton University Press.
Cull, R., Ehrbeck, T. and Holle, N. Financial Inclusion and Development: Recent Impact Evidence
            (CGAP Focus Note #92, April 2014)
Crepon B, Devoto F, Duflo E, Pariente W. 2011. Impact of Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco:
          Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation. Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of
          Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., T. Beck, and P. Honohan. 2008. Finance for All? Policies and Pitfalls in Expand-
         ing Access. World Bank Policy research Report, World Bank, Washington DC
Demirgüç-Kunt A. and Levine R. 2009. “Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence.” Annual
         Review of Financial Economics 1: 287–318.
Demirgüç-Kunt A. and Klapper L. 2013. Measuring Financial Inclusion: Explaining Variation and
         Use of Financial Services across and within Countries, Brookings Papers on Economic
         Activity.
Demirgüç-Kunt A., Klapper L., and Randall. 2013a. The World Bank and the Bill and Melinda
         Gates Foundation. Financial Inclusion in India, Findex Notes.
---. 2013b. The World Bank and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Financial Inclusion in
             Europe and Central Asia, Findex Notes.
---. 2012. The World Bank and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Financial Inclusion in Sub-
            Saharan Africa, Findex Notes.



                                                                                           39 | P a g e
Demirgüç-Kunt A., Klapper L., and Singer. 2013. The World Bank and the Bill and Melinda
         Gates Foundation. Women and Financial Inclusion, Findex Notes.
DFID. GIZ 2013. Promoting Women’s Financial Inclusion: A Toolkit. February 2013. DFID, GIZ.
Doi Y., McKenzie D., and Zia B.. 2012. Who You Train Matters: Identifying Complementary Effects of
          Financial Education on Migrant Households. Policy Research Working Paper 6157,
          World Bank, Washington, DC.
Duflo, E. 2012. “Women Empowerment and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Litera-
           ture, 50(4), 1051–1079.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2009. Savings Constraint and Microenterprise Develop-
          ment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya. Working Paper no. 14693. Cambridge,
          Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Giné X, Jakiela, and others. 2010. “Microfinance Games.” American Economic Journal: Applied
           Economics 2 (3) 60-95.
Giné X., Mansuri. 2011. Money or ideas? A field experiment on constraints to entrepreneurship in rural
          Pakistan. Unpublished manuscript, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. 2012. The G20 Basic Set of Financial Inclusion Indica-
           tors, http://www.gpfi.org/featured/g20-basic-set-financial-inclusion-indicators, re-
           trieved on April 15, 2014.
———. 2010. G20 Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion.
Gutierrez and Singh. 2013. What Regulatory Frameworks Are More Conducive to Mobile Banking?—
           Empirical Evidence from Findex Data, PRWP 6652, World Bank.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014. The Big Business of Small Enterprises: Evaluation of the
          World Bank Group Experience with Targeted Support to Small and Medium-Size Enterpris-
          es, 2006-12. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013. Evaluation of the International Finance Corporation’s Global Trade Finance Program,
        2006-2012. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011. Assessing IFC’s Poverty Focus and Results. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2008. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor. Global Program Review, Volume 3, Issue 1.
———. 2007. The World Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis: Phase I. Washington,
        DC: World Bank.
———. 2006. World Bank Lending for Lines of Credit: An IEG Evaluation. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
IFAD. 2009. Gender and Rural Microfinance: Reaching and Empowering Women, Guide for practition-
          ers. IFAD.
IFC. 2010. Two Trillion and counting – Assessing the Credit Gap for Micro, Small and Medium size
           Enterprises in the Development World. IFC, McKinsey &Company
IFC. 2011. Strengthening Access to Finance in Women-Owned SMEs in Developing Countries, Wash-
            ington DC, IFC. In Women, Business, and the Law – IFC, World Bank. Almodovar-


                                                                                           40 | P a g e
           Retaguis N., Kushnir, K., and Meiland T., Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in Using
           Property and Building Credit. p.2-3.
--- . 2013. MF Global Industry trends, Presentation.
Kaboski and Townsend. 2011. A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-Experimental Micro-
          finance Initiative, Econometrica 79 (5): 1357-406
Karlan D. and Zinman J.. 2009. Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to
           Estimate the Impacts in Manila. Yale University and Dartmouth College.
Karlan D. and Zinman J. 2011. “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized Credit
           Scoring for Impact Evaluation.” Science 332:1278–84.
Khandker. 2005. “Microfinance and Poverty: Evidence Using Panel Data from Bangladesh.”
          World Economic Review 19 (2): 263-86.
Mandell, L, Klein, L. S. 2007. Motivation and financial literacy, Financial Services Review 16: 105–
          116
Mas, Ignacio, and Dan Radcliffe. 2010. Scaling Mobile Money. Bill and Melinda Gates Founda-
          tion.
Mayne J. 1999. Addressing Attribution Through Contribution Analysis: Using Performance Measures
          Sensibly, Office of the Auditor General of Canada, Discussion Paper, Error! Hyperlink
           reference not valid., retrieved April 16, 2014.
Munyegera G.K. and Matsumoto T. 2014. Mobile Money, Rural Household Welfare and Remittances:
         Panel Evidence from Uganda, National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies Tokyo, Ja-
         pan.
Murdoch, J. 1995. “Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing.” Journal of Economic Per-
          spectives 9 (3): 103-14.
Morduch J. and Karlan. 2009. Access to Finance. In Handbook of Development Economics, Vol 5, ed-
          ited by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, 4704-84. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
OECD/INFE. 2012. “High-Level Principles on National Strategies for Financial Education.”
Pitt M. and Khandker S.R. 1998. “The Impact of Group-Based Credit on Poor Households in
           Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participation Matter?” Journal of Political Economy
           106 (5): 958-96.
Roodman D. 2012. Due Diligence – An impertinent Inquiry into Microfinance, Center for Global
        Development, Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC.
Roodman D. and Morduch J. 2009. The impact of Microcredit on the Poor in Bangladesh: Revisiting
        the Evidence. Working paper 174. Center for Global Development.
Universalia. 2012. CGAP Phase IV - External Mid-Term Review of CGAP.
World Bank. 2008. Finance for All? Policies and Pitfalls in Expanding Access. A World Bank Policy
         Research Report. Washington.
World Bank. 2013. Measuring Financial Capability: a New Instrument and Results from Low-
         and Middle-Income Countries, http://www.finlitedu.org/team-



                                                                                          41 | P a g e
           downloads/measurement/measuringfinancial-capability-a-new-instrument-and-
           results-from-low-and-middle-income-countriessummary.pdf
World Bank. 2014. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. Washington DC




                                                                                     42 | P a g e
Attachment B

Preliminary Portfolio Review

1.      This preliminary portfolio review aims at providing an overview of the World Bank
Group’s support in the area of “financial inclusion” for projects approved between FY07 and
FY13. This support is channeled through the three institutions of the Bank Group including
World Bank lending and non-lending technical assistance and economic and sector work
(AAA), IFC Investment and Advisory Services, and MIGA guarantees. The analysis focuses on
projects approved FY07-FY13 and presents data by approval year. The evaluation itself will also
cover projects approved prior to FY07 that were evaluated during FY07-FY13. As such, these
additional projects are not reflected in this analysis as their data cannot be meaningfully repre-
sented by approval fiscal year given the varying length of a project’s life (between 2-8 years).

2.     Over the past seven years, the World Bank Group has been active in 114 countries
across all regions. The map below visualizes the global distribution of Bank Group projects by
product line, where product lines are known as WB Lending, WB AAA, IFC Investment, IFC
Advisory, and MIGA guarantees. Just over 50 percent of countries have more than two product
lines.


Figure B.1. World Bank Group Support towards Financial Inclusion by Types of Institutional
Engagements



                                                                                                                                                                                          3



                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                      1           3
                                                                                              1                       3                                       2
                                                                                                                  5                                                                       4
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                      4               2               4
                                                                                                      4                                   3       1
                                                                                                                          2                                       4
                                                                                      4                                           1
                                                                                                                                      1                   5                                       4
                                                                        3                                                     3
                                                                                1                 1                                                       5                   3
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
         3                                                                                                                                                                4           3       3
                            3                                       1       2                                                                 1                                           3
                        2                                                             2                                                                                                                   3
             3 4                                        1   2                                     1                                       2
                                        1                                   2                                                                                                                 2
                   32                                                           2 4                                                   1
                                                                2                                                                 3
                                        2                           3 3 3                                                                                                     4
                            4                                                             4                                                                       1                       1
                                                                                                                          3   4
                        2                                                                                 4       4                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                          4                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                            5                       4                                             1                       4 4         1
                                                                                                              4                                                                                                            2
                                    3
                                                                                                                      1                   4   2
                                                                                                  1       3
                                1           2


                                                3                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               …

Source: IEG Portfolio Review.
Note: Each country receives one point for having at least one project in each of the following areas: WB Lending, WB AAA, IFC
Investment, IFC Advisory, MIGA guarantees. All figures are preliminary.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      43 | P a g e
3.     Overall, financial inclusion interventions have been more prevalent in the Africa Re-
gion by number of projects, while Latin America has seen the largest share of project com-
mitments (see figure B.2). However, there are differences both across and within World Bank
Group institutions. For example, nearly half of IFC Advisory Services projects and commit-
ments are in Africa (27 percent of projects; 31 percent of commitments) and South Asia (23 per-
cent of projects; 17 percent of commitments). On the other hand, while nearly half of IFC In-
vestments are Latin America (27 percent) and Europe and Central Asia (20 percent) these
represent an even greater share of its commitments in these regions (36 percent in LAC and 30
percent in ECA).

4.      MIGA, on the other hand, is heavily focused on Europe and Central Asia with 48 per-
cent of projects and 61 percent of gross exposure. LAC 28 percent of projects but 13 percent of
gross exposure while SAR 12 percent of projects and 24 percent of gross exposure. AFR is
smallest with 12 percent of projects but only 2 percent of gross exposure.


Figure B.2. Regional Distribution of World Bank Group Support towards Financial Inclusion
                         By Numbers                     By Commitment/Gross Exposure Value




                                               …

Source: IEG Portfolio Review.
Note: All figures are preliminary.

5.     By number of projects, the World Bank Lending portfolio is concentrated in the Afri-
ca region (38 percent of projects), but these account for only 8 percent of project commit-
ments. On the other hand, LAC represents 17 percent of projects but 32 percent of commit-
ments. South Asia represents only 16 percent of number of projects but 30 percent of
commitments. World Bank AAA regional distribution shows small differences when comparing
number of projects to commitments (i.e. SAR AAA accounts for 23 percent of projects and 25
percent of commitments).




                                                                                      44 | P a g e
Across Income Levels, while World Bank Group interventions are evenly distributed across
Lower, Lower-middle, and Upper-middle countries by number of projects, 86 percent of
commitments reside in Lower-middle and Upper-middle income countries. For IFC Investment,
33 percent of projects and 51 percent of commitments reside in Upper-middle Income countries.
More than half of MIGA’s projects (56 percent) and gross exposure (54 percent) reside in Lower-
middle Income countries.


Figure B.3. Distribution of World Bank Group Support towards Financial Inclusion by Income Level
                         By Numbers                      By Commitment/Gross Exposure Value




                                                …

Source: IEG Portfolio Review.
Note: All figures are preliminary.

Across the three institutions and their respective product lines, credit is the focal area, though
payments, savings, and rural finance represent a significant amount of activity especially for
World Bank Lending and IFC Investment.




                                                                                       45 | P a g e
Figure B.4. Financial Inclusion Portfolio Components by Institution

        WB Lend
        0
        Credit     AAA
               WB AS
               MIGA
               IFC IS
        250
        200
        150
        100
        50
        300
        Number




                                                 …

Source: IEG Portfolio Review.
Note: All figures are preliminary




6.     As can be seen in Figure B.5., the type of activity carried out by each of the World
Bank Group institutions varies according to their respective strengths and advantages. For
example, World Bank activities are evenly distributed across legal, supervision/standards, fi-
nancial literacy, and financial infrastructure, with increased support in the area of regulation.
Meanwhile IFC Advisory is heavily focused on supporting financial intermediaries, firms, and
individuals through technical assistance and capacity building while IFC Investment and MIGA
Guarantees are focused wholly on channeling funds through financial intermediaries.




                                                                                      46 | P a g e
Figure B.5. Expanded View of Financial Inclusion Portfolio Components towards Enabling
Environment, Advisory and Funding




                                              …

Source: IEG Portfolio Review.
Note: All figures are preliminary.




                                                                                     47 | P a g e
Attachment C

Evaluation Design Matrix

                                                                                                        Data collection          Data analysis
Evaluation questions                        Information required           Information sources             methods                 methods               Limitations

Has the World Bank Group been effective and efficient in creating better functioning markets that provide the full range of financial services to the poor and micro
enterprises at adequate quality?

    1.   Has the World Bank Group’s
         support for inclusive finance
         been relevant to client
         countries?
              a.   Given the body of       Information on               Systematic Reviews (SRs)                             Meta evaluation and
                   evidence from the       effectiveness of financial   of Impact evaluations (IEs),                         policy analysis
                   literature and          inclusion interventions,     policy documents, portfolio
                   increasing number       economic rationale for       data
                   of impact               public policy
                   evaluations, is there   interventions, WBG
                   a sound economic        portfolio data
                   rationale for World
                   Bank Group to be
                   active in financial
                   inclusion?
                                           Information on the nature    Strategies, operational                              Document review,
              b.   What are IFC’s,                                                                     Document retrieval,   portfolio analysis,   Some strategy has been
                                           of WBG support, project      notes and frameworks,
                   MIGA’s and World                                                                    interviews with key   organizational and    implicit, or embodied
                                           components and design        project design documents
                   Bank’s support                                                                      informants            strategic mapping,    internally or informal in
                                           features; information on     (PADs, Board Documents,
                   instruments for                                                                                           interviews with key   presentations and
                                           institutional strategies     Underwriting Documents
                   inclusive finance                                                                                         informants            memos that may be
                                           and frameworks
                   and how do they                                                                                                                 hard to find.
                   relate to each
                   institution’s
                   corporate strategy?
                   How do they differ      Information on resources                                                          Resources mapping
                   from each other,                                                                    Portfolio analysis,                         Indicators on the need /
                                           allocations of financial                                                          to assess resources
                   and are they                                                                        data collections/                           sector maturity /
                                           inclusion interventions,                                                          deployment and

                                                                                                                                                              48 | P a g e
                                                                                                         Data collection          Data analysis
Evaluation questions                       Information required           Information sources               methods                 methods                   Limitations

                 consistent and          country level indictors for   Project documents, portfolio     retrieval             indicators of relative    constraints at country
                 complementary?          need of these                 databases; Country               (indicators)          need and constraints      level may not cover all
                                         interventions                 Assistance Strategies                                                            aspects of all WBG
             c. How strategically did                                  (CAS) and their Completion                             Portfolio analysis to     client countries. IEG will
                  the World Bank         Information on relevance      Report Reviews (CASCR-                                 assess relevance of       outline limitations in the
                  Group allocate its     of systemic interventions     Rs) country level data on                              interventions based on    report.
                  resources on           given the countries’ level    maturity / constraints with re   Portfolio analysis,   micro evaluation
                  financial inclusion    need and relative                                              data collections/     ratings                   Potentially a significant
                                                                       to financial inclusion;
                  interventions to       development priorities /                                       retrieval                                       share of WBG systemic
                                                                       Findex, MIX, EIU FSAP                                  Content Analysis to
                  those countries how    constraints re financial                                       (indicators)                                    interventions has been
                                                                       data, informal enterprise                              assess in how far
                  need them most?        inclusion                                                                                                      carried out through non-
                                                                       survey data.                                           projects addressed        lending / AAA which is
             d. How well did systemic    Information on relevance                                                             priority issues           not embedded in a
                  interventions that     of funding support given                                                             according to the          results framework nor its
                  aim at improving the   the countries’ level need                                                            relevant CAS, CASCR-      outcomes evaluated
                  enabling               and relative development                                                             Rs, EIU, FSAP, MIX        independently upon
                  environment for        priorities / constraints re                                    Portfolio analysis,   data                      completion; outcomes of
                  financial inclusion    financial inclusion                                            data collections/                               non-lending will hence
                  address client                                                                                              Country case studies
                                                                                                        retrieval                                       only be assessed based
                  countries’                                                                                                  (desk-based and
                                                                                                        (indicators)                                    on existing self-ratings
                  constraints and                                                                                             missions) to get
                                                                                                                              context information       and, in an independent
                  priorities?                                                                                                                           manner, in the context of
                                                                                                                              and expand coverage
                                                                                                                              to non-lending            country case studies
                                                                                                                              activities / systemic     (desk based and
             e. How well did                                                                                                  intervention / enabling   missions)
                  interventions that                                                                                          environment
                  provided finance for
                  the supply of micro
                  finance reflect the
                  country’s enabling
                  environment /
                  systemic factors?




                                                                                                                                                                   49 | P a g e
                                                                                                       Data collection            Data analysis
Evaluation questions                          Information required          Information sources           methods                   methods                   Limitations

2. Has the World Bank Group been
   effective in its systemic interventions
   to create an enabling environment?
  a. To what extent have projects and
     project components that targeted        Information on achieving    Ratings and qualitative      Data extraction of      Portfolio analysis of     Potentially a significant
     the enabling environment for            the respective objectives   information on development   ratings and specific    portfolio data and        share of WBG systemic
     inclusive finance achieved their        of creating an enabling     outcomes and results         section within the      outcome ratings to        interventions has been
     stated objectives? Have such            environment                 achievement from IEG         micro evaluation        assess development        carried out through non-
     interventions effectively addressed                                 validated micro evaluation   documents               outcomes / results        lending / AAA which is
     deficiencies in regulatory and                                      systems, including ICRs,     referring to            achievements              not embedded in a
     oversight regimes; improved                                         PPARs, XPSRs, PES,           achievement of set      including patterns        results framework nor its
     consumer protection regulations                                     PERs, PRC, PIMs, mission     objective (rating                                 outcomes evaluated
     and enforcement thereof;                                                                                                 Content analysis to
                                                                         case study interviews with   and other                                         upon completion;
     contributed to enhancing the                                                                                             identify patterns of
                                                                         relevant experts and         qualitative                                       outcomes of non-lending
                                                                                                                              success and failure in
     financial infrastructure (credit                                    stakeholders, beneficiary    information                                       will hence only be
     bureaus, collateral registers etc.);                                                                                     micro evaluation
                                                                         assessments.                 indicating success                                assessed in the context
     and enabled adequate                                                                                                     documents
                                                                                                      or failure) and                                   of country case studies
     competition?                                                                                     portfolio analysis of   Country case studies      (desk based and
                                                                                                      the thus obtained       (desk-based and           missions). In addition,
  b. What can we learn from cases
                                                                                                      data                    missions) to identify     many observed changes
     where the implementation of
                                                                                                                              detailed context          may be attributable to a
     systemic interventions was
                                                                                                                              information and gain      variety of positive and
     particularly successful or failed?
                                                                                                                              in-depth understanding    negative factors,
                                                                                                                              factors of success and    including the work of
                                                                                                                              failure; identify         Governments and other
                                                                                                                              common patterns           donors and major events
                                                                                                                              across regions            such as the global
                                                                                                                                                        financial crisis. This
                                                                                                                              Contribution analysis     complicates the task of
                                                                                                                              to assess the linkages    identifying WBG
                                                                                                                              of WBG interventions      contribution.
                                                                                                                              and development
                                                                                                                              outcomes in the
                                                                                                                              context of the mission-
                                                                                                                              based country cases
                                                                                                                              studies


                                                                                                                                                                  50 | P a g e
                                                                                                             Data collection            Data analysis
Evaluation questions                          Information required           Information sources                methods                   methods                   Limitations

3. Has the World Bank Group been
   effective in funding institutions that
   provide financial services to the poor
   and microenterprises, including
   funding through intermediaries or
   apex institutions? Has the World
   Bank Group been effective in advising
   these institutions in improving their
   performance?

  a. To what extent has such a financial    Information on
     support through line of credits,       development outcomes
     investments and/or guarantees          and performance of                                              Data extraction of      Portfolio analysis of     Data on the supply of
     helped increase the supply of          projects; information on                                        ratings, quantitative   performance / results     financial services as
     financial services to the poor and     supply of financial                                             and qualitative         reported in micro         contained in the project
     microenterprise? To what extent        services; information on                                        information and         evaluation documents      documents may be
     did its advice improve their           performance of advisory       Project level evaluation data     specific section                                  incomplete or not
     performance?                           clients                       (ICRs, PPARs, PCRs,               within the micro        Country case studies      representative for the
                                                                          XPSRs etc.); development          evaluation              (desk-based and           entire country; MIX data
  b. Is there evidence that World Bank      Information on                outcome ratings; qualitative      documents               missions) to identify     do not cover all
     Group interventions contributed to     development outcomes          information from these                                    detailed country level    countries equally and
     improved access to payments,           and performance of            sources; country case                                     data on outcomes,         hence data will not be
     savings, credit and insurance for      projects; information on      studies; CAS, CASCR-Rs;                                   access to financial       comprehensive or
     the poor and microenterprises?         access to financial           MIX data, financial data on                               services, effects on      representative;
     Has such access been of the            services, including on        relevant financial institutions                           households and            household and
     needed quality, affordable,            qualitative aspects etc.;                                                               enterprises; and gain     enterprise data may lack
     following consumer protection          information on usage of                                                                 in-depth understanding    in micro evaluations
     regulations, and embedded in a         financial services                                                                      factors of success and    documents (ICRS,
     stable financial system? And has                                                                                               failure                   PPARs, XPSRs etc.);
     such access led to increase                                                                                                                              enterprise survey data
     usage?                                                                                                                         Contribution analysis     focuses on specific
                                            Subject to availability,                                                                to assess the linkages    countries and hence is
  c. Subject to availability of data, to    information on welfare of                                                               of WBG interventions      not representative;
     what extent has the increase           FI clients / beneficiaries,                                                             and development           contribution analysis and
                                                                                                            Focus groups,
     supply of micro financial services     including on household                                                                  outcomes in the           stakeholder
                                                                                                            beneficiary
     supported poor household to            income level,                                                                           context of the mission-   assessments can only
     improve their livelihood, increase

                                                                                                                                                                        51 | P a g e
                                                                                                         Data collection            Data analysis
Evaluation questions                         Information required           Information sources             methods                   methods                  Limitations

    and/or smoothened their income,        consumption,                  Household data, MIX data       assessments             based country cases      be carried out for
    supported consumption, allowed to      investments, health/                                                                 studies                  mission-based country
    mitigate risk?                         education expenditures                                                                                        case studies and are
                                                                                                                                Beneficiary              there for mainly for
  d. Subject to availability of data, to   Information on FI clients /                                                          assessments of           providing insights into a
     what extent has the increase          beneficiaries, including                                                             households and / or      subgroups of
     supply of micro financial services    on micro enterprises and                                                             micro / very small       beneficiaries; beneficiary
     supported microenterprises to         their investments in                                                                 enterprises through      assessment will not
     growth, increase their employment,    assets, revenue changes                                      Focus groups,           focus groups or          follow randomized
     sales, investment, or productivity?   and employment etc.                                          beneficiary             surveys in the context   control trial protocol as
                                                                         MIX data                       assessments;            of one or two mission-   this would have to be
                                                                                                        analysis of             based country cases      launched at the start of
                                                                                                        enterprise survey       studies                  project implementation;
                                                                                                        data                                             control groups can only
                                                                                                                                                         be synthetically
                                                                                                                                                         produced; beneficiaries
                                                                                                                                                         that dropped out of the
                                                                                                                                                         scheme can only be
                                                                                                                                                         captured if the MFI kept
                                                                                                                                                         a record of them;
                                                                                                                                                         substitution effects
                                                                                                                                                         cannot be assessed.

4. Are World Bank Group interventions
   in inclusive finance efficient
   instruments, from both a program and                                                                                         Portfolio analysis of
   institutional perspective?              Information on client                                                                results reported in
                                           reach, client structure of                                                           micro evaluation
  a. To what extent has support in                                                                                              documents
     inclusive finance reached the poor    supported MFIs
     and microenterprises?                 Information of utilization                                                                                    Project level record or
                                                                                                                                Content analysis to      micro evaluation reports
  b. What is the utilization rate of       of LoCs, loan portfolio                                                              identify patterns of
                                           size, composition,                                                                                            (PPARs, ICRs, XPSRs
     support provided (e.g. lines of                                                                                            success and failure in   etc.) may not contained
                                           business success /            Project level evaluation       Data extraction and     micro evaluation
     credit (LoCs), guarantees, and                                                                                                                      the detail information
                                           profitability and quality     reports (ICRs, PPARs,          portfolio analysis of   documents
     other instruments for inclusive                                                                                                                     needed to assess the
                                                                         PCRs, XPSRs etc.);             supported projects
     finance)?                                                                                                                                           targeting of the poor /
                                                                         qualitative information from                           Country case studies

                                                                                                                                                                    52 | P a g e
                                                                                                             Data collection         Data analysis
Evaluation questions                            Information required            Information sources             methods                methods                     Limitations

  c. Are the activities either profitable or                                 these sources; country case                         (desk-based and             MVSEs; or the utilization
     sustainable? What is the                                                studies; CAS, CASCR-Rs;                             missions) to identify       of specific support types.
     profitability of IFC and mainstream       Information on outcomes       MIX data                                            detailed country level
     MIGA activities? For World Bank           being sustained, i.e.                                                             data on targeting of the
     and for all subsidized WBG                effective beyond WBG                                                              poor and MVSEs;
                                               support; information of on                                                                                    WBG M&E systems do
     activities, are they meeting the                                                                                            utilization rate of LoCs;   not foresee project
     target rate of return? After World        financial status / business                                                       update of previously
                                               success / rate of return of                                                                                   outcomes being
     Bank Group interventions, is there                                                                                          evaluated projects          monitored beyond
     an enduring benefit in correcting         supported projects /                                                              (based on existing
                                               MFIs; information on                                                                                          project closure; hence
     the market failure?                                                                                                         ICRs; PPARs, XPSRs,         sustainability of FI
                                               sustained correction of                                                           PERs etc.) and gain in-
                                               factors leading to market                                                                                     interventions can only
                                                                                                                                 depth understanding         be assessed in the
                                               failure                                                                           factors of success and      context of mission-
                                                                                                                                 failure                     based country case
                                                                                                                                                             studies.

5. Is the World Bank Group effectively
   managing factors within its control?
  a. How well did country strategies           Information on alignment      Record of the WBG [and         Document retrieval   Literature review of
     reflect World Bank Group’s                of WBG research               CGAP] research                                      WBG research,
     research and knowledge in                 agenda, content and           /publication activity;                              complemented by
     inclusive finance?                        WBG strategies                institutional strategies and                        literature of external
                                                                             operational frameworks                              sources
                                                                                                                                 Content analysis to
                                                                                                                                 assess alignment of
                                                                                                                                 strategies with WBG
                                                                                                                                 research outcomes /
                                                                                                                                 results
                                                                                                                                 Country case studies
                                                                                                                                 (desk-based and
                                                                                                                                 missions) to assess
                                                                                                                                 alignment of strategies
                                                                                                                                 with WBG research
                                                                                                                                 outcomes on the
                                                                                                                                 ground with a more

                                                                                                                                                                        53 | P a g e
                                                                                                         Data collection           Data analysis
Evaluation questions                        Information required            Information sources             methods                  methods                    Limitations

                                                                                                                               holistic approach
  b. Is the WBG meeting its established
     work quality standard in                                                                                                  Portfolio analysis of
     preparation, implementation and                                                                                           portfolio data to assess
     supervision? How does                 Information working           Project level evaluation       Data extraction of
                                                                                                                               work quality of project
     performance vary by country           quality standards and         reports (ICRs, PPARs,          ratings and specific
                                                                                                                               portfolio and how they
     conditions, and the presence or       meeting thereof               PCRs, XPSRs etc.);             section within the
                                                                                                                               vary by country, region
     absence of complementary or                                         qualitative information from   micro evaluation
                                                                                                                               and if and how the
     precedent reform reforms or                                         these sources; country case    documents
                                                                                                                               results correlate with
     projects?                                                           studies; CAS, CASCR-Rs;        referring to work
                                                                                                                               presence / absence of
                                                                                                        quality and
                                                                                                                               related reform efforts
                                                                                                        achievement of set
                                                                                                        objective (rating      Econometric and
                                                                                                        and other              statistical analysis of
  c. Are World Bank Group monitoring                                                                    qualitative            relationship of
     and reporting standards adequate?                                                                  information            favorable development
                                                                                                        indicating success     outcomes to measured
                                                                                                        or failure)            IEG flags for work
                                           Information M&E               Project level evaluation                              quality.
                                           standards and meeting         reports (ICRs, PPARs,                                 Portfolio analysis of
  d. Are the three World Bank Group        thereof                       PCRs, XPSRs etc.);             Data extraction of
     institutions leveraging synergies                                                                                         to assess M&E
                                                                         qualitative information from   ratings and specific
     through adequate coordination and                                                                                         activities and if they
                                                                         these sources; country case    section within the
     sequencing of interventions? To                                                                                           are fir for purpose
                                                                         studies; CAS, CASCR-Rs;        micro evaluation
     what extent have complementary                                                                     documents              Country case studies       Coordination efforts tend
     interventions contributed to the      Information on the extent     Qualitative information on     referring to M&E       (desk-based and            to be poorly documented
     effectiveness of assistance? Has      to which World Bank           WBG coordination and                                  missions) to assess        in project documents
     the presence or absence of            Group units worked in the     leveraging of synergies        Document retrieval                                and micro evaluation
                                                                                                                               adequateness of M&E
     multiple activities and/or            same country, set of          from IEG validated micro                              standards and practice     documents, according to
     sequenced activities influenced       interventions, regions etc.   evaluation systems,                                                              IEG experience; hence
     outcomes?                                                           including ICRs, PPARs,         Interviews with key    WBG staff                  the document-based
                                                                         XPSRs, PES, PERs, PRC,         informants and         interviews/survey.         review will have to be
  e. What can we learn from successful                                   PIMs, CASCR-Rs, CPEs           project                                           complemented by
                                           Information on                                                                      Portfolio analysis of
     or failed World Bank Group                                          etc.                           stakeholders,                                     country visits to
                                           complementary role,                                                                 to assess leveraging of
     coordination across the various                                                                    including at the                                  complete the picture
                                           coordination and                                                                    synergies and
     units contributing to the inclusive                                                                country level
                                           collaboration of World                                                              complementary roles


                                                                                                                                                                    54 | P a g e
                                                                                                        Data collection      Data analysis
Evaluation questions                                   Information required       Information sources      methods             methods           Limitations

               finance agenda?                        Bank Group activities at                                            Country case studies
                                                      project and country level                                           (desk-based and
                                                                                                                          missions) to assess
                                                                                                                          adequateness of
                                                                                                                          coordination and
                                                                                                                          complementary roles,
                                                                                                                          given the country
                                                                                                                          specific context and
                                                                                                                          history of WBG
                                                                                                                          engagement




Version control: April 28, 2014, 10.00am, Version 1




                                                                                                                                                     55 | P a g e
Endnotes

1 Based on 2011 World Bank Findex data of which an update is expected in time for the final evalua-
tion; and IFC 2010.
2 The literature suggests a mixed experience in practice, which will be discussed on pages 5-6.
3 The President’s statement especially emphasized electronic payments as an entrée to the financial

system. “As early as 2020, such instruments as e-money accounts, along with debit cards and low-
cost regular bank accounts, can significantly increase financial access for those who are now exclud-
ed.” However, he also emphasized the importance of a range of services: ““When low-income
workers or poor families gain access to basic financial services, they gain a foothold on the first rung
of the ladder toward prosperity. Access to savings accounts, credit or remittances can help families
afford essential services like water, electricity, housing, education and health care. When firms gain
access to financial services such as credit or insurance, they can reduce business risks, expand their
firms and create more jobs.” Source: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
release/2013/10/11/universal-financial-access-vital-reducing-poverty-innovation-jim-yong-kim
4 Consistent with IFC usage of this term, these include microenterprises of less than 5 employees and

very small enterprises of less than 10 employees.
5 It would provide little benefit (and potentially great cost), for example, to try to increase the num-

bers of those who hold an account with the formal sector if they do not use it. By contrast, focusing
only or mainly on access may distort incentives. In this context, by formal, IEG means established
under and governed by law, whether or not the law is well-enforced.
6 At the country level, the Global Findex data show sharp disparities in the use of financial services

between high-income and developing countries. The share of adults in high-income countries who
are “banked” is more than twice that in developing countries. In low-income countries formal ac-
count penetration stands at only 24 percent, compared to 89 percent in high-income countries. Look-
ing more closely at the individual level, data also show significant variations. Wealthier adults tend
to make greater use of formal financial services; in developing countries, adults in the highest 20 per-
cent of income earners are more than twice as likely to have an account as those in the lowest 20 per-
cent Disparities in the use of financial services based on many of these parameters exist also in devel-
oped countries, but they are more pronounced in developing countries. In other words, if you live in
a developing country, it matters more whether you are poor, have a low level of education, or live in
a rural area.
7 Source: EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University of London.

Main Findings: No good evidence for benefit of microfinance on well-being of poor. RCTs: No evi-
dence on positive impact of microfinance interventions on well-being of poor. Impact found on busi-
ness activities. Few impacts on health, education, subjective well-being, income or consumption ex-
penditures. Pipeline designs studies: Little significant effect of microfinance on well-being. Limited
evidence of strong positive impacts. Greatest impacts reported by studies with the weakest designs.
With/without, before/after and panel designs: Mixed results. Longitudinal study – problems con-
trolling for unobservables. IEs of microfinance tend to have low internal validity.
8 Full Title: Do Micro-credit, Micro-savings and Micro-leasing Serve as Effective Financial Inclusion Inter-

ventions Enabling Poor People, and Especially Women, to Engage in Meaningful Economic Opportunities in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries? A Systematic Review of the Evidence. Main Findings: Varied evi-
dence made it difficult to draw conclusions. Both micro-credit and micro-savings can reduce poverty
but do not in all circumstances, nor for all clients. No evidence on micro-leasing. Unanswered ques-
tions: success of micro-leasing, micro-credit and micro-savings in enabling poor clients to engage in



                                                                                               56 | P a g e
economic opportunities…and outcomes. Do not know circumstances in which these interventions are
successful nor whether targeting women is more effective than mainstream interventions.
9 Main Findings: Innovatively designed savings products as a short-term solution can increase in-

come of the poor. Mobile phones can lead to increased household consumption and asset accumula-
tion via increased income. No evidence on impact of debit cards or other payment methods. Im-
proved access to credit associated with improved ability of farmers to generate income through
production and output, with potential spillovers to social networks. Credit leads to higher agricultur-
al incomes. No evidence on impact of financial literacy. More research needed to understand impact
of different technologies, effect of savings products on behavior.
10 Main Findings: Positive impact of microcredit and microsavings on clients’ incomes, expenditures,

housing and asset accumulation. Microfinance also positively affects health, nutrition and food secu-
rity, but microcredit seems to affect negatively clients’ children’s education, likely because it may
create a problem paying school fees. No significant effect of microcredit on job creation. Microfinance,
specifically microcredit, might increase poverty by fostering consumption rather than investment.
Indeed, business seems to fail to generate profits to pay for the high interest rates of microcredit. Re-
sults suggest that microfinance can reduce households’ vulnerability to negative shocks. Micro-
finance should target poor entrepreneurs instead of treating every poor individual as a prospective
entrepreneur. Indeed, microsavings is overall more effective than microcredit in reducing poverty, as
it does not require high income to pay off the debt.
11 6 Regions: 44 impact evaluations: eighteen studies from Africa; eight from South Asia; eight from

East Asia; eight from Latin America and the Caribbean; one from the Middle East and North Africa;
and one from Central Asia and Eastern Europe. Included studies evaluated private-sector interven-
tions to either improve access to finance (A2F) or farmer and business training interventions, or both.
Main Findings: A2F interventions generally produce positive impacts on agricultural outcomes, such
as adoption of technologies…with resulting increases in production, productivity, and/or farm in-
come and profits. A significant portion of the positive results when disaggregated by value chains or
groups of beneficiaries reveal…statistically not significant effects for some value chains or groups of
beneficiaries. [T]he few A2F evaluations that examine impacts on per capita consumption and pov-
erty generally show positive results… Most of the successful A2F projects combined provision of
credit to farmers with training, technical advice, or other kinds of help… Evaluations of farmer and
business training initiatives have identified positive effects on immediate outcomes such as adoption
of technologies…but mixed results for longer-term outcomes such as productivity, farm income and
profits.
12 Main Findings: Social programs to improve the capabilities of poor seem overall to have a positive

effect on a wide range of outcomes. Impact assessments of microfinance and microenterprise pro-
grams found mixed results. Self-selection can mislead interpretation of results. People who self-select
to participate in a program cannot be compared to people who choose not to participate. Results on
impact of microfinance institutions are mixed. Evaluations in Peru and Brazil indicate a positive ef-
fect on the income of clients. Results for Chile and Bolivia are not significant, or are negative. Results
of evaluation of microenterprise training programs are mostly positive-- improved income, the likeli-
hood of business survival after four months, and repayment rates to microfinance institutions. Condi-
tionality improves social program results by affecting the behavior of beneficiaries. Interventions that
include supply-side and demand-side components are more effective.
13 Main Findings: An efficacy study found household with hypothetical product increased purchase

of fertilizer. Another showed insurance plus loan made farmers less likely to purchase inputs com-
pared to loan only. Eleven studies on take up identify non-price factors associated with higher de-
mand: higher income, greater liquidity and financial literacy, lower income diversification, trust in
and familiarity with provider and product. Promotion of insurance focusing on vulnerability,
group/family responsibility or network-based trust may increase demand. Conclusions: Removing
liquidity constraints and providing information may increase take-up. Products combined with agric.
extension programs and financial literacy training may enhance take-up, impact. Need for more rig-

                                                                                              57 | P a g e
orous impact evaluations, gaps in evidence on take-up and impact, half evidence from lab experi-
ments, little info on effects of risk, financial literacy, consumer education and group-based micro-
insurance.
14 Main Findings: Grants to microenterprise: One study reported measured effects of transfer of

grants between men and women. It found that accumulation of assets and durables increases when
grants are made to men rather than women. They suggest that female entrepreneurs, in contrast to
male entrepreneurs, do not use small grants to make investments and do not gain returns on invest-
ments made from large grants. Microcredit: The effects across programs are heterogeneous but pro-
vide evidence of beneficial effects of microcredits given to women in terms of schooling, expendi-
tures, assets, height-for-age in children and measures of women’s empowerment. Two studies find
small and insignificant impacts of transfers on contraception and fertility, and no impact on women’s
empowerment.
15 Main Findings: Improving access to finance can help firms expand their operations, with a positive

effect on quality and number of jobs created. The effects greatest for smaller firms. Improving access
to finance for micro-enterprises can create jobs both through establishment of new businesses and
through expansion of already existing ones. The latter effect tends to dominate in rural settings. In-
vestments in services sector in urban areas and in agriculture in rural areas tend to create the most
jobs. Collective loans are likely to have stronger employment effects than individual ones. Investment
climate reforms—particularly business entry/registration reform and investment promotion—tend to
lead to the creation of new firms with positive employment effects. But firms that enter be less likely
to survive their first two years. So duration and quality of jobs created are not always clear. Training
for youth produced either no effect or positive effects depending on the country, and on way training
was designed and delivered. Combining in-class training with on-the-job training tended to have
positive effects. Training most beneficial for women and disadvantaged youth.
16 Main Findings: Microfinance has a significant positive impact on per capita income, non-land asset

value and poverty incidence. Microfinance fails, however, to engender positive change on other pov-
erty dimensions, namely non-food expenditures, per capita monthly and daily food expenditures,
medical expenditures, and livestock. Overall, across countries and methodologies, it seems that mi-
crofinance generally has a short-term positive effect on borrowers, but that this effect is not necessari-
ly sustained in the long-term. In terms of regional differences in impact, microfinance in Africa ap-
pears to have a more positive impact on poverty compared to elsewhere. A few impact studies found
that the effect of microfinance on households’ poverty and well-being is more likely to be significant-
ly positive in the case of women borrowers in Asia and South America. The impact microfinance has
on the poorest households is inconclusive. Experimental studies unanimously report insignificant
and/or significant negative impact of microfinance on all the poverty dimensions and variables con-
sidered in this study while reports from quasi-experimental research are more mixed.
17 Insurance includes micro-insurance. Payments include person to person (P2P), person to business

(P2B) and government to person (G2P) payments, including international remittances.
18 IEG’s preliminary portfolio review indicates that most World Bank Group investments, guarantees,

and loans support credit; fewer support savings, payment, and insurance. It is natural that the focus
of World Bank Group’s investment / loan portfolio has been more on credit, as savings, payments,
and insurance require less financing. In these cases the users are putting money into the system in the
form of deposits, premiums, and payments and income is earned directly from those payments.
19 The preliminary portfolio analysis revealed that the World Bank has been active in a range of regu-

latory issues, in some cases playing a role in developing standards as well as assessing country prac-
tices and in providing technical assistance. In this context, the FSAP plays an important role. Jointly
implemented by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, FSAPs analyze countries’
financial sector regulatory and prudential frameworks, including their consumer protection provi-
sions. Although FSAPs provide an excellent platform to consider the framework for financial inclu-



                                                                                              58 | P a g e
sion, the Bank has only recently (2012) issued a framework to assist in consistent and uniform cover-
age of these issues.
20 As highlighted by the G20 leaders (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion 2010). But financial

education is also increasingly on the agendas of governments, nongovernmental organizations, and
the private sector. For example, see OECD/INFE (2012).
21 Putting together the “M” for mobile with pesa, which means money in Swahili, the most spoken

language in Kenya.
22 Although this would depend on the interaction of supply and demand.
23 An additional 108 financial inclusion projects evaluated between FY07-13 were identified, but these

were approved prior to 2007 and are thus not included in Table 2 (8 IFC AS, 32 IFC Investment, and
68 World Bank lending). However, they will be included in the evaluated portfolio. The difference in
coverage between the committed and evaluated portfolios will be clearly represented in the evalua-
tion.
24 But not including SMEs.
25 For these master contracts, its subprojects were recorded as a single project for each host country

except for Ukraine, Georgia, and Serbia, where each host country had more than one guarantee and
thus the collection of guarantees for a host country counted as one project.
26 Including PCRs = Project Completion Report; PIMs = Post Implementation Monitoring reports

(both IFC Advisory Services); IFC investment supervision and monitoring reports. World Bank AAA
work for this period was not subject to IEG validation, so self-evaluation is the only source of infor-
mation.




                                                                                           59 | P a g e
