                                                                 93679
TRANSPORT & ICT GLOBAL PRACTICE




OPEN DATA FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH
IN RUSSIA




                                              Photo by Ilya Dobrioglo




                                  JULY 2014

                                                             1
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments:	  .........................................................................................................................	  2	  
       ............................................................................................................................................	  3	  
Summary	  
Introduction	  .....................................................................................................................................	  5	  
                                              ....................................................................................................	  6	  
The	  Size	  of	  the	  Potential	  Prize	  
Unique	  Characteristics	  and	  Challenges	  ...................................................................................	  8	  
What	  data	  is	  most	  important	  for	  economic	  growth	  .........................................................	  10	  
Open	  Data	  Companies	  ................................................................................................................	  11	  
Types	  of	  Businesses	  ....................................................................................................................	  12	  
Implications	  for	  Russia	  ..............................................................................................................	  14	  
Conclusion	  ......................................................................................................................................	  22	  




                                                                                                                                                          1
Acknowledgments:

This report was prepared by Andrew Stott, Senior Open Data Consultant, World
Bank. Thanks to colleagues within the World Bank and external experts who have
contributed to and commented on this paper in draft, as well as to the original
research by McKinsey, Deloitte, the EU and others cited in the report.

Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.

Copyright Statement:

This report, created by The World Bank, is available under the Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported (CCBY3.0) license.




                                                                                    2
Summary
1. Many governments are pursuing Open Data policies. One of the key policy
drivers has been to use Open Data to drive economic growth and business
innovation. This paper examines the evidence for the economic potential of Open
Data and concludes that, despite a variation in published estimates and some
methodological difficulties, the potential is very large indeed. For example, the study
by Graham Vickery of Information Economics investigated direct and indirect
benefits of open data and concluded that they could have been of the order of 200
billion Euro in 2008 for the whole EU. More recently McKinsey have claimed that,
globally, seven sectors alone could generate more than $3 trillion a year in additional
value as a result of open data. In the United Kingdom an independent review was
commissioned as the evidence base for the next phase of the Open Data program
and published in 2013. It “conservatively” estimated the direct economic benefits of
public sector information at around £1.8bn a year, with an overall impact including
direct and indirect benefits (such as time saved by access to real-time travel data) of
around £6.8bn.

2. The report reviews the latest data about companies using Open Data, and
highlights four companies which did not exist ten years ago, which are driven by
Open Data, and which are each now valued at around $1 billion or more. It
discusses the five archetypical types of businesses using Open Data, and cites
concrete examples of each, and discusses the types of data which are proving most
likely to lead to widespread business adoption and innovation. One of the examples
of successful open data companies is Zillow with a market capitalisation of over $3
billion, provides a home and real estate on-line marketplace. Climate Corp, acquired
for $930 million by Monsanto in October 2013, uses 60 years of detailed crop yield
data, weather observations from one million locations in the United States and 14
terabytes of soil quality data - all free from the US Government - to provide
applications that help farmers improve their profits by making better informed
operating and financing decisions.

3. The paper suggests that since Open Data is relatively new in Russia it is
unsurprising that there is less evidence of actual economic returns so far.
Nevertheless rapid progress has been made, with the successful publication of over
500 datasets as promised by July 2013. Subsequently the first version of the
Russian Open Data portal data.gov.ru has been launched, and already contains
close to 1300 datasets. In addition to the release of data from Ministries of the
Russian Federation there have been creditable Open Data initiatives in several
regions, with 8 regional open data portals, and in major cities such as Moscow and
St Petersburg. There is no fundamental reason why Russia should not be able to
exploit the economic advantages of Open Data for itself - and indeed why Russia
should not be a global leader in the exploitation of Open Data elsewhere in the
region and globally. In addition to the available data and well-advanced digitisation of
the government, Russia has active venture capital sector with both state and private
sources of capital, high-speed broadband and mobile internet infrastructure and
necessary technical skills.

                                                                                      3
4. The report makes some recommendations for policies and actions which the
Government of the Russian Federation could take to maximise the economic growth
possible from their data - and suggests that the Government should see itself not
only as a Supplier of Open Data but also as a Leader, Catalyst and User of it.

5. As a Supplier the Government needs to release the data it holds which is needed
for economic growth and business innovation (including core reference data such as
maps, address databases, demographic data, transport data, company registers,
etc.), to do so publicly and regularly, and to steadily improve quality (including
releasing fine-grained and disaggregated data) and access.

6. As a Leader in addition to the data which the Federal Government itself holds, it
will need to provide both policies and active leadership and encouragement to other
institutions to release data important to economic growth and business innovation.
This includes public institutions at regional and city level, state owned enterprises,
and private sector companies providing important public services.

7. As a Catalyst the Government of the Russian Federation should nurture a thriving
ecosystem of data users, coders, and application developers and incubating new,
data-driven businesses. It needs to ensure that Open Data portals are more
collaborative and demand-driven (for example, place links to related datasets or
other assets), actively support and incubate innovation using Open Data and create
institutional structures to do that on a sustainable basis (similar to Open Data
Institute in the UK). Each Ministry should have a strategy and a target for generating
economic growth and business innovation in its sector from the data it and other
public institutions in its sector hold, and the strategies should be reviewed and
approved by the Government Commission on Open Government (for instance, in the
United States, there is an annual “Health Datapalooza” to showcase innovation using
health data).

8. As a User the Government needs to promote the use of public data within its own
Ministries and the public institutions at regional and city level. This will also mean
investment in skills and tools. It should also mean that the government should be a
leading, and proactive, customer for innovative private sector products and services
using open data, including advanced analytic services to improve internal decision
making and to help create new services. In addition using one’s own data can give
greater understanding of how the data could be made more usable and useful.




                                                                                    4
Introduction
9. Governments collect or generate a lot of data for their own purposes or from their
own operations. A priori the collection and generation of this data is justified by the
benefits of the use of this data within governments for the purposes for which it was
collected. The benefits may be financial, for instance in terms of policy making,
resource allocation or operational management and optimisation; or they may be
non-financial, for instance in meeting legislative and other requirements for
transparency and accountability. In principle if governments did not gain a net
benefit from collecting and using the data then they would not collect it in the first
place.

10. Governments may also collect data which is not of direct benefit to government
itself but in order to provide wider economic and social benefits. For instance
cadastral information contributes to an authoritative system of land ownership and
proof of title, which has important economic benefits. In some cases the provision of
information is a natural monopoly and the government collects it as the best-placed
actor to do so - for instance the Danish government intervened to create a single,
accurate, national address register for all sectors of the economy - including the
public services themselves1.

11. However because use of data is “non-rivalrous” the fact that governments (or
others) have used the data for the purpose for which it was originally collected does
not prevent that data being used for other purposes - by others or, indeed, by other
parts of the government itself. Economic theory suggests2 that benefits are
maximised when access to the information is priced at the marginal cost of
distribution - and the internet has made the marginal cost of distribution of digitised
data by download from the web effectively zero. While there may be distribution
costs such as setting up an Open Data portal and policy and technical work to
implement the extraction data from internal databases, these are mainly one-off
expenditures which are usually infeasible or uneconomic to amortise in recurrent
charges for data access - the amounts involved are typically small compared to the
on-going costs payment collection and administration that would be necessary to
recover them.

12. So many governments have now launched “Open Data” programmes to make
their digital, machine-readable data available to business and citizens to use and
reuse free of charge for any lawful purpose. For most governments the policy
objectives have been a mixture of four distinct drivers: economic growth, including
business innovation and the creation of companies and jobs; closer and more
inclusive citizen engagement in improving public services, particularly by giving
citizens information on standards of provision and service performance which equips

1
    http://www.adresse-info.dk/Portals/2/Benefit/Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-
07-07b.pdf
2
    See for instance Pollock et al “Models of Public Sector Information Provision” 2008
http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file45136.pdf
                                                                                             5
them to be more engaged “consumers” of public services; increased transparency
and accountability; and improvement in the efficiency and operations of public
services themselves, for instance through better decision-making through access to
data from other agencies.

13. For the citizen engagement, transparency and efficiency objectives Open Data
has assisted and enhanced civic and governmental processes already underway.
However the release for the first time of government data has created completely
new opportunities for the opportunities for economic growth, innovation and jobs -
both in the creation of economic activity in new, “data-rich” services themselves and
in the wider economic benefits of the use of these services by others in the business
and personal sectors.


The Size of the Potential Prize
14. Open Data is a relatively new concept in its current, recognisable, form, dating
from 2006-07 - although in some sectors and in some countries there were earlier
developments which would now be seen as Open Data3. Even in countries which
started relatively early to release government information as Open Data the benefits
still appear to be developing. Like other innovations, it is likely to be many years
until there is full adoption and the implications for downstream users have been fully
understood. Indeed, as discussed later in this paper, the usage of Open Data
depends not only on the availability of the data itself but also on the ideas of how to
use it, and the tools to use it effectively.

15. However various policy-makers have commissioned studies of the potential
economic benefits of Open Data as an evidence base for decisions which need to be
taken now in order to take the initial step of releasing data on open terms.

16. The European Commission commissioned two studies4 as the evidence base for
their proposals to amend the EU Reuse of Public Sector Information Directive. The
POPSIS study looked at some case studies where previously restricted data had
been made Open, and showed a consistent pattern of much greater usage as a
result. The second study, by Graham Vickery of Information Economics, reviewed
the evidence from studies on public sector information re-use as a whole and other
market developments related to data. The Vickery study found that the size of the
narrowly defined EU direct, “business as usual”, public sector information reuse
market was of the order of 28 billion Euro in 2008 with an annual growth rate of
around 7%. However this excluded domains where re-use was not a principal
activity and the value of government activities. In addition it was expected that open
public sector information policies, easier access to information and the abolition of


3
    See for instance Weiss 2003 http://www.codata.org/archives/2003/03march/papers/Weiss.pdf
4
    Vickery: http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/review-recent-studies-psi-reuse-and-related-
market-developments
Deloitte/POPSIS: http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/economic-analysis-psi-impacts
                                                                                                       6
charging would further stimulate the market, with direct public sector information use
and re-use activities increasing to 40 billion Euro a year.

17. Importantly the Vickery study also investigated the indirect benefits of open data
- for instance the additional benefit to the personal or business customers of using
the services provided by the “direct” re-users. In total, and with easier access,
improved infrastructure and lower barriers, aggregate direct and indirect economic
benefits for the whole EU economy could have been of the order of 200 billion Euro
in 2008 - 1.7% of the GDP of the EU as a whole.

18. More recently McKinsey5 have claimed that, globally, seven sectors6 alone could
generate more than $3 trillion a year - and perhaps as much as $5 trillion a year - in
additional value as a result of open data. While they recognised that open data is in
its early days, they showed that it is already giving rise to hundreds of
entrepreneurial businesses and helping established companies to segment markets,
define new products and services, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
operations. McKinsey saw a clear potential to unlock significant economic value by
applying advanced analytics to both open and proprietary knowledge to help uncover
consumer preferences and allowing companies to improve new products.

19. In the United Kingdom, one of the leading governments in the field of Open Data
and one where the economic benefit has always been strongly on the agenda, an
independent review7 was commissioned as the evidence base for the next phase of
the Open Data program and published in 2013. It “conservatively” estimated the
direct economic benefits of public sector information at around £1.8bn a year, with
an overall impact including direct and indirect benefits (such as time saved by
access to real-time travel data) of around £6.8bn.

20. In Spain, a study found that the “infomediary” sector (companies that sell
services on top of Open Data) has at least 150 companies and employs around
4,000 people and generates 330-550 million Euros annually that can be directly
attributed to Open Data reuse8.

21. Other, sectorial, evidence suggests similar potential benefits. A study9 by Oxera
for Google estimated the Gross Value Added (GVA) by the Geospatial Services


5
    “Open data: Unlocking innovation and performance with liquid information” 2013
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/open_data_unlocking_innovation_and_perfor
mance_with_liquid_information
6
    Education, Transportation, Consumer Products, Electricity, Oil & Gas, Health Care and Consumer
Finance
7
    Shakespeare review: an independent review of public sector information
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/shakespeare-review-of-public-sector-information
8
    Spanish Open Data Portal Annual Report, “Characterization Study of the Infomediary Sector”, July
2012 via Cap-Gemini http://www.capgemini.com/resource-file-
access/resource/pdf/the_open_data_economy_unlocking_economic_value_by_opening_government
_and_public_data.pdf
                                                                                                       7
Sector as $113 billion a year, 0.2% of global GVA and approximately half the GVA of
the global airline industry. Oxera also pointed to additional indirect benefits including
$17 billion in time savings, $5 billion in fuel savings and $13 billion in education.
They also pointed out that the industry was growing rapidly - at a rate of 30% per
annum globally. A study of the importance of the Global Positioning System to the
US Economy10 found that it was difficult to estimate the total economic value of GPS
because it had become so pervasive and because it was still increasing at a high
rate. However the best estimate as of June 2011 was that there were $96 billion in
annual direct economic benefits attributable to GPS and 3.3 million US jobs were
dependent on it: the agriculture sector alone had productivity and cost-saving gains
of $19.9 billion a year due to GPS. In the Netherlands, the geo-sector accounted for
15,000 full time employees in 200811. Another study reported that the weather
derivatives market, driven by the free availability of weather data in the US, had
grown from $4.6 billion in 2004 to a value of $19.2 billion in 200712.

22. These studies do not converge on a single, consistent, measure of the economic
potential of Open Data. However all studies and all the analytical approaches that
they have adopted appear to point in the same direction. It seems safe to conclude
that the economic potential of Open Data is significant - the remaining issue is
whether it is just significant or extremely significant.


Unique Characteristics and Challenges
23. The studies also highlight a number of other characteristics of the economic
potential.

24. First, a common finding is that although the “direct” economic benefit of the
business providing data-rich services is significant, the majority of the overall benefit
is “indirect” in the sense that it accrues to the users of data-rich services, in both the
business and the personal sectors, rather than the providers of those services.
Many data-rich services are themselves delivered over the internet and so have very
low marginal costs of distribution and customer management so, freed of upstream
data charges or restrictions, end-user prices can be driven down so as to reach a
very large market. This in turn increases the consumer surplus.

25. Second, there is some evidence13 that open data attracts new types of re-users,
in particular SMEs, and new business models such as advertiser-pays rather than
end-user-pays. For instance as a consequence of the price cuts by the Dutch

9
    http://www.oxera.com/Oxera/media/Oxera/downloads/reports/What-is-the-economic-impact-of-Geo-
services_1.pdf
10
     http://www.gpsalliance.org/docs/Economic_Study_Backgrounder.pdf
11
     http://www.capgemini.com/resource-file-
access/resource/pdf/the_open_data_economy_unlocking_economic_value_by_opening_government
_and_public_data.pdf
12
     http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/weather/forecast/2008-06-09-weather-derivative_N.htm
13
     For example the POPSIS study by Deloitte
                                                                                               8
Meteorological Office KNMI, a new SME re-user launched an innovative service
which allows anyone to find out whether it is going to rain in the current location over
the next few hours. It generated around 300 million hits per year throughout Europe
in 2010. This service is provided completely free of charge to end-users, and is paid
for through advertising revenues.

26. Third, it is also apparent that the value is not in the data by itself. It is the
combination of the data with one or more other factors such as an innovative idea,
the inadequacy of existing services, the availability of new techniques to process
data (such as “big data analytics” methods) or new technologies for the delivery
services, including the use of smartphones or even the “internet of things” (for
instance in-car navigation systems).

27. Fourth, it is increasingly difficult to attribute the total benefits to the individual
factors. There is a blurring between “Open Data” and “Big Data”, not least because
much Government Open Data is inherently also Government Big Data due to the
size of government operations and of the population and economy they serve and
regulate. McKinsey admit that the $3 trillion figure encompasses total benefits.
However they rightly argue that it is unlikely that those benefits would occur at all in
the absence of freely available data. Any attribution of benefits to the various inputs
- data, technology, innovation - would inevitably be arbitrary.

28. Finally, the measurement of benefits from Open Data is still imprecise. In a
recent seminar hosted by McKinsey and the UK Advisory Panel on Public Sector
Information a range of holistic and sectorial studies were reviewed and some
common difficulties noted, including the difficulty already discussed of separating the
value of the data from the value of the innovation.

29. One other difficulty was that in many cases benefits took time to emerge;
innovators and entrepreneurs were more likely to act as a result of spotting a market
opportunity, and then seek the data needed to build a service to address it, rather
than observe the availability of data and try and invent ways of using it immediately.
Moreover even where entrepreneurs acted quickly it took some time for products and
services to come to market and to be widely adopted. Simple applications for
presenting essentially the original information in more attractive and accessible ways
can develop quickly, as has been seen in the number of public transport applications
in cities such as New York (68 for the subway alone), London (500 in total) and St
Petersburg (30 for buses); more analytical data services, particularly where the data
is enriched, can take longer to design, develop and market widely.

30. Another difficulty is that it can be harder to measure the indirect benefits to
consumers than to measure the direct economic activity of data-rich service
providers themselves. This is unfortunate since the majority of the benefits are
usually in those indirect benefits. However in some sectors progress has been made
on measuring indirect benefits. For instance in the transport sector the existing
approach to cost-benefit analysis usually measures the value of any investment - for
instance in a new road or a new public transit scheme - principally by the benefit to

                                                                                        9
end users in terms of the economic value of time saved. The transport sector has
developed robust methodologies to estimate this.

31. A final difficulty is that it has so far proved hard to measure the public sector
benefits of open data. Like other business consumers, public institutions are
purchasers of data-rich services. Indeed, in some cases they buy back their own
data after it has been aggregated or enriched by data-rich service providers. The
amount of use of Open Data within government has been one of the unexpected and
surprising observations of the last five years: for instance, one third of the data
downloads from the Open Data portal of the province of British Columbia in Canada
have been observed to be coming from the province’s own internet addresses; and
in the Catalonia Region of Spain the cost savings and efficiencies to public
institutions themselves of open metadata on geospatial datasets mandated by the
EU INSPIRE Directive recovered four years of development costs in just six
months14.


What data is most important for economic growth
32. There is also strengthening evidence about some of the types of data which are
most important for economic growth.

33. The highly pervasive and leveraged nature of geospatial reference data in the
economy is already well recognised. The data from the Ordnance Survey, the UK’s
National Mapping Agency, underpins around £100 billion a year of economic activity
for a production cost of around £100 million a year15. The single Address Register
for Denmark, available as Open Data, has an annual return of economic benefit of
70 times its maintenance cost16.

34. Other government-held information is also widely used - weather data, road and
other transport data, official registers including company registers and cadastres,
and so on. Together with geospatial data these provide core reference data for the
economy as a whole - both through the utility of the data itself and through the role of
the government providing basic, common, reference data including identifiers to
which other actors can add their own, possibly private, data. For instance access to
comprehensive and up to date company data is important to credit reference
agencies, and so to the financing of businesses. This is sometimes called the
National Information Infrastructure.

35. Both the GovLab Open Data 500 and the Deloitte-Open Data Institute work is
giving evidence on which datasets are most important for companies building
services with Open Data. The GovLab study shows particular importance in the US

14
     http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/reports/Study_reports/catalonia_impact_study_report.pdf
15
     http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090323145858/http://ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/
aboutus/reports/oxera/oxera.pdf
16
     http://www.adresse-info.dk/Portals/2/Benefit/Value_Assessment_Danish_Address_Data_UK_2010-
07-07b.pdf
                                                                                                  10
to data from the Department of Commerce (used by 120 out of the 500 companies in
the Open 500), the Department of Health and Human Services (75) and the Security
and Exchange Commission. In the UK six categories of data - geospatial,
environment, economic, transport, energy & resources, and demographic are used in
at least 10 of the 20 defined sectors of the economy.


Open Data Companies
36. In North America and Western Europe there are a growing number of
companies set up to use government open data to provide data-rich services and a
growing number of other companies adapting their business models to
accommodate open data into their services.

37. In the United States GovLab - the Governance Lab at New York University -
have produced an “Open Data 500”, a catalogue of 500 US-based companies
providing services using Open Data. Of the 500 in the index, more than 180
responded to the GovLab's survey. The responses showed that these were typically
new companies, with two thirds of them founded in the last five years and half had
more than ten employees.

38. In the United Kingdom an early report from an ongoing study by Deloitte in
conjunction with the Open Data Institute17 reported that it was studying over 230
companies and about 15 distinct business models had been identified.

39. While many of the companies using Open Data to provide services are (for the
moment) small, there are already a number of companies which have grown quickly
and have significant valuations, including:

*         Zillow with a market capitalisation of over $3 billion, provides a home and real
          estate on-line marketplace to help homeowners, home buyers, sellers,
          renters, real estate agents, mortgage professionals, landlords and property
          managers find and share vital information about homes, real estate,
          mortgages and home improvement. It is driven by a database of more than
          110 million U.S. homes – including homes for sale, homes for rent and homes
          not currently on the market.

*         Zoopla, a UK-based analogue of Zillow using house sales data from the UK
          Land Registry, has annual sales of £76m and profit of £25m. 86% of its sales
          come in subscriptions from over 19,000 estate agents. It is expected to float
          in summer 2014 with a total value estimated between £1.0bn and £1.3bn18.




17
     http://www.deloitte.com/view/en_GB/uk/market-insights/deloitte-
analytics/bfb570a79416b310VgnVCM1000003256f70aRCRD.htm
18
     http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/eb5a8b76-e17d-11e3-9999-
00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk#axzz344i4HNjO
                                                                                       11
*         Waze, acquired for a reported $1.3 billion by Google in June 2013, is a GPS-
          based geographical navigation application for smartphones with GPS support
          and display screens which provides turn-by-turn information and user-
          submitted travel times and route details, including crowd-sourced information.
          It won the Best Overall Mobile App award at the 2013 Mobile World Congress.

*         Climate Corp, acquired for $930 million by Monsanto in October 2013, uses
          60 years of detailed crop yield data, weather observations from one million
          locations in the United States and 14 terabytes of soil quality data - all free
          from the US Government - to provide applications that help farmers improve
          their profits by making better informed operating and financing decisions. A
          key product is “Total Weather Insurance”, an insurance offering that pays
          farmers automatically and without proof of loss for bad weather that may
          impact their profits. Founded by two ex-Google engineers in 2006, Climate
          Corp uses three million new data points a day from 22 datasets using
          advanced analysis techniques. The data comes from a range of third-party
          providers such as the US National Weather Service, which publishes its data
          free for re-use.

40. Venture capital has followed. A recent estimate19 puts VC investment in open
data-related areas in the first half 2013 alone at $1.28 billion across 127 deals.
There is already some exit activity too: the same period saw a total of 22 M&A
transactions and 3 IPOs.


Types of Businesses
41. The range of companies now actively using Open Data has also given some
insight into typical business models. The examples above give some specific
examples, and the Deloitte-Open Data Institute work20 has identified about 15
distinct models which it clustered into five main archetypes:

Suppliers

42. These are organisations that publish their data as Open Data to allow others to
use and reuse it. They include not only public sector bodies but also some private
sector companies, such as the Association of Train Operating Companies in the UK
(where most of the railway operators are in the private sector). Revenues from the
publication of data are nil, but the data may lead to increased levels of customer
engagement and loyalty, with revenue gains. There is also the opportunity to sell
value-added services based on the supplier’s intimate understanding of the data: for
instance after Statistics Germany started to publish its data free of charge in October
2008 the income from premium and advisory services rose by 95% in two years.
Some data suppliers, such as the UK Weather Bureau (“The Met Office”), have two-

19
     http://www.cbinsights.com/blog/trends/big-data-funding-venture-capital-2013
20
     http://www.deloitte.com/view/en_GB/uk/market-insights/deloitte-
analytics/bfb570a79416b310VgnVCM1000003256f70aRCRD.htm
                                                                                      12
tier models, where data is available for free on a “best endeavours” basis and where
the same data on the same licence terms is available with a guaranteed level of
available for a service fee.

Aggregators

43. These are organisations that collect and aggregate open data and, sometimes,
other proprietary data. This is typically on a sectorial or geographic theme.
Examples include: Data Publica, which is a one-stop shop for data about France;
Placr/Transport API which aims to be the UK first comprehensive open platform for
transport solutions; and Open Corporates, which holds data on 66,665,508
companies taken from 81 national or state company registers. Business models
range from remuneration for aggregation itself through added-value data access
services such as APIs to tiered models (for instance free on a “share-alike” basis and
charged-for if re-sold with closed additional data). A Russian example would be
Carbon Valley.

Developers

44. These are organisations and individual developers who design, build and sell
web or smartphone applications to deliver government open data to customers
(normally in the personal sector) in attractive and informative ways, sometimes in
competition with “official” applications. There are over 68 such applications for the
New York City subway system and around 500 applications using Transport for
London’s 25 Open Data feeds (employing around 5000 people in development,
marketing and support). Russian examples would include Zakupki360.ru and
Findtenders.ru.

Enrichers

45. These are organisations which use open data to gain new or better insights that
they can deliver in services or products to their customers - often completely new
services which could not exist before Open Data. This is Climate Corp’s business
model. It is also largely that of Zillow in the US and Zoopla in the UK. Enrichers are
probably the highest value-added type of business, and this seems to be recognised
in valuations. A Russian example would be Rospravsudie.

Enablers

46. These are organisations which provide platform and technologies that other
businesses and individuals use. They are a vital part of the Open Data “ecosystem”
- while being revenue generating themselves, they also provide cost-effective and
easy-to-access services for both data suppliers and data consumers. Examples
include Socrata, which provides a Software-As-A-Service Open Data portal for
governments and municipalities (and which received $25m of venture capital funding



                                                                                   13
in 2008 and 2013) and its more recent France-based competitor OpenDataSoft21,
and MuSigma and Cloudera which provide data analytics services and platforms. A
Russian example would be NextGIS.

What about the ICT sector?

47. No doubt some companies in the “traditional” ICT sector of hardware supply,
software development and systems integration are providing services to companies
working to create data-rich services. Some are also providing essentially enabling
services, such as the Microsoft Azure Datamarket22 (it does not do active
aggregation). However the drive to exploit Open Data is coming from outside the
traditional ICT sector, driven by entrepreneurs and innovators seeing market
opportunities for data-rich services rather than through “pushing” technological
solutions. Belatedly some of the traditional ICT sector firms are responding,
particular in the area of big data analytics, where they can leverage their existing
engagements with large corporations.

48. That is not to say that a strong ICT sector is irrelevant for achieving economic
growth and business innovation from Open Data. It is instead that the data
companies are bringing together the latest ICT skills, open source software, and
increasingly commoditised ICT services such as cloud computing to provide a
reliable and cost-effective technological base for their business.

Implications for Russia
49. Russia started on its Open Data journey later than some other countries, with
initial announcements in 2012. Nevertheless rapid progress has been made, with
the successful publication of over 500 datasets as promised by July 2013.
Subsequently the first version of the Russian Open Data portal data.gov.ru has been
launched, and already contains 1295 datasets23. In addition to the release of data
from Ministries of the Russian Federation there have been creditable Open Data
initiatives in several regions, with 8 regional open data portals, and in major cities
such as Moscow and St Petersburg.

50. However achieving the economic potential of Open Data is more complex than a
government simply putting some data on a website. International experience is that
the delivery of the initial promise of Open Data is only the first step on the Open Data
road. Some jurisdictions have done nothing more - and have not delivered their
objectives. Conversely even the most successful initiatives have found that
sustaining Open Data has been a hard road to follow; and even now in the first
countries to work on Open Data the full requirements of successful and sustainable
use of Open Data and its supporting ecosystem are still being discovered.
Supplementing the provision of data with more engagement and participatory
approaches is a significant key to realizing the potential of open data.

21
     http://www.opendatasoft.com/
22
     http://datamarket.azure.com/
23
     As of 9 May 2014
                                                                                     14
51. So at this stage it is unsurprising that there is not yet wide-spread evidence of
economic growth and business innovation from the release of Open Data in the
Russian Federation. The “gestation period” of the leading international examples
quoted above has been several years from the first release of data, and has required
continued focus and support from the governments concerned.

52. Nevertheless there appears to be no fundamental reason why Russia should not
be able to exploit the economic advantages of Open Data for itself. The key inputs
for economic growth from Open Data are data, capital, infrastructure and skills.
Russia scores well on each of these.

53. On data the digitisation of government is well advanced. Important and valuable
data is usually already held in digital form within the relevant Federal Ministries and
in Regional Governments and cities. Further investment is being rapidly made in the
standardisation and interchange of this data. An Open Data portal has already been
launched in order to help businesses (and others) find the data they need. On this
basis it should be relatively easy to make available the data needed for businesses
to generate economic growth.

54. On capital there is an active Venture Capital sector, with both state and private
sources of capital. According to the joint research by EY and Russian Venture
Company (RVC), the volume of venture capital market in Russia reached $1,213
million in 2012 (more than tenfold growth from $108.3 million in 2007, 63% year-on-
year growth). Such figures make Russia second in Europe and fifth in the world by
the value of venture capital available. Key growth drivers are the IT and consumer
market. IT is the biggest segment having attracted $792.1 million in 168 deals in
2012. Far from there being a shortage of funding, some experts consider that the
market is oversaturated with capital. Moreover venture capital firms say that they
would like to see more truly innovative projects, such as cloud services for small and
medium businesses, retail mobile payments, online education and healthcare, and
less proposals which simply copycat previously successful formats. This suggests
that if entrepreneurs have innovative ideas and the necessary data then they could
be funded.

55. On infrastructure the Government of the Russian Federation has made it a
strategic imperative to implement high speed broadband and mobile internet
services across the country, and the implementation of this is well advanced.
Therefore if the right applications came to market then they could be quickly
deployed widely. The size of the potential Russian market which could be reached
through these internet services would be very large by international standards and
so the economic gains from successful innovations would be highly leveraged (using
the internet and cloud computing technologies it costs little more in relative terms to
develop and deploy an application for 10m people than for 1m people, but 10m
customers could give up to ten times the return that 1m could do).



                                                                                    15
56. On skills the Russian Federation already has a ready availability of the
necessary technical skills and the education system, including the State Technical
Universities, are producing more year by year. Some young people are already
using their technical skills to build innovative data-driven and crowd-sourced
applications; the experience in other countries is that this is the initial step on which
business entrepreneurs then build

57. In addition the Russian Federation has also shown that its ICT industry can
produce global leaders, such as Kaspersky Labs. If it could exploit its own Open
Data for economic gain then Russia could be well placed to gain further economic
advantage by supplying the ICT and data-driven services needed to exploit Open
Data in other countries, both in the region and globally.

58. In order to achieve this, the Government of the Russian Federation will need to
recognise that it will have four distinct but related roles:

*      Supplier The Government needs to release the data it holds which is needed
       for economic growth and business innovation, to do so publicly and regularly,
       and to steadily improve quality and access.

*      Leader In addition to the data which the Federal Government itself holds, it
       will need to provide both policies and active leadership and encouragement to
       other institutions to release data important to economic growth and business
       innovation. This includes public institutions at regional and city level, state
       owned enterprises, and private sector companies providing important public
       services.

*      Catalyst The Government of the Russian Federation should serve as a
       catalyst for the use of open data by nurturing a thriving ecosystem of data
       users, coders, and application developers and incubating new, data-driven
       businesses.

*      User Open Data programmes often enable government agencies to overcome
       their own internal barriers to using data. The Government of the Russian
       Federation needs to promote the use of public data within its own Ministries
       and the public institutions at regional and city level. This will also mean
       investment in skills and tools. It should also mean that the government should
       be a leading, and proactive, customer for innovative private sector products
       and services using open data, including advanced analytic services to
       improve internal decision making and to help create new services. In addition
       using one’s own data can give greater understanding of how the data could
       be made more usable and useful

59. The following specific policies and practices are recommended to do this:

Supplier


                                                                                      16
(1)       Release data which businesses and others request and need

          The Government of the Russian Federation’s future program of data release
          needs to be driven not only by the knowledge of the officials of the different
          Ministries on what could be released but also by a public system by which
          businesses (and others) can request, discuss and prioritize the data that they
          want. Making this work effectively requires three supporting steps. First,
          government institutions need to make publicly visible more details of their
          overall data holdings - including those datasets which are not yet available as
          Open Data24. Using the Federal Open Data portal data.gov.ru effectively is an
          important part of this. Second, when data is requested, businesses must get
          a quick answer. Third, because of the importance to the wider economy,
          individual Ministries should not be permitted to refuse data without a wider
          and fast review by the Government as a whole of the overall arguments for
          and against data release; the request process needs to be actively managed
          by the Open Government Department and proposes by Ministries to refuse
          requests for data from businesses should be subject to review by the
          Government Commission on Open Government

(2)       Prioritize the release of “core reference data”

          As outlined above, experience from other countries suggests that there is a
          conceptual subset of government data that can be termed “core reference
          data” or “national information infrastructure”. This subset is government data
          is widely used across the economy to underpin the efficient operation of
          businesses of all kinds. Typical examples of such data include maps, address
          databases, demographic data from the Census, data about roads and other
          transport links, official data about registered companies and other businesses
          and data about public procurement. In consultation with business, the
          Government Commission on Open Government should identify the datasets
          which would comprise the “core reference data” and the Open Government
          Department should then ensure that the release of this data is prioritized.

(3)       Ensure that data can be found

          It can be a challenge for potential users to find the data that they need within
          the structures of government. In addition to division into separate Ministries at
          Federal level data also resides at regional and municipal levels. Each
          authority has its own website. Even if the data is there the navigation to it can
          be inconsistent. The data.gov.ru portal has been created to help address this
          issue. While this is a good first step, more work will be needed. This will
          include enhancement of the Federal portal and the collection of richer


24
     In the United Kingdom data.gov.uk contains metadata not only about 10,700 “Open Data datasets”
but also about around 4,000 other geospatial datasets and 4,000 non-geospatial datasets which are
not yet open. The publication of metadata about government-held geospatial datasets is required by
the EU INSPIRE Directive.
                                                                                                 17
          metadata on each dataset to assist locatability. It will also mean developing
          Federal policies on other portals and ensuring that they all can collaborate
          and share their metadata25. It also means making the data more visible on
          third party search services such as Yandex.

(4)       Ensure continuity of supply of data

          To give businesses the confidence to invest, the government will need to give
          continuing assurances that the data that businesses use will continue to be
          released, maintained and updated regularly. This will give business users the
          reassurance that they have continuity and that their investment is protected. It
          will also be important to ensure that Ministries do not unilaterally withdraw
          data which has previously been published without adequate consultation and
          notice. The Open Government Department should establish policies and
          actively monitor compliance with them, reporting regularly to the Government
          Commission on Open Government and escalating to Ministerial level quickly
          any failure in data supply which is endangering a business.


(5)       Release fine-grained and disaggregated data

          The Open Data initially released by many governments is often statistics or
          aggregate data. This is because such datasets are relatively easy to release -
          and often they are re-usable and “open” forms of information already available
          in a closed or printed form, and thus do not raise policy issues. Russia has
          been no exception. However most of the data useful to business - particularly
          for the “developer” and “enricher” business types where most of the economic
          benefit is - is more detailed and less aggregated data. This is because it can
          be used in the context of individual business transactions or it can be
          analyzed in different, innovative, ways using big data analytics and other
          techniques. So it is important to ensure that the right level of detailed data is
          released while protecting national security and personal privacy. The
          Government Commission on Open Government should require each Ministry
          to have a concrete plan for releasing specific datasets in a more
          disaggregated form.

Leader

(6)       Extend the release of data beyond Government Ministries

          Some of the most valuable and sought-after data may not be owned by
          Government Ministries themselves, but by State Owned Enterprises, private
          operators of public services, and academic institutions. This would, for
          instance, include data about fares, routes, timetables and real-time running of


25
     The EU have created a prototype pan-European data portal harvesting metadata from national and
other portals http://publicdata.eu/ - see http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/open-data-portals
                                                                                                    18
      transport services and scientific data generated as part of government-funded
      research. It is therefore important that Federal Ministries see their role not
      only as opening up their own data but also as a leader and influencer to their
      sector, encouraging and supporting regions, municipalities, State Owned
      Enterprises and private operators to open their data as well. Each Ministry
      should have a broader strategy for Open Data in its sector but which it does
      not itself control, and these strategies should be reviewed and approved by
      the Government Commission on Open Government.

(7)   Actively participate and promote the use of open data

      Individual Ministries should not only give leadership to other data suppliers in
      their sector; they should also be seen to give leadership to the uses of data in
      their sector too. Individual Ministries should be given a remit and a target to
      promote the use of Open Data both from the Ministry itself and from other
      data suppliers within the Sector. The Open Government Department should
      provide guidelines and highlight good practice in this field.

Catalyst

(8)   Ensure that Open Data portals are more collaborative and demand-
      driven.

      Leading governments in Open Data are not only focused on sustaining a
      supply of high-value data. They are actively encouraging and enabling
      businesses and citizens to help lead the evolution of their Open Data portals
      (and priorities). This means seeing the Open Data portal not only as a place
      where people can find data but also as a place where they can discuss the
      use of the data, find applications using the data and place links to related
      datasets or other assets. By doing so the government can help accelerate the
      development of “communities” of data users, and also build the links between
      officials responsible for the supply of data and the developers responsible for
      the innovative use of those data. This should be a priority for the further
      development of the Open Data portal of the Russian Federation. It should
      also be a requirement for regional and city portals.

(9)   Ensure that government data is properly explained, and that issues can
      be raised with the relevant expert officials

      Even with good metadata a government dataset can be hard to understand
      and to use. Developer-activists may be prepared to gain understanding by
      trial and error over a period of time out of personal interest, but potential
      business users may be more easily discouraged. In addition, the lack of
      supporting information makes business use of data even more difficult
      because reliable and predictable results are essential. Therefore the
      government experts responsible for each dataset need to be responsible for
      engaging with the community of people using their data and to be responsible

                                                                                   19
       for supporting and helping people make good use of their data. This should
       involve not only answering questions and supplying documentation about
       standards and coding, but also actively reaching out to developers by
       contributing to online communities (e.g., on the Open Data portal) and through
       seminars and workshops.

(10)   Reach out not just to developers but to innovators and entrepreneurs in
       specific sectors

       It is important for the Government to see the use of Open Data as an issue of
       business innovation of all types, and not solely or primarily an issue for the
       ICT sector. Software developers or ICT service companies are not the sole -
       or even necessarily the best - source of ideas. The most successful drivers
       will come from a business problem which the innovator seeks to address.
       Promotional activities for the use of Open Data can focus not only on Open
       Data in general but additionally on specific sectors - or indeed on specific
       issues on which the government would like more innovation. For instance, in
       the United States, there is an annual “Health Datapalooza” to showcase
       innovation using health data. The first event, in 2010, had 45 attendees and
       17 submitted applications; the third in 2012 had nearly 1,600 attendees and
       240 submitted applications; the fourth in 2013 had 2,000 attendees - and
       would have had more had a cap on number not had to be imposed. Each
       Ministry should have a strategy and a target for generating economic growth
       and business innovation in its sector from the data it and other public
       institutions in its sector hold, and the strategies should be reviewed and
       approved by the Government Commission on Open Government.

(11)   Actively support and incubate innovation using Open Data and create
       institutional structures to do that on a sustainable basis

       Many governments have tried to support innovation using “hackathons” and
       competitions. These certainly have their place, particularly in the very early
       days of an Open Data initiative to generate ideas and some proof of concepts
       - as well as to help build the community of Open Data developers itself.
       However the trend is towards establishing something more institutional and
       sustainable. For instance the UK have created an Open Data Institute to
       “convene world-class experts to collaborate, incubate, nurture and mentor
       new ideas, and promote innovation”; this is part-funded by the UK
       Government’s Technology Strategy Board which provides funding for
       innovation and applied research in partnership with business. In Germany the
       Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems is similarly working on
       Open Data, with the mission to emphasize “the high potential of open data for
       businesses and to challenge the view that open data is not only a matter for
       administration, but also for enterprises, NGOs and science”. A 2013
       conference funded by the Knight Foundation about Open Government and



                                                                                  20
           Open Data in the United States identified the need for an Open Data Institute
           in the United States, and this is now well on the way to being established26.

           The Government of the Russian Federation therefore needs to move quickly
           to establish a similar “centre of excellence” for Open Data in Russia. The
           centre should engage and bring together both the data suppliers from within
           public institutions and the data users in the private sector. It should
           specifically provide incubation facilities for start-up businesses in Open Data.
           In addition to its remit to promote the use of Open Data within Russia it should
           be given a role to promote Russia’s expertise and capability in Open Data
           regionally and globally, and to assist Russian businesses in competing
           globally in the supply of data-rich services.            The Open Government
           Department and the Ministry of Economic Development should urgently bring
           forward proposals for this Centre.

           The Centre of Excellence may also provide a sustainable mechanism to
           provide leadership and management to the programme as a whole and to the
           other recommendations.

(12)       Leverage existing government support programmes to ensure that they
           also contribute to Open Data objectives where possible

           The Government should ensure that other sources of innovation investment,
           ICT industry stimulation and start-up incubation are playing their part in
           supporting the growth of innovative uses of Open Data and of the supporting
           ecosystem of ICT and other services. It may be possible to leverage the
           substantial existing funding in these areas to accelerate the exploitation of
           Open Data. Once explained, the relatively high potential returns on Open
           Data and the synergies with other related technologies such as Big Data
           should be attractive to the managers of the existing funding.

User

(13)       Develop Open Data skills within the government institutions, regions
           and municipalities

           The re-use of Open Data has opportunities for the efficient and collaborative
           operations of government itself. Other jurisdictions have found that once data
           is freely available as Open Data there is a surprising and serendipitous reuse
           of data within government itself. However, fully exploiting this potential
           requires the development of “Open Data skills” among the relevant officials.
           These skills should include a sound understanding of the clear laws which the
           Russian Federation has now put in place on Open Data including their
           interpretation and limits, together with more detailed explanation, guidance
           and clarification; how to extract and prepare data for publication in machine-


26
     http://usodi.org/
                                                                                        21
       readable formats and how to generate rich metadata and other supporting
       materials to help ensure the reuse of the data; how to release datasets at a
       level of fine granularity and disaggregation without compromising personal
       privacy and within the Federal Data Protection Law No. 152 (eg
       anonymization techniques); how to assist businesses and other data users
       make the best use of the data; and where supporting technical, legal and
       other resources can be found. Success in Open Data represents a new way
       of working for officials that will require sustained leadership and change
       management.

(14)   Ensure that the Government is using data services and products from
       the private sector.

       Federal Ministries should be leading, and proactive, customers for innovative
       private sector products and services using open data, including advanced
       analytic services to improve internal decision making and to help create new
       services. This public procurement demand will help stimulate early
       investment.


Conclusion
60. While sources differ in their precise estimates of the economic potential of Open
Data, all are agreed that it is potentially very large. In countries which were early
movers in Open Data there is already evidence of significant businesses having
developed to exploit that potential. There is no fundamental reason why the Russian
Federation should not be able to exploit the potential of its own Open Data - and
why, by doing so, it should not become a global force in the provision of data-rich
products and services more widely. However other governments have recognised
that their role is not simply to publish data - they are supporting the whole value
chain of the use of data through four distinct though interlinked roles. Creating in
Russia a “Centre of Excellence” for Open Data could be the pivotal step in
developing and driving the programme to do so.




                                                                                  22
