                                                                                                   93684


                  REPUBLIC OF KOREA
December 2014     FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM



                  TECHNICAL NOTE
                  CRISIS PREPAREDNESS AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT
                  FRAMEWORK




                  Prepared By                       This Technical Note was prepared by International
                  Monetary and Capital Markets      Monetary Fund (IMF) led mission with World Bank
                  Department, IMF and the Financial participation that visited Seoul on April 3-19, 2013 and
                  and Private Sector Development,   July 1-17, 2013 to update the Financial Sector
                  World Bank.                       Assessment Program (FSAP) for the Republic of Korea
                                                    (Korea) conducted in 2003. It contains technical
                                                    analysis and detailed information underpinning the
                                                    FSAP’s findings and recommendations. Further
                                                    information on the FSAP program can be found at
                                                    http://www.imf.org/external/np/fsap/fssa.aspx, and
                                                    www.worldbank.org/fsap.




           INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND                                       THE WORLD BANK
REPUBLIC OF KOREA
                                                                     CONTENTS


Glossary ……………………………………………………………………………………..………... i
Preface .................................................................................................................................................... ii
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................................. iii
            Table of Recommendations ....................................................................................................... v
I. Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1
            A. Past experience in crisis management .................................................................................. 1
            B. Korean financial system ....................................................................................................... 1
II. Legal and institutional framework for crisis management................................................................. 3
            A. The framework ..................................................................................................................... 3
            B. Interagency cooperation and coordination ............................................................................ 5
III. Crisis preparedness and prevention framework................................................................................ 8
            A. Systemic risk and financial stability assessment .................................................................. 8
            B. Financial safety net ............................................................................................................... 9
            C. Supervisory Framework for problem banks ....................................................................... 14
            D. Contingency plans .............................................................................................................. 17
IV. Crisis management framework ....................................................................................................... 20
            A. Systemic liquidity in money and securities markets........................................................... 21
            B. Deposit insurance and guarantee ........................................................................................ 21
            C. Public Financial Support..................................................................................................... 22
V. Financial institutions resolution....................................................................................................... 24
            A. Resolution measures for insolvent banks. .......................................................................... 24
            B. The Least Cost Principle. .................................................................................................... 27
            C. Systemic implications. ........................................................................................................ 29
Tables
Table 1          Interconnectedness of Authorities’ Decision-Making Bodies………………..... v
Table 2          Interconnectedness of Authorities’ Decision-Making Bodies               5
Table 3          Deposit Insurance Protection (at end-2012) ..…………………………………. 10
Table 4          Deposit insurance premium rates per financial sector segment……………………… 11
Table 5          Corrective action framework for banks and bank holding companies……………… 15

Boxes
Box 1 Policy Measures initiated in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis ……                                                                         2
Box 2 Contingency Planning in Korea ………..……………………………….….......                                                                                            18
Box 3 Use of Public Funds to support the financial system ………………………..…                                                                                    23
                                       i


                                 GLOSSARY

ASIFI     Act on Structural Improvement of the Financial Industry
BA        Banking Act
BCBS      Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BCP       Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision
BIS       Bank for International Settlements
BoK       Bank of Korea
BOKA      Bank of Korea Act and Enforcement Decree
CAMEL-R   Supervisory bank rating methodology
CMGs      crisis management groups
CMM       Crisis management manual
CMT       Crisis management team
CSE       Crisis simulation exercise
DIC       Deposit Insurance Committee
DICP      Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems
DIF       Depositor Insurance Fund
DPA       Deposit Protection Act
D-SIFIs   Domestic systemically important financial institution
ELA       Emergency liquidity assistance
FHC       Financial holding company
FI        Financial institution
FMIs      Financial market infrastructures
FRI       Financial resolution institution
FSAP      Financial Sector Assessment Program
FSB       Financial Stability Board
FSF       Financial Stability Forum
FSC       Financial Services Commission
FSC Law   Act on the Establishment, etc. of the Financial Services Commission and its
          Enforcement Decree
FSR       Financial Stability Report
FSS       Financial Supervisory Service
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
G-SIFI    Global Systemically Important Financial Institution
KA        Key Attributes for Effective Resolution Regimes
KAMCO     Korea Asset Management Company
KDIC      Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation
KRW       Korean Won (local currency)
MEFM      Macroeconomic Financial Meeting
MMF       Money Market Fund
MOSF      Ministry of Strategy and Finance
MOU       Memorandum of understanding
MMOU      Multilateral MOU
MPC       Monetary Policy Committee
MSB       Mutual Savings Bank
NBFI      Non-bank financial institution
NPL       Non-performing loan
OMO       Open market operation
OTC       Over-the-counter
LOLR      Lender of last resort
SFC       Securities and Futures Commission
SIBs      Systemically important banks
SIFI      Systemically important financial institution
SME       Small and medium enterprise
USD       US Dollar
                                              ii


                                          PREFACE

As part of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) conducted by a joint team from
the World Bank and International Monetary Fund in April 2013, the mission was requested
by the authorities to perform an assessment of the crisis preparedness and management
framework. The mission visited Seoul from April 3-19, 2013.

The team is grateful to the officials and staff of the Financial Services Commission, Financial
Supervisory Service, Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation, Bank of Korea, Ministry of
Strategy and Finance, market players and other stakeholders for their cooperation, assistance
and hospitality.
                                                iii


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Korea experienced significant financial distress in the late 1990s along with some of its
Asian neighbours. The authorities’ experience in handling this crisis and the experience in
handling the fallout from the global financial crisis in 2007-08 helped them establish a broad
crisis management framework in Korea.

Improving and formalizing the framework for crisis management would help preserve
and build upon institutional memory. Authorities can consider formally setting up an apex
forum for leading the inter-agency cooperation and coordination work on crisis preparedness
and crisis management. With a view to avoid duplication, the authorities may consider
upgrading the Macroeconomic Financial Meeting (MEFM) with participation by the heads of
the Ministry of Strategy and Finance (MOSF), Financial Services Commission (FSC),
Financial Supervisory Service (FSS), Bank of Korea (BoK), and Korea Deposit Insurance
Corporation (KDIC) as members, and by including crisis preparedness and crisis
management as an explicit mandate.

The essential elements of a financial safety net are available in Korea, and the
Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) framework and deposit insurance system can be
improved to make the safety net more responsive. For ELA, this can be achieved by
reviewing and revising the legal and procedural aspects to remove any scope for delays in
actual disbursement of funds. For deposit insurance system, improvements can be made by
bringing the deposit insurance fund out of deficit, and assuring a back-up funding.

The financial safety net is well supported by an efficient framework of financial sector
supervision. While the corrective action framework has some of the main elements in place
it can, among others, be improved in the following areas for better effectiveness: (a)
reviewing the triggers for corrective actions and improving their objectivity to enable timely
intervention, including even before banks breach regulatory thresholds; and (b) putting in
place norms and guidance determining the use of the powers to postpone or suspend
corrective actions.

To ensure that the KDIC is able to intervene effectively during or leading up to a crisis
and is not in the process exposed to avoidable losses, certain improvements are
required. These include the following: (i) not allowing insolvent banks to continue to accept
fresh deposits and repay existing deposits; (ii) establishing a back-up funding arrangement
to improve its ability to make prompt depositor pay-outs and meet liquidity needs in times of
crisis – such arrangements may include funding arrangement with the central bank or a line
of credit from the Government; and (iii) reviewing the processes involved to reduce the


1
 Prepared by Damodaran Krishnamurti and Yejin Carol Lee (FFSAB), Sau-Ngan Wong (LEGPS) (all World
Bank), and Ernesto Aguirre (IMF external consultant).
                                               iv


allowed timelines for making decisions on depositor payouts, for providing financial
assistance to troubled banks and their resolution.

The authorities have a few ready and efficient options that can be activated in the event
of a financial crisis. These include tools to influence systemic liquidity in money and
securities markets, to increase deposit insurance and investor protection cover (including full
guarantee), to mobilise public funds to provide support to financial institutions and markets
that may be under stress, and to intervene and resolve troubled financial institutions.

Korea established several funds in the wake of the recent global financial crisis to
provide financial assistance to financial institutions either directly or indirectly. While
these funds are playing a useful role by providing liquidity and capital support, they have
potential implications for distorting the incentive framework for financial institutions,
particularly when they are deployed without imposing losses on shareholders and other
creditors, or when bank managements are not held accountable. While supervisory
authorities’ powers are comprehensive to address threats to financial stability, moral hazard
issues may need to be more fully addressed.

Other important elements of crisis management framework that could be formalized or
improved include the following: (a) formally designating crisis management team(s) in
each supervisory authority; (b) developing a crisis management handbook/manual; (c)
establishing multi-agency institution-specific crisis management groups; (d) establishing
group-wide contingency plans by FHCs; and (e) periodically conducting crisis simulation
exercises to test and enhance contingency plans and overall preparedness.

While financial supervisory authorities have in place a good and sound framework for
information sharing with domestic and foreign supervisors, there is room to further
strengthen these arrangements from crisis preparedness and crisis management
perspectives. The governance structure in these agencies provides for information sharing,
cooperation, and coordination, which is supplemented by bilateral and multilateral
arrangements to cooperate and coordinate with each other in the discharge of their respective
roles. Current arrangements with domestic agencies broadly cover information exchange in
normal times and upon request, but similar arrangements need to be put in place with foreign
deposit insurers and resolution agencies.

The resolution framework for financial institutions in Korea provides a comprehensive
range of resolution options but can be improved in light of the Financial Stability Board
(FSB) and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) recommendations. The
legal framework establishes a special resolution regime for distressed financial institutions in
Korea. While the resolution authorities’ powers are sufficiently comprehensive to address
threats to financial stability, there is a scope for improvement to assure certainty and avoid
delays in resolution processes. These include, (i) establishing clarity of definition of
                                                      v


‘systemic stability’; (ii) improving the resolvability of financial institutions through
mechanisms like living wills and bail-ins; (iii) establishing criteria for the identification of
systemically important financial institutions; and (iv) introducing schemes to improve
“resolvability” of financial institutions, improving efficiency and reducing costs.2

                                     Table 1. Recommendations
¶        Recommendation                                                                                 Priority
No.                                                                                                     (H-M)3
         Government
18       Formalise an apex crisis monitoring and crisis coordination committee                          H
34       Assure back-up liquidity and funding support to KDIC                                           H
         FSC, FSS, KDIC and Government
19       Strengthen inter-agency information sharing and coordination arrangements with                         M
         domestic and foreign authorities from crisis preparedness and crisis management
         perspectives
31       Prevent banks determined as insolvent from taking fresh deposits and allowing                  H
         deposit withdrawals.
32       Arrange to replenish the deficit in the Deposit Insurance Fund                                 H
33       Review the funding and accounting of the DIF (especially the Special Account) to                       M
         eliminate direct cross subsidization by other segments of financial sector
35       KDIC adopt a more pro-active approach for timely depositor payouts                                     M
60       KDIC and FSC should review the processes involved to reduce the timelines allowed
         for making decisions on the making depositor payouts, providing financial assistance
         to, and resolving troubled banks.

46       Make improvements to the corrective action framework by reviewing the triggers and                     M
         improving their objectivity to enable early intervention; put in place norms and
         guidance determining the postponement or suspension of corrective actions.
51       Consider requiring FHCs to prepare and submit group-wide contingency plans and                         M
         recovery plans
52       Formalize or improve some elements of crisis management framework                                      M
              - Crisis management teams; crisis management handbooks; and crisis
                  management groups
53       Undertake periodic crisis simulation exercises to test the adequacy and effectiveness          H
         of the crisis preparedness and crisis management arrangements
64       Ensure use of public funds does not provide wrong incentives and only after first              H
         imposing losses on existing shareholders and creditors
84-      Review and improve resolution framework for financial institutions in the light of                     M
86       FSB and BCBS recommendations
         BoK and Government
41       Review and revise the BOKA to avoid scope for potential delays in providing ELA in                     M
         a timely manner



2
  The KDIC has since engaged in consultation with the FSC for identifying the domestic SIFIs and applying the
relevant FSB KAs.
3
    H – High; M – Medium.
                                                         1


                                              I. INTRODUCTION

                               A. Past experience in crisis management

1.      Korea experienced a financial crisis in the late 1990s, which it overcame
successfully. The rich experiences gained in handling past crises have helped in the
establishment of a broad crisis management framework in Korea. The successful management of
the 1997 financial crisis is reported to have been guided by the following principles: (i) bold and
decisive measures are required to regain market confidence, rather than incremental ones; (ii)
though Government will take the lead in crisis management initiatives, private capital should be
encouraged to fully participate in the process; (iii) bank recapitalization and creation of a bad
bank are not mutually exclusive options; the crisis management measures should be politically
acceptable and have built-in exit strategies with clear time-frames; (iv) moral hazard should be
minimized; and (v) all forms of financial protectionism must be rejected.4

2.      Korea responded to the 2008 global financial crisis with certain policy measures that
helped the Korean financial and real sectors to weather the immediate effects of the global
crisis. These included policy and financial support to stabilize the money, securities, and bond
markets, to extend financial support to corporate and financial entities, and to support small and
medium enterprise (SME) and micro finance sectors. (Please see Box 1 for details)

3.      The authorities introduced a series of measures to contain the stress in Mutual
Savings Banks (MSBs) during 2011 and 2012 and turned them around. The stress in MSBs
was largely due to an extensive industry-wide exposure to troubled real estate project financing
as well as shareholder and management misconduct.5 Faced with sector-wide stress and
declining depositor confidence the financial sector regulatory agencies jointly announced new
mitigating measures for the MSB sector.6

                                        B. Korean financial system

4.     Korea’s financial sector has continued its modest growth in the past two years at an
average rate of 7.9 percent, with assets at 3.2 times GDP in end-2012. The financial sector
includes banks (54 percent market share), non-bank depository institutions7 (13 percent),
insurance companies (18 percent), securities companies (6 percent), and collective investment
companies (8 percent). The banking sector comprises of 13 commercial banks (7 national and 6
4
  Lee, Myung-Bak. “How Korea Solved Its Banking Crisis: The world can learn from our experience in the late
'90s.” The Wall Street Journal 27 Mar. 2009.
5
    FSS, 2011 Annual Report.
6
 These included the following: joint examinations; establishment of funding arrangements to provide liquidity and
solvency support to MSBs; establishment of a counseling and support center to assist the defrauded depositors; and
creation of a special account in the deposit insurance agency to support resolution of troubled MSBs.
7
 MSBs, credit cooperatives (credit unions, community credit cooperatives, mutual banking entities), merchant
banks, and postal savings.
                                                   2


local), 39 foreign bank branches, and 5 specialized banks. It is fairly concentrated, with the top 5
banks making up 54 percent of market share. (Please see Tables 1, 2, and 3 in the Appendix for
details).




5.     The Korean financial system is dominated by twelve financial holding companies
(FHCs) that constitute about 50 percent of financial sector assets.8 The FHCs have steadily
increased their market share in total financial sector assets from about 39 percent at end-2010.
The FHCs have 87 percent of their consolidated assets in banking (accounting for about 70
percent of the banking sector assets). Of the 18 commercial and specialized banks in Korea, 14
are operating under 10 bank holding companies, which have a total of 275 subsidiaries. The


8
 Ten Bank Holding Companies and 1 Securities Holding Company and 1 Insurance Holding Company – Bank
holding companies make up 98 percent of the assets under FHC structure.
                                                            3


financial companies under the bank holding companies are operating in almost all segments of
the financial sector.

6.      Foreign financial institutions in Korea constitute roughly 11 percent of the financial
sector assets. The banking and insurance sectors have the highest presence of foreign companies
with 15 and 12 percent market shares, respectively. In the banking sector, there are 41 foreign-
owned banks (two subsidiaries, 39 branches) from 16 countries making up about 14 percent of
the banking sector. In the insurance sector, 12 insurance companies’ subsidiaries from five
countries make up 10 percent of the domestic insurance sector. About six percent of the
securities sector assets are held by 20 foreign companies from eight countries.

7.      Korean financial institutions abroad make up roughly 2 percent of the financial
sector in terms of assets. Of these, the banking sector is the most notable, doing business abroad
through 100 entities in 28 countries. Twenty securities companies operate in 15 countries and 15
collective investment (asset management) companies operate in 11 countries.



               II. LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR CRISIS MANAGEMENT

                                                  A. The framework

8.      Effective crisis management requires swift and coordinated action that must be
planned in advance. Well-defined legal powers, processes, procedures, and clarity in the roles
and relationships among all relevant stakeholders, namely central bank, ministries, domestic
financial sector supervisors, and foreign supervisors are essential. Experience has shown that it is
important to have mechanisms in place before a crisis to ensure that the authorities’ actions are
coordinated at all stages.

9.      The mandates and powers for financial sector oversight in Korea are clearly
allocated among five authorities: The Financial Services Commission (FSC), the Financial
Supervisory Service (FSS), the Bank of Korea (BoK), the Korea Deposit Insurance
Corporation (KDIC), and the Ministry of Strategy and Finance (MOSF). The relevant laws
and their enforcement decrees have provided the FSC/FSS, KDIC, and BoK with explicit
mandates for financial stability. FSC and FSS are assigned with the responsibility “to promote
the advancement of the financial industry and the stability of financial markets, establish sound
credit order and fair financial transaction practices, and protect depositors, investors, and other
financial consumers.”9 KDIC is assigned with the responsibility “to contribute to the protection
of depositors and the maintenance of the stability of the financial system.”10 On top of its price



9
    Article 1 of the Act on the Establishment, etc. of the Financial Services Commission.
10
     Article 1 of the Depositor Protection Act.
                                                       4


stability mandate, the BoK has been assigned with the responsibility to “pay attention to
financial stability in carrying out its monetary and credit policies.”11

10.     The powers distributed among the above agencies are comprehensive to address
threats to financial stability. The MoSF develops and coordinates economic and fiscal policies
of the country, and serves on various decision-making bodies of the financial regulators. The
FSC is in charge of financial sector and supervisory policies, including early intervention and
resolution of troubled financial institutions. FSC is empowered to impose various corrective and
resolution measures, such as the suspension of executives, appointment of management
supervisors, suspension of all or part of the business, and writing down of shareholder equity.
The FSS, an integrated supervisor for all supervised financial entities, operates under the
guidance of FSC and its Securities and Futures Commission (SFC). (The SFC was established
under the FSC to perform matters related to the capital market and business accounting
supervision among the affairs of the FSC.) KDIC, the deposit insurance agency, operates an
integrated deposit insurance system and resolves troubled financial institutions, largely under
FSC oversight. The BoK, the central bank, is mainly responsible for the country’s monetary and
credit policies, payment systems operations, and is the lender of last resort.

11.     The legal framework establishes a special resolution regime for distressed financial
institutions in Korea and identifies the roles and responsibilities of different authorities
with clear mandates.12 The Act on Structural Improvement of the Financial Industry (ASIFI)
identifies the FSC and KDIC as the resolution authorities, with the FSC acting as the lead
resolution authority. Although the BoK is not a resolution authority, it has a role in providing
financial assistance, indirectly through KDIC or public funds. The special resolution regime for
the financial sector entities, under the ASIFI and the Deposit Protection Act (DPA) extends to
banks, the Industrial Bank of Korea, investment traders, brokers, collective investment business
entities, investment advisory business entities, discretionary investment business entities,
insurance companies, mutual savings banks, trust business entities, merchant banks, and
financial holding companies. The specialized banks are outside the purview of the special
resolution regime, but are governed by the provisions in the relevant special statues under which
they were established.

12.    The legal framework facilitates resolution through a broad range of resolution tools.
The resolution tools include merger and acquisition, purchase and assumption, bridge bank,
funding by government and other relevant authorities (including the KDIC),13 and liquidation.

11
     Article 1 of the Bank of Korea Act.
12
  The relevant laws include the Act on the Structural Improvement of the Financial Industry (ASIFI) and its
Enforcement Decree; Depositor Protection Act (DPA) and its Enforcement Decree; the Act on the Establishment,
etc. of the Financial Services Commission and its Enforcement Decree (FSC Law); the Banking Act (BA) and its
Enforcement Decree; and the Regulations on the Supervision of Banking Institutions.
13
     Article 10 (1), 11 (1), and 12 (1) of ASIFI.
                                                    5


The FSC is empowered to appoint an administrator (management supervisor) and direct the
administrator to undertake the necessary resolution process if the distressed bank fails to comply
with prompt corrective actions.14 DPA mandates the application of the least cost test in the
choice of a resolution method by the KDIC,15 which can establish a financial institution for
resolution (like a bridge bank) as a separate entity for taking over business or contracts of
insolvent financial institutions or conducting the resolution process.16

                                B. Interagency cooperation and coordination

13.    The governance structure in the Korean financial sector supervisory and regulatory
agencies, including the central bank, provides for information sharing, cooperation, and
coordination. These agencies have cross representation at key decision-making levels (boards or
commissions) as presented in Table 2.

                 Table 2: Interconnectedness of Authorities’ Decision-Making Bodies

     Name     MOSF       BOK       FSC       FSS     FSC-SFC KDIC                 OTHERS
Macroeconomic Chair:     Senior             Senior
                                                                Vice
Financial       Vice    Deputy Vice Chair Deputy         -              -
                                                              President
Meeting       Minister Governor            Governor
                                                                        Five other members (one
                Vice    Chair:
Bank of Korea                   Vice Chair                              member each recommended
              Minister Governor
(Monetary                         (non-                                 by BOK, MOSF, FSC, Korea
               (non-    and Sr.               -          -        -
Policy                            voting                                Chamber of Commerce &
               voting Deputy.
Committee)                       member)                                Industry, and Korea
              member) Governor
                                                                        Federation of Banks)
                                  Chair:
Financial                Senior    FSC                                  Three external members
                Vice
Services                Deputy Chairman Governor         -    President including one recommended
              Minister
Commission             Governor   & FSC                                 by Chamber of Commerce
                                Vice Chair
                                                      Chair:            One standing commissioner
FSC– SFC         -         -        -         -      FSC Vice     -     and three non-standing
                                                     Chairman           commissioners
Deposit                  Senior
                Vice                                           Chair:
Insurance               Deputy Vice Chair     -          -              Three external members
              Minister                                        President
Committee              Governor
                                            Chair:
Financial                                  Governor,
Supervisory      -         -        -       Senior       -        -                   -
Services                                    Deputy
                                           Governor




14
     Article 14 of ASIFI.
15
     Article 38-4 of the DPA.
16
     Article 36-3 of the DPA.
                                                         6


14.      In addition, a vice-ministerial level forum was formally established for deliberation,
consultation and coordination of policy action among the financial sector authorities. This
forum is the “Macroeconomic Financial Meeting”17 (MEFM) and includes deputy level
representation from the MOSF (in the Chair), FSC, FSS, BoK, and KDIC (by invitation when the
agenda involves information sharing and joint examinations). Though the forum does not have a
legal basis, it was established through a Presidential Decree lending it a formal status. This
forum met regularly but informally since 2008, until it was formalized in September 2012. The
MEFM is designed to meet on a quarterly basis at the minimum and can hold additional ad-hoc
meetings to cooperate and coordinate on the identification and assessment of threats to financial
stability and to ensure smooth information exchange among relevant institutions. In effect, the
MEFM has been meeting quite frequently, sometimes even weekly.

15.      The Presidential Decree for the establishment of the MEFM does not explicitly
mandate it with responsibility of crisis response, but the authorities view and operate as if
it is a crisis response committee. While the role of the MEFM appears to be a consultative and
coordinating forum, the Presidential Decree mentions that its deliberation requires two-thirds
attendance and decisions carried by votes of at least two-thirds in the affirmative. Authorities
assert that in practice, decisions are made by consensus, and unresolved issues are escalated to an
informal ministerial level meeting (referred to as the “Economic and Financial Council”). If
need be, issues are further escalated to a top-level “Blue House Meeting,” a meeting convened
by the President’s office for discussion of matters of greater significance.

16.     Authorities also enter into bilateral and multilateral arrangements to cooperate and
coordinate with each other in the discharge of their respective roles. The domestic financial
sector authorities (FSC, FSS, BoK, MOSF, and KDIC) have signed a joint Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) that provides for sharing “periodic” and “non-scheduled” financial
information submitted by financial institutions to BoK, FSS, and KDIC. The MOU also provides
for each authority to share its own “processed information” as much as possible.18 Aside from
the MOUs (multilateral as well as bilateral) for information sharing, the relevant laws allow the
BoK and the KDIC to request FSS for undertaking joint examinations of regulated entities and
sharing of examination reports.19 The MOUs do not explicitly provide for crisis management
elements, but these are taken up through the MEFM for dealing with threats to financial stability.




17
  This “Meeting” formalized in September 2012 and combined three previously existing separate meetings called
“Economic and Financial Status Review Meeting”, the “Financial Consultative Meeting”, and the “Foreign
Exchange Market Stabilization Consultative Meeting.”
18
  The MOU gives 10 days (3 days if urgent) for complying with information requests and also provides for
confidentiality of certain information and for any disputes in relation thereto to be taken up by the MEFM.
19
 Article 88 of the Bank of Korea Act and Article 21 of the Depositor Protection Act, and related Enforcement
Decrees.
                                                        7


17.     While crisis management is essentially a national responsibility, it also must include
cross-border arrangements for cooperation, coordination, and information exchange.20
FSC/FSS have entered into MOUs with 33 foreign authorities in 18 countries. The MOUs with
host authorities broadly cover information exchange arrangements for ongoing supervisory
purposes during normal times and on request. These do not explicitly provide for arrangements
from crisis preparedness and crisis management perspectives, including resolution matters. In the
case of capital markets, the FSC/FSS are signatories to the IOSCO multilateral MOU (MMOU),
a global information-sharing arrangement among securities regulators. Through the MMOU, the
FSC/FSS have an extensive framework for assistance and mutual co-operation with regulators
from major developed markets including the UK and the USA, but these have a limited scope for
cooperation. The KDIC also has MOUs with other foreign deposit insurers and resolution
authorities, that provide for cooperation on staff secondment but do not cover information
sharing arrangements or dealing with situations that can arise during a crisis in either
jurisdiction.21

Recommendations

18.     Improving and formalizing the framework for crisis management would help
preserve and build upon institutional memory and existing framework . Authorities can
consider formally setting up an apex forum for leading the inter-agency cooperation and
coordination work on crisis preparedness and crisis management. The apex forum can include
the supervisory agencies, the Central Bank, the Deposit Insurance Agency, and the Ministry of
Strategy and Finance, as they all have a relevant role in crisis preparedness and crisis
management. With a view to avoid duplication, the authorities may consider upgrading the
MEFM with participation by the heads of these agencies, and by including crisis preparedness
and crisis management as an explicit mandate.

19.     While FSC, FSS, BoK, KDIC, and the MOSF have in place a good and sound
framework for information sharing with domestic and foreign supervisors, there is a room
to further strengthen these arrangements from a crisis preparedness and crisis
management perspective. The improvements can be aimed at inclusion of explicit provisions in
the inter-agency MoUs (both domestic and cross border) for cooperation and coordination for
crisis preparedness and crisis management, including ongoing information sharing with the
relevant foreign agencies. To facilitate better cooperation and coordination during crisis
situations, relevant MOUs should explicitly cover arrangements to minimise overall costs of
resolution in home and host jurisdictions, the need to duly consider the potential impact of

20
  Korean financial institutions have presence and operations in about 28 countries through 68 branches and 152
subsidiaries.
21
  The KDIC has MOUs with the deposit insurance agencies or resolution authorities of ten countries, including the
US Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (the home jurisdiction
of Citibank Korea).
                                                           8


resolution actions on financial stability in other jurisdictions, and the need to achieve a
cooperative solution with foreign resolution authorities.22 The authorities may also consider
putting in place institution-specific cooperation and coordination arrangements (usually for
entities that can be systemic from a home or host perspective) and jurisdiction-specific
arrangements where more than one Korean entity is operating.23



                       III. CRISIS PREPAREDNESS AND PREVENTION FRAMEWORK

                            A. Systemic risk and financial stability assessment

20.     The MEFM acts as an inter-agency forum for sharing and reviewing the analyses of
risks to financial system stability. These analyses are performed independently by the various
agencies responsible for financial sector regulation and supervision that are members of the
MEFM (namely the MOSF, the BoK, the FSC, and the FSS). For example, the FSC’s early
warning system tracks local and global financial market situation and grades the level of threat to
financial stability on a five point scale (sound, precautionary, cautionary, grave, and critical).
Similar analyses of the potential threats to financial stability are also prepared independently by
the other financial regulators. The analyses by these agencies are periodically discussed at the
MEFM to identify policy responses.

21.     The BoK’s Financial Stability Report (FSR), published twice a year, comprises of
analyses of changes in the macroprudential environment and potential risk factors, an
assessment of Korean financial system stability, and a review of policy response efforts and
future challenges. 24 Its analytical efforts include using its Systemic Risk Assessment Model for
Macroprudential Policy (SAMP), strengthening its research on non-bank financial institutions
(NBFIs), and monitoring the funding and operational behaviours of financial institutions. In its
assessment of the Korean financial system stability, the FSR evaluates and analyses any
vulnerabilities inherent in banks and non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), and suggests
policies to resolve them. The BoK analyses the potential threats to financial system stability by
subdividing the macroprudential environment into the world economy, the domestic economy
and the economic agents (households and firms).25 It also analyses the risk factors inherent in

22
     FSB Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions 2.3 and 7.
23
  The improvements can largely be along the lines of the recommendations contained in the relevant
pronouncements of the FSB (and its predecessor, the Financial Stability Forum – FSF) and the BCBS. These include
the FSB’s Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions and FSF Principles for Cross-
border Cooperation on crisis management; BCBS’s Report and Recommendations of the Cross -border Bank
Resolution Group.
24
   The BoK compiles twice a year (April, October) a report evaluating the status of the nation’s macro-financial
stability, and submit it to the National Assembly. This is a requirement under Article 96 of the BOKA.
25
   The October 2012 FSR pointed out that household debt accumulation could act as a factor reducing the macro-
financial resilience.
                                                          9


each of the four main segments of the financial system (namely banks, NBFIs, financial markets
and foreign exchange soundness). To facilitate and support its analyses, the BoK receives
accurate and timely information on financial institutions from the FSS, solicits the views of the
academics, outside experts and other agencies, and reflects them while drawing up the FSR.

                                            B. Financial safety net

22.     The essential elements of a financial safety net are available in Korea. These include
comprehensive BoK liquidity facilities including emergency liquidity assistance (ELA), a
deposit insurance scheme for deposits in financial institutions, and an efficient framework of
financial sector supervision.

Deposit Insurance

23.      The deposit insurance system in Korea is an integrated insurance system that
provides protection to depositors in the banking and non-banking sectors, up to KRW 50
million per depositor per covered financial institution. The ‘covered financial institutions’
include banks, life insurers, non-life insurers, financial investment companies (e.g. securities
firms and asset management companies), merchant banks, and mutual savings banks. Deposits
that are eligible for protection26 are broadly defined as all money due to customers of financial
institutions even if these are not strictly in line with the conventional definition of a bank deposit.
Deposits in banks that qualify for protection include the deposits held in banks in Korea
(including foreign bank branches in Korea), foreign currency deposits in Korea, and the deposits
held in the foreign branches of Korean banks when these are not protected by the host
jurisdiction. Participation in the deposit insurance system is mandatory for all licensed financial
institutions. The size of insurance cover per depositor is approximately twice the per capita GDP.
Deposits made by government, local government, BoK, KDIC, FSS, or a ‘covered financial
institution’, certificates of deposits, MMFs, commercial papers and insurance policies held and
paid by corporate policy holders are not eligible for KDIC’s protection.

24.     KDIC’s deposit protection cover is available to about 97 percent of bank depositors
and 32 percent of deposits. The corresponding extent of coverage for the other segments of the
financial sector is provided in Table 3 below. The Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) for bank
deposits is about 0.64 percent of total deposits, which is short of the target ratio of 0.825 to 1.1
percent.



26
  Under Article 2-2 of DPA, “deposits) is defined to include- money raised by insured financial institutions in the
form of deposits, installment deposits, etc.; through money trusts whose principal is protected; customer deposits at
securities firms for the purchase and sale of securities and other transactions; and insurance premiums collected by
insurance companies and money raised by insurance companies through money trusts whose principal is protected
and surrender value (or insurance benefits at maturity or accident claims) of insurance policies (except for variable
policies).
                                                            10


                            Table 3: Deposit insurance protection (at end-2012)

                                      Share of fully-    Share of Deposits      Share of         Ex-ante
 Type of financial institution        insured            eligible for           Insured          Coverage
                                      depositors (%)     insurance (%)          Deposits27 (%)   Ratio28 (%)
 Banks                                      97.3                 79.6                32.1             1.58
 Life Insurer                               94.4                 95.2                78.9             1.10
 Non-life Insurer                           96.8                 86.1                77.8             0.98
 Financial Investment
                                            98.8                 90.2                59.3             2.30
 Companies
 Merchant Banks                             96.0                 80.2                60.3             3.66
 Mutual Savings Bank                        99.3                 99.2                94.2             -4.39
Source: KDIC

25.     The provisions in the DPA and the relevant regulations do not explicitly stipulate
stringent timelines for allowing depositors access to their deposits in troubled financial
institutions that are under resolution. KDIC has put in place an efficient information
technology system to handle payouts since 2008,29 but has not set any time limits within which it
shall make deposit pay-outs, when the insurance contingencies occur. When a ‘category one’
insurance contingency occurs (insured financial institutions' payment suspension of claims such
as deposits), the KDIC has two months to decide whether to payout depositors.30 When a
‘category two’ insurance contingency occurs (revocation of license, dissolution, or bankruptcy
declaration) in an insured financial institution, the KDIC shall pay the insurance money, upon the
request of the depositors of the insured financial institution concerned, but the time period within
which such payment shall be made is not stipulated in law or regulations. Authorities note that
KDIC has not had to implement payouts of commercial bank deposits in the past 10 years.
Pending deposit pay-outs, KDIC can make provisional pay-outs (partial payments within the
insured limit). The ‘standard’ time for effecting the provisional pay-outs of deposits was reduced
to 2 weeks in 2011.

26.     Banks declared insolvent and under resolution by the KDIC are allowed to operate
and accept new deposits as well as repay existing deposits. In response to the public criticism
that the depositors in insolvent mutual savings banks are not able to access their deposits in time,
FSC is now allowing insolvent mutual savings banks to continue operations while the KDIC is
considering the resolution options. This can expose the DIF to the risk of a higher loss. This can
27
     Share of deposits within insured amount as percentage of total deposits.
28
     Deposit insurance fund as percentage of deposits eligible for insurance.
29
  Since 2008, depositors can file deposit claims and receive payments promptly via KDIC’s website through an IT
system (Integrated Resolution Information System (IRIS)). Through this system, KDIC calculates deposit insurance
coverage, process claims, make payments, and keep records, with capacity to handle 100,000 claims per hour.
There are contingency plans in place for system slowdowns and failures.
30
     Articles 31 and 34 (Payment Decision) of the Depositor Protection Act.
                                                 11


also expose new depositors in excess of the insured amounts to risk of loss, allow the insolvent
bank to make preferential payments or resort to asset stripping that can eventually lead to a
potential additional burden on the DIF.

27.      The deposit insurance fund is currently in deficit. The KDIC is an organisation
without capital. The DIF which is to be financed ex-ante as provided for in Article 30 of the
DPA, is managing a fund of KRW 8.354 trillion (as of end-2012). The DIF is funded by
collection of premium from the insured entities. The current premium structure is presented in
the table below. The DIF is divided into six accounts – separate for commercial banks, merchant
banks, life insurance, non-life insurance, finance investment companies, and mutual savings
banks. In 2011, KDIC created a separate special account for MSB failure resolutions. The special
account is funded ex-post with part of deposit insurance premiums paid by other financial sector
institutions until the Account’s expiration date (which is December 31, 2026) and funds
recovered from failed and assisted banks. The special account has a deficit (negative balance) of
KRW 15.887 trillion (as of end-2012). When aggregated, the DIF is in deficit (negative balance)
of approximately KRW 7.5 trillion.

          Table 4 : Deposit insurance premium rates per financial sector segment

                                     Financial investment   Insurance   Merchant
       Category           Banks          companies          companies    banks         MSBs
Insurance Premium Rate   8/10,000         15/10,000         15/10,000   15/10,000     40/10,000
Legal Maximum Limit      50/10,000        50/10,000         50/10,000   50/10,000     50/10,000



28.     Recent amendments to the DPA following the failure of a few MSBs in Korea allows
the special account for MSB in the DIF to borrow from other accounts in the DIF, thereby
departing from the DPA’s principle of separation of the different accounts and also
promoting cross subsidization. Article 24-4-2 of DPA which establishes the special account for
the restructuring of the mutual savings banks provides that, among others, one of the sources of
revenue for this special account may be in the form of “borrowings from other accounts in the
deposit protection fund.” While responding to the stress in mutual savings banks, the special
account for mutual savings banks had borrowed from the other accounts in the DIF. In addition,
the deficit in the Special Account is being funded by appropriating 45 percent of the annual
premium received from all insured entities. This results in cross-subsidization of the losses in
MSB segment by the insured entities in other segments.This is an exception to the provision in
the DPA that requires that separate accounts for each type of covered financial institution be
established and each account be kept separate from each other.

29.    From a liquidity perspective, the DIF for conventional bank deposits will be
adequate for paying out the insured depositors in only one regional bank if it became
necessary to make a deposit pay-out. The DIF for commercial banks will have no difficulty
paying out the minimal share of insured deposits in foreign bank branches in Korea with the
                                                            12


present ex-ante funds available. However, the fund, which constitutes about 1.6 percent of the
deposits within the insurable limit, will need to be augmented if it were to pay-out depositors of
more than one regional bank at one time. The fund is inadequate to cover the deposit payout
liability in any one of the top 10 banks (except for one which has a smaller amount of insured
deposits) that collectively account for about 91 percent of the insured deposits.

30.     The KDIC has the legal basis to garner additional funds as needed to support its
role in resolution of financial entities,31 but does not have access to an explicit and assured
funding mechanism which it can tap in an emergency for meeting its liquidity needs. In
times of crisis and/or market liquidity crunch, the quick market sources of funding (borrowing
from member financial institutions or issuing DIF Bonds) may not be feasible, and the
arrangement of loans from the Government can involve some process time (from 2 weeks to 3
months). Having an assured liquidity support which can be drawn down immediately when
required in an emergency will be a step in the direction of international best practices.32

Recommendations

31.    Authorities should not permit banks determined as insolvent banks to accept fresh
deposits and allow withdrawal of existing deposits.33

32.    Authorities should arrange to replenish the deficit in the deposit insurance fund.
This will help to preserve credibility of the deposit insurance as an effective safety net
component and will also be in alignment with the core principles for effective deposit insurance
systems.

33.     Authorities should consider reviewing and modifying the DPA to preserve the
principle of separation of the different accounts and avoid cross-sector subsidization by
entities in other financial sector segments. Going forward, it is recommended that authorities
review the DPA with regard to the funding options for the special account for MSB (within the
DIF) to avoid co-mingling of funds, and aligning the premiums in each account with reference to
that sector’s performance without cross subsidization from other accounts, either directly or
indirectly.


31
  Article 26 DPA allows the KDIC to borrow from the Government, BoK, insured financial institution, or other
institutions identified by the Presidential Decree, and issuance of DIF bonds.
32
     Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems, Principle 11, Essential Criteria 2.
33
   Through the use of purchase and assumption in resolution, “good assets” of the insolvent banks could be
transferred to a bridge bank together with deposits to allow for orderly withdrawals by depositors. In the context of
the early stages of official administration when special audits are being conducted to ascertain solvency or where
resolution options are being considered, banks should not be allowed to accept more deposits when it becomes
evident that they are not solvent or that their return to solvency is not feasible. In appropriate cases, moratoriums
should be used judiciously to prevent additional risks to banks but in a manner that does not cause panic or potential
runs on other banks.
                                                         13


34.      Authorities should establish an explicitly assured line of credit from the
Government to provide back-up funding to KDIC to improve its ability to ensure prompt
reimbursement of depositors’ claims and to provide financial assistance in times of crisis.34
KDIC should also establish clear processes for timely access to the line of credit and liquidity
facility.

35.     KDIC should adopt a more pro-active approach for depositor payouts by putting in
place a procedure for timely payouts to eligible depositors, for example within two weeks from
the occurrence of insurance contingencies, and without requiring the depositors to lodge their
claims.

36.    Authorities should review and revise the DPA to give priority to depositors’ claims
up to the insured amount in the DPA, over other general classes of unsecured creditors
within constitutional limits and within the broader design of the resolution framework in Korea.

Emergency liquidity assistance (ELA)

37.      In addition to its powers to provide liquidity support to banks under normal
conditions, the BoK is empowered to provide emergency liquidity support.35 It can provide
ELA against a flexible list of collateral36 to banking institutions whose liquidity conditions have
deteriorated due to funding liquidity mismatches. It can also provide temporary ELA to banking
institutions which are expected to experience pronounced difficulty in carrying out their
operations due to temporary shortages of funds for payment caused by a breakdown of an
electronic information processing system or other accidental mishap. The BOK’s policy is to
provide ELA only to solvent entities although the BOK Act does not formally prescribe such a
requirement.

38.     The BOK has considerable discretion over the range of assets it may accept as
collateral. Essentially any security or currently performing customer loan could potentially be
pledged to the BOK as collateral provided it has one year or less to maturity. The BOK would
decide on the acceptability of a particular loan/security on a case-by-case basis. The BOK
advised that there is a contingency plan that the MPC has developed to help guide this decision-
making process but no details were available to the mission.

39.    BoK can also lend to for-profit non-bank businesses (including non-financial
enterprises).37 This is intended to be used when these companies experience severe impediments
34
     This will be in line with the requirements under DICP 11(EC 2) and DICP 17(EC 3).
35
     Article 65 of the BOKA.
36
  This support can be in the form of re-discounting, discounting, buying and selling of promissory notes, bills of
exchange, and other credit securities which banking institutions have acquired, provided that the instruments mature
within one year from the date of their acquisition by the BoK. It can also extend ELA against any assets of banking
institutions which can be treated as temporarily acceptable collateral.
37
     Art. 80 of the BOKA.
                                                        14


in obtaining funds from financial institutions, including when there is a severe contraction of
credit or when there is a strong likelihood of that arising.

40.     As provided by Article 65 of BOKA, the BoK shall hear the opinions of the
government before deciding on the provision of ELA, which has the potential to delay ELA
decisions. Any decision of the MPC, including ELA provision, may be challenged by the
government. Article 91 of the BOKA give the MOSF and FSC the right for the Vice Minister/
Vice Chairman of those entities to attend and state their opinions at the meeting of the MPC. 38
As provided by Article 92 of BOKA, where the MOSF considers the decisions taken by the MPC
to be in conflict with the Government’s economic policy, he may request the MPC to reconsider
them. In these cases, the decision of the MPC must be reconsidered and elevated to the President
for ultimate decision in the event that five members of the MPC continue to disagree with the
views of the MOSF. Where the Minister of Strategy and Finance makes a request for
reconsideration, the purpose and contents of the request are required to be publicly disclosed
immediately. These processes have the potential to slow decisions on ELA.

Recommendation

41.   As scope for delays, though remote, in providing ELA to financial institutions
during a crisis can be critical to financial stability, authorities should review and revise the
BOKA and related processes to avoid scope for potential delays in timely provision of ELA.

C. Supervisory Framework for problem banks

42.     The FSC/FSS conducts comprehensive oversight of banks by using the on-site
CAMEL-R assessments and the off-site surveillance. The FSS performs on-site examinations
in major banks once in two years. The degree of off-site surveillance and the scope of the
inspection plan are dependent upon individual bank’s financial situation, size, risk profile, and
the prevailing macro-economic situation. Banks are assigned a supervisory safety and soundness
rating on a scale of 1 to 5, using the CAMEL-R methodology.




38
  The Vice Chairman of the FSC may be present and state his/ her opinion only on matters related to the
responsibilities of the FSC.
                                                            15


          Table 5: Corrective action framework for banks and bank holding companies39

     Actions       Management Improvement                Management Improvement             Management Improvement
                        Recommendation                           Requirement                             Order
                   1. BIS capital ratio of lower   1.   BIS capital ratio of lower than    1. BIS capital ratio of lower
                      than 8%.                          6%.                                   than 2%.
                   2. CAMEL-R rating of 3 or       2.   CAMEL-R rating of 4 or lower.      2. Banks defined as failing
                      higher with capital          3.   Financial irregularity or non-        banks under the Act on
                      adequacy and/or asset             performing loan of considerable       Structural Improvement of
                      quality rating of 4 or            magnitude.                            the Financial Industry.
 Triggering           lower.                       4.   Failure to implement               3. Failure to implement
   Point           3. Financial irregularity or         improvement plan that a bank          improvement plan that a
                      non-performing loans of           has been required to prepare and      bank has been required to
                      considerable magnitude.           implement as a result of FSC’s        prepare and implement as a
                                                        Management Improvement                result of FSC’s Management
                                                        Recommendation.                       Improvement Requirement.
   Issuing                     FSC                                    FSC                                 FSC
  Authority
1. For securities firms, net capital ratio of lower than 150% or safety and soundness rating of 3 or higher with capital
   adequacy and/or asset quality rating of 4 or lower triggers the first level of corrective action, Management
   Improvement Recommendation.
2. For insurance firms, triggering point for Management Improvement Recommendation is solvency margin ratio of
   lower than 100% or safety and soundness rating of 3 or higher with capital adequacy and/or asset quality rating of 4
   or lower.



43.     FSC triggers corrective actions when the safety and soundness indicators fall below
the threshold levels established in regulations. The corrective measures are triggered at three
stages and the triggers are clearly established (please see Table 5 above). The triggers at the first
stage will result in the issuance of a management improvement recommendation by the FSC,
while the next stage will result in a management improvement requirement, and the last stage
will result in the management improvement order. While FSC can take corrective action with
reference to the CAMEL-R rating and financial irregularity or NPLs, the triggers set with
reference to the CAR indicates potential delay in activating corrective measures, the asset quality
trigger in stage 2 is unclear, and the asset quality trigger in stage 3 is absent. The corrective
action triggers with reference to banks’ CAR are set to be activated only after a bank breaches
the minimum capital ratio, and allows the capital ratio to go down to 2 percent before the bank is
subject to intrusive measures (intervened).40 For instance, in the case of mutual savings banks,
the authorities effectively adopted more stringent corrective measures when the CAR was close
to or lower than 2 percent, which did not allow enough time for meaningful corrective actions.
Several MSBs were put into resolution after they became insolvent. The corrective action
framework for securities and insurance firms are similar to that for banks.


39
     Articles 34 to 36 of the Regulation on supervision of banking business (amended June 26, 2012).
40
  These measures can include retirements of all or parts of issued stocks, suspension of duties of officers,
appointment of administrators, transfer of all or parts of business or contracts, suspension of business, mergers and
acquisitions.
                                                           16


44.     The FSC has broad discretion on the range of remedial actions it can take to
address problem situations and is guided by the relevant regulations.41 The range of actions
that can be invoked is proportionate to the gravity of the safety and soundness rating and the
stage of intervention. In situations where there may be a rapid deterioration of a bank’s financial
position and if a bank is recognized to significantly undermine the interests of depositors, the
FSC can take emergency measures for removing such danger.42 The range of emergency
measures include, among others, restriction on taking deposits and granting credits, suspension
of payment of all or parts of deposits, prohibition of debt‐repayment, and disposal of assets.

45.      Pursuant to ASIFI and DPA, the FSC can postpone or suspend the corrective
actions, including revocation of licence, for a specified period under certain special
situations. For example, if the situations in the financial institution are determined to be such
that it will be able to meet the required standards within a short time (such as capital increase,
disposal of assets, or other grounds corresponding thereto), the FSC can postpone the corrective
action for a specified period.43 The subordinate regulations stipulate that the suspension period
for corrective action shall be limited to no more than 3 months for financial institutions with
small asset volume. The FSC can also choose not to revoke authorisation or permission for a
period up to one year in cases where the financial institution ordered to reduce capital, or
amortise all or some of its stocks, or consolidate its stocks, complies with the order.44 Under
Article 21(6) of the DPA, where the KDIC requests the FSC to take adequate measures where it
appears to KDIC that there is a threat to the insurance contingency as a result of its
investigations, the FSC should comply with the request unless there exist “any special grounds”
for it not to so comply. In the absence of written criteria of when FSC can indeed exercise its
discretion under these provisions, there are elements of uncertainty on the efficacy of the
intervention framework and possible forbearance. The FSC has used its power to postpone the
corrective actions in mutual savings banks, which is one of the reasons cited anecdotally for their
failure. Such postponement results in higher losses to the KDIC.

Recommendations

46.     While the corrective actions framework has some of the main elements, there is
scope for improving it and its effectiveness. The improvements can be in the areas of
reviewing the triggers, introducing greater clarity and objectivity to the triggers, re-setting the
triggers to earlier stages in the deterioration of a financial institution’s health than at present.

41
     Articles 34 to 36 of the Enforcement Decree for the Regulation on Supervision of Banking Business.
42
  The broad determining factors will include (a) shortage of reserves and assets for future payment to depositors,
default of external debts, and other similar situations due to the rapid deterioration of liquidity; (b) cases where it is
impossible and difficult to conduct normal businesses due to the unexpected accidents such as shutdown, suspension
of business, bank run, and labor disputes, etc.; and (c) cases where bankruptcy or insolvency is highly expected.
43
     Article 37 of the Regulation on supervision of banks and Art 10 (3) of ASIFI.
44
     Article 11(4) of ASIFI.
                                                          17


This will be in compliance with international standards45 that require that the supervisor
intervenes at an early stage to require a bank to take action to prevent it from reaching its
minimum regulatory requirements. The FSC should also develop strict internal guidelines and
criteria that will allow it to postpone or suspend serious corrective actions (including
interventions) only in extremely rare cases that are of systemic relevance, and which deserve
support in the larger interest of preserving financial stability. As this matter is best addressed in
the primary law or in subsidiary legislation rather than in internal guidelines, authorities should
undertake revisions to the relevant laws.

                                             D. Contingency plans

47.      The financial institutions, particularly banks, have prepared contingency plans to
address the stress that might arise from their exposures to certain risks like liquidity and
operational risks. The financial institutions undertake periodic stress tests to identify their risk
vulnerabilities and prepare their contingency plans to address the situations that might arise if the
stress levels were to materialise. These are subject to periodic oversight by the FSS.

48.     Preparedness at the group level for addressing risk vulnerabilities might not be as
comprehensive as at the individual group entity (subsidiary) level. As observed during the
process of the standards assessments,46 the financial groups normally oversee risk management
in the group entities at their solo level but do not always undertake a group-wide approach to risk
management. The financial groups seem to be at early stages of adopting a group-wide approach
to risk management. Consequently, their contingency plans for responding to stress situations are
at the subsidiary level.

49.    The FSC, FSS, KDIC, BoK, and MOSF are stated to have contingency plans for
responding to stress in the financial system. While the assessment team did not have access to
the contingency plans per se of all authorities, the authorities assert that these are detailed and are
adequate. A gist of the contingency plans shared by the FSS, KDIC, and BoK is presented in the
Box 2. In the event of a stress or threat to financial stability, the response measures proposed by
each regulator are stated to be discussed in the MEFM, and the package of response measures as
appropriate for the level of stress in the financial system is agreed upon. The actual activation of
the measures is handled by each responsible regulator.

50.    While the authorities have made good progress in establishing a crisis preparedness
framework, these have not been tested for their operational feasibility and effectiveness
through crisis simulation exercises (CSEs). CSEs are powerful tools to diagnose what is
missing or not working in existing crisis management arrangements (the organizational, legal,
and operational framework, inter-agency information sharing and coordination arrangements,
45
     Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision.
46
  Undertaken as a part of the FSAP Update, like the assessment of the compliance with the Basel Core Principles
for Effective Banking Supervision.
                                               18


communications with key stakeholders and the public, etc.). The intensity and scope of the
diagnosis can be modulated by developing and designing appropriate plausible scenarios for the
simulations. The CSEs are also particularly useful for “learning by doing” training in the
implementation of contingency plans and crisis-management options. Financial sector CSEs
have been undertaken at inter- or intra-agency levels, at the national level, and across borders.
CSEs usually include situations that demand quick decision-making under critical and worsening
scenarios. Lessons for promoting changes to law, policy, procedures, and institutional
arrangements may naturally arise from these exercises. Discussions with the industry and the
financial regulators suggest that they have not yet undertaken crisis simulation exercises (CSEs)
to test the framework and the various functionaries.
                                                        19


Recommendations

51.     Given the significance of the FHCs in the system, the extent of their concentration in
the banking sector, their presence in the other key financial sector segments and also their
international presence, the authorities should consider requiring the FHCs to prepare their
contingency plans at the group-wide level. While the group contingency plans could be for
dealing with specific risks, a key element of crisis preparedness initiatives requires that the
authorities require the FHCs to prepare and submit their recovery plans. This will be in
alignment with the trend in the advanced economies and also in line with the proposals in the
FSB Key Attributes.47

52.     While the existing framework for identifying and responding to threats to financial
stability is generally working well, these can be formalised or additional steps can be taken
to enhance crisis preparedness. Some of the key elements of the framework for crisis
preparedness which can be reviewed for improvement will include the following:

     a. Crisis management teams (CMTs): Each agency (FSC, FSS, BoK, KDIC, and MOSF)
        can identify key officials tasked with executing crisis preparedness and crisis
        management related activities. Relevant tasks can include finalizing the internal
        procedures and processes, preparation and maintenance of the documents identified
        below, interacting with the secretariat of the proposed Apex Forum, and implementation
        of crisis response measures.

     b. Crisis management handbook or reference materials: Having key reference materials
        summarized in advance and readily at hand can aid senior officials in a time of crisis.
        Relevant reference materials can include the following: crisis management
        protocols/procedures (e.g. documents that identify key actions likely to be required and
        those responsible for taking them, that enumerate detailed steps required to implement
        those actions, etc.); extracts of relevant sections of laws and regulations that may be
        relied upon while responding to a crisis; summaries of key policies; templates of key
        documents that might need to be issued (e.g., directives to boards of distressed
        institutions); regularly updated lists of relevant stakeholders with contact details; and
        communication protocols (basic guidance for interacting with the media, templates for
        press releases, etc.).

47
  Jurisdictions should put in place an ongoing process for recovery and resolution planning, covering at a minimum,
domestically incorporated firms that could be systemically significant or critical if they fail. (FSB – KA 11.1)
Supervisory and resolution authorities should ensure that the firms for which a recovery and resolution plan is
required maintain a recovery plan that identifies options to restore financial strength and viability when the firm
comes under severe stress. Recovery plans should include: (i) credible options to cope with a range of scenarios
including both idiosyncratic and market wide stress; (ii) scenarios that address capital shortfalls and liquidity
pressures; and (iii) processes to ensure timely implementation of recovery options in a range of stress situations.
(FSB – KA 11.5)
                                                         20


       c. Crisis management groups (CMGs): In line with the FSB Key Attributes for Effective
          Resolution Regimes (KAs), the authorities should consider establishing institution-
          specific CMGs with the objective of enhancing preparedness for resolving complex
          institutions and mitigating the potential for systemic crises. The CMGs would normally
          be envisaged for each financial institution that is of systemic relevance. The CMGs could
          include the FSC, the BoK, the KDIC, other domestic financial sector supervisory
          agencies, and key foreign authorities.48

53.     The crisis preparedness and crisis management capabilities in Korea should be fully
tested through crisis simulation exercises. Going forward, conducting periodic crisis
simulations should be an important area of focus. While these exercises can be undertaken at the
level of individual regulators to test their internal systems and decision-making frameworks, the
authorities should also consider undertaking national inter-agency simulations. These simulations
can cover severe but plausible crisis situations involving individual institutions and system-wide
disruptions. It will be beneficial to repeat the simulations at periodical intervals, particularly
when there have been significant changes in the incumbents of the major stakeholders, the legal
framework, the banking system, and the operating environment.



                                 IV. CRISIS MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK

54.    The objective of financial crisis management is to seek to prevent serious domestic
or international financial instability that would have an adverse impact on the real
economy. In so doing, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) principles49 require that authorities be
mindful of the impact that interventions may have on the public purse and, as far as possible,

       a. maintain incentives for financial institutions to behave prudently,
       b. promote private sector solutions and use public sector interventions only when this is
          necessary to preserve financial stability, and
       c. maintain a level, competitive international playing field, in the spirit of the Basel Accord.

55.     The authorities have a few ready and efficient options that can be activated in the
event of a financial crisis. These include tools to influence systemic liquidity in money and
securities markets, to increase deposit insurance and investor protection cover (including full
guarantee), to mobilise public funds to provide support to financial institutions and markets that


48
  The CMGs will also include the supervisory authorities, central banks, resolution authorities, finance ministries
and the public authorities responsible for guarantee schemes from key home and host jurisdictions of the group
entities that are material to its resolution. The KDIC has since engaged in consultation with the FSC on
establishment of a consultative body similar to the CMGs.
49
     FSB Principles for Cross Border Cooperation on Crisis Management, April 2009.
                                                        21


may be under stress, and to intervene and resolve troubled financial institutions. These options
are discussed below.

                           A. Systemic liquidity in money and securities markets

56.     The BoK is empowered to influence systemic liquidity through its open market
operations (OMO)50, via its standing facilities, and by varying reserve requirements.51
OMOs are normally done in certain specified securities (Government bonds of the Republic of
Korea and securities whose full redemption and interest payments are guaranteed by the
Government). The BoK has an expanded list of eligible collateral which is used for the BOK’s
standing credit facility (Liquidity Adjustment Loans). This wider list includes other credit
securities such as promissory notes and bills of exchange. Banks in Korea are required to
maintain a certain percentage of their liabilities as reserves with the BoK (reserve requirements
vary between 0 and 7 percent depending on the type of liability), which can be varied to
influence systemic liquidity. Banks may also be required to maintain marginal reserves over and
above the ratio of reserves on liabilities.

57.      The BoK has planned a securities lending facility under the OMO window52 and
provides intraday funds to participant institutions of payment systems.53 The proposed
facility would aim to not only ease the liquidity situation indirectly but can also help in
addressing stress in both money markets and the securities markets. The latter is available to
participants of those payment systems that are operated directly by the Bank of Korea. This
facility allows the BoK to address gridlock situations in the BoK Wire settlement system that
might arise due to temporary shortage of funds in one or more participating institutions,
including non-banks.

                                      B. Deposit insurance and guarantee

58.     Raising and widening the deposit insurance cover is a tested option for KDIC to
signal its commitment to maintaining calm in the markets in times of crisis. KDIC had
raised the insurance cover from KRW 20 million to a blanket guarantee in November 1997
during the Asian Financial Crisis, and dropped the coverage in 2001 to KRW 50 million, where
it remains unchanged.54 In the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008, the deposit insurance
cover was extended to also cover foreign currency deposits.


50
     Article 68 of the BOKA.
51
     Articles 55 to 59 of the BOKA.
52
     Article 68 of BOKA.
53
     Article 81-2 of the BOKA.
54
 Article 32 (2) of the Depositor Protection Act provides that the maximum amount of insurance money be decided
by Presidential Decree in consideration of the per capita GDP and size of protected deposits. Article 18 (6) of the
Enforcement Decree of the Depositor Protection Act specifies that the ceiling be fifty million won, while by
                                                        22


59.     The processes stipulated in the laws and the related procedures can prove to be a
serious challenge to effective crisis management if there were failure or insolvency of a
medium or large financial institution. To enable the KDIC to decide on the repayment of
depositors in insolvent banks, it will undertake due diligence, perform a least cost test of the
available options, and choose the one that is imposing least cost on the DIF. Thereafter, the
KDIC’s proposal will be referred to the FSC for its approval. These steps are expected to take at
least about two months even in the case of mutual savings banks, which are small. If the chosen
option involves use of public funds, obtaining approvals and raising the funds are expected to
take about 2 more months. In addition, when a financial institution is required to write down
shareholder equity and creditors’ claims under the chosen option, the KDIC/failed bank is
required to provide due notice of at least 10 days to the creditors.

Recommendation

60.    KDIC and FSC should review the processes involved to reduce the timelines allowed
for making decisions on making depositor payouts, providing financial assistance to, and
resolving troubled banks.

                                       C. Public Financial Support

61.     Korea established several funds in the wake of the recent global financial crisis to
provide financial assistance to financial institutions either directly or indirectly. These funds
were used to provide liquidity assistance and capital assistance to the financial institutions or to
stressed borrowers. Some of these funds (for example, Bank Recapitalization Fund, and
Restructuring Fund) receive support from the Government and BoK, either through loans or
through guarantee of the bonds issued by them. These funds can be collectively seen as serving
the role of an additional tool for managing stress in the financial system, and which have been
used to stabilize the system during past crises. (Please see Box 3.)

62.     While these funds are playing a useful role, they have potential implications for
distorting the incentive framework for financial institutions. While some of these funds
might have received funding from the BoK directly or indirectly, the funding or guarantee has
been largely provided by state-owned financial enterprises. The establishment of funds to help
the financial institutions directly and indirectly to overcome the stress on their liquidity and
solvency can give rise to moral hazard and distort the incentive framework for these institutions
to better manage their risk.

63.     While FSC and KDIC powers are comprehensive to address threats to financial
stability, moral hazard issues may need to be more fully addressed. While the ASIFI


Addendum to the Enforcement Decree (Article 5), July 25, 1998, the limit was lifted until December 31, 2000,
effecting the blanket guarantee. Currently, as a part of the normal review, KDIC is contemplating raising the
insurance cover for some sectors’ deposits.
                                                           23


empowers the FSC to impose various corrective and resolution measures, it does not explicitly
provide for mandatory imposition of losses first on shareholders and other creditors before
deploying public funds.55 This is at a variance with the FSB KAs and DICP.56 However,
authorities assert that as a matter of practice, the FSC has imposed losses on shareholders.
Hence, formalizing this is not expected to be difficult and it will also help to address the moral
hazard issues.




55
     Article 12(3) of the ASIFI provides an option to the FSC to order writing down of shareholders equity.
56
  FSB KA (6.4) requires that public funding should be temporary, that private funding is either not available or
cannot achieve these objectives, that losses are allocated to shareholders and that residual losses are borne by the
creditors or the industry (if required through ex-post levies or insurance premiums). DICP 16 (EC 7) requires that
resolution procedures clearly ensure that bank shareholders take first losses.
                                                          24



Recommendations

64.      Authorities should review the direct and indirect use of public funds (including
Depositor Protection Fund) to ensure that the incentive frameworks are not distorted and
that moral hazard issues are fully addressed. The international trend is to put in place
frameworks whereby costs of financial institution resolutions are borne by the private sector first
and that public funds are used only when the private sector sources are not available or cannot
achieve the objective.57 Additionally, when use of public funds is inevitable, the shareholders
and other creditors of insolvent financial institutions should always bear the losses caused to that
institution, before the infusion of public funds. Authorities should ensure that utilization of
public funds for managing stress situations, including resolution of financial institutions,
complies with the above principles. Further, in order to restore market discipline and promote
efficient operation of financial markets, the authorities should consider, and incorporate into their
planning, clear options or principles for exit from public involvement.



                                 V. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS RESOLUTION

                                 A. Resolution measures for insolvent banks

65.     The FSC have the legal powers to take stronger measures for insolvent banks. There
is a second level of legal triggers58, which allows the FSC to take more radical measures,
including ordering the suspension of the business of the financial institution or their total transfer
to another financial institution59; these actions require the institution to be “insolvent”. At this
point the Korean Deposit Insurance Corporation (KDIC) comes to be a key player in the
process60.



57
     This will be in line with the FSB KA 6.4.
58
  In addition to the corrective actions in terms of Banking Act. Arts. 34 and 46 and in terms of Act on Structural
Improvement Art. 10 (4).
59
   The ASIFI refers in its Art. 10 (4) to the transfer of “all business” and/or “all contracts” which reduces the
flexibility of the power, nevertheless DPA Arts. 36-2 and 36-3 does not require the transfer to include “all” assets,
liabilities or contracts, which goes in line with the requirements of KA 3.3 and 3.4.
60
   Although most of the actions that the KDIC is authorized by law, to undertake, are related to insolvent financial
institutions, the Corporation make request from an insured financial institution and/or its parent financial holding
company, to submit all data, and it also can investigate the financial institution’s business and financial status as
needed for the exercise of its (KDIC’s) duties, including the determination of the institution being an “insolvency
threatened institution” This may occur since a very early moment, in the process, even from the time on which the
financial institution start to be in non-compliance of its basic standards as prescribed in the Regulation on the
Supervision of Banking Business. See DPA art. 21 (1) and (2), and DPA enforcement decree art. 12-2. This norms
go in line with KA 3.1 which states that the resolution regime should provide for timely and early entry into
resolution before a firm is balance-sheet insolvent and before all equity has been fully wiped out.
                                                          25


66.    Definition of “insolvency” under Korean financial laws. A key definition under
Korean Financial Laws (ASIFI, art. 2.2, and DPA, art. 2.5.) is that of “Insolvency” that needs to
be examined, as follows. The definition has three aspects, two of them objectives and one with
some subjective elements. They are:

         a. the financial institution’s liabilities exceed its assets (balance sheet insolvency);

         b. the financial institution has suspended its payments; and

         c. the financial institution, in the opinion of the FSC or the KDIC, is deemed as having
            difficulty in paying its claims without financial assistance61.

67.     The KDIC may repay depositors or perform resolution operations. In cases (a) and
(b) the KDIC shall pay the insured deposits (DPA) Art. 31)62, and if the grounds for bankruptcy
are there, the FSC may file a petition for bankruptcy. However, if the KDIC considers that the
insolvent financial institution needs help for the protection of depositors or “the stability of the
credit market” (DPA Art. 38(1)2) it may, by a resolution of its Committee, provide financial
assistance. This treatment applies, in practice, to most cases of insolvency under criteria (c)
above.

68.     The specific type of resolution operation to be performed is determined by the FSC
and performed by the KDIC. The KDIC financial assistance is most frequently provided in the
context of a resolution operation that in most cases implies either a total or partial merger with a
sound financial institution, or the partial or total transfer of business or contracts to another
financial institution. Once the determination of insolvency has been made either by the FSC or
the KDIC (DPA Act Art. 2.5 and ASIFI Art. 2.2), the FSC decides, at the request of the KDIC,
the specific type of resolution operation that will be performed (DPA Art. 36-2)63.

69.    The resolution operations are, generally, performed under management appointed
by the FSC. As a general rule the performance of a resolution operation is made under a
Management Supervisor appointed by the FSC 64 (ASIFI, Art. 14 (7)) in concordance with Arts.
10(1)4 and 14 (1) of the same Act), this officer has the authority to conduct the business and to

61
   In fact the Regulation on Supervision of Banking Business provides in arts 42 to 45 a number of elements for the
determination of insolvency by the FSC and KDIC, including criteria and procedures for the valuation of assets and
liabilities of the financial entity in question.
62
  See that in case b) above the revocation of the insured institution’s business authorization or its dissolution (by
FSC decision) or a declaration of insolvency are prior requirements for the payment of deposits.(DPA Art. 2.7 (b).
63
   As can be seen from the above description, the triggering of resolution results from the interaction between the
FSA and the KDIC. While the determination of insolvency can be made be any of the two entities, the decision
related to the kind of resolution operation that should be performed can only be taken by the FSA; once this decision
is taken the actual performance of the operation is to be undertaken by the KDIC.
64
  Art. 14 (1) of the Act on Structural Improvement requires the Governor of the FSS to previously request this
action to the FSC.
                                                          26


manage and dispose of assets and liabilities of the insolvent financial institution. In cases on
which the KDIC provides financial assistance the Management Supervisor appointed by the FSC
shall be “an executive or employee” of the KDIC (ASIFI, Art. 14-6 (1).65

70.     The capital of insolvent institutions under resolution operations may be reduced
and/or consolidated by the FSC. In case of performance of resolution operations such as forced
mergers or the transfer of business and contracts, the FSC may reduce and/or consolidate the
capital of the insolvent institution, using the powers from Art. 10 (1) of the ASIFI, in
concordance with Art. 12 (3) of the same Act. 66

71.     The KDIC can also provide financial assistance to financial institutions on which the
Government has made investments to avoid their “complete destabilization”. Financial
assistance from the KDIC can also be provided in cases on which the FSC so request in relation
to Financial institutions on which the Government (as the request of the FSC) has made
investments to avoid a complete destabilization of its financial structure due to “the continued
withdrawal of funds” (ASIFI, Art. 12 (1)).

72.     The KDIC can also provide financial assistance to sound financial institutions that
accept to merge with insolvent financial institution, or receiving transfer of contracts from
them. In the case on which the FSC has ordered a merger of the insolvent financial institution
with a sound financial institution, or a transfer of business or contracts,67 the KDIC can also
provide financial assistance. In this case the financial assistance will be provided to the sound
entity.68, 69

73.     The KDIC can also create “bridge banks” and to provide their capital. The KDIC
can also establish a Financial Resolution Institution with the purpose of “taking over business or




65
  In some special cases the FSC may appoint additional management supervisors, whenever the FSC considers that
the depositors need some additional protection. (ASIFI, art 14-6 (2).
66
   See that the power of the FSC in these cases is fully discretional. Although we understand that there may be some
exceptional cases on which the reduction and consolidation of capital may not be appropriate (for example the case
on which the remaining capital of the assisted institution is not below the minimum requirement of the Commercial
Act. See art. 24-4 (1) 4 of the DPA Implementation Decree, or cases on which assistance is provided to a sound
financial entity which merges with an insolvent financial institution) the general rule should be that capital reduction
shall proceed in all cases, except in those specifically excluded by Law.
67
     ASIFI, Art. 11 (1).
68
     DPA , Art. 38 (1) 1.
69
  The “arrangements” for the merger or transfer can also be originated by the KDIC whenev er it deems that
‘necessary for the protection of depositors and the maintenance of financial stability” (DPA, Art. 36). In this case the
KDIC request the FSC to order the merger or transfer. Then, the sound institution which will participate in the
operation should make an application for financial assistance from the KDIC (Art. 37 DPA).and the KDIC can
decide by itself on the provision of such assistance (Art. 38 (1) 1 DPA).
                                                          27


contracts of insolvent financial institutions or conducting the resolution process”.70 The capital of
this Financial Resolution Institution shall be paid up in full by the KDIC.

Recommendations

74.      The definition of “Insolvent Financial Institutions” shall be made less discretionary
by the Law to make the resolution process more precise and improve legal certainty. The
authorities should consider the inclusion in the law of some key parameters to declare a financial
institution as insolvent under ASIFI Art. 2, 2. c), and DPA Art. 2. 5. c). i.e. in cases on which the
FSC and/or the KDIC have discretional power to determine the insolvency.71, 72

75.     Reduction or consolidation of capital in insolvent financial institutions under the
resolution regime should be made the general rule. Considering that in case of performance of
resolution operations, such as forced mergers or the transfer of business and contracts, the FSC
may reduce and/or consolidate the capital of the insolvent institution on a discretional basis,
using the powers from Art. 10 (1) of the ASIFI, in concordance with Art, 12 (3) of the same Act,
the authorities should consider a change in the law to make the reduction of capital the general
rule, and to allow exceptions only in extreme and very justified cases as determined by the
Law73.

                                         B. The Least Cost Principle

76.     The KDIC is subject to the “least cost principle” in all its operations. Insurance
payments and resolution actions by the KDIC are subject to the least cost principle as stated in
art. 38-4 of the DPA. The provision states that whenever the KDIC pays insured money or
provides financial assistance to insured institutions, “it shall do so in a manner as to minimize
any loss to the deposit insurance fund”.

77.      Complementary elements of the definition of the “least cost principle” are provided
in secondary legislation and in KDIC policies. Art. 24-3 of the DPA Enforcement Decree
states that whenever the KDIC pays insurance money or provides financial assistance shall
minimize the loss to the deposit insurance fund by “objectively understanding the management
status and financial conditions of the insured financial institution and the financial holding
company that has such insured financial institution as a subsidiary, through a due diligence of

70
     DPA, 36-3.
71
  The existing regulatory provisions in this matter (see footnote 63) are a good step in this direction but the system
would benefit from a reduction in discretionality at the legal level to improve legal certainty in a key element of the
resolution framework.
72
  KA 3.1 requires that “clear standards” and/or “suitable indicators” of non-viability shall be in place to help guide
decisions on whether firms meet the conditions for entry into resolution.
73
   The recommended amendment, by reducing the likelihood that pre-resolution shareholders receive unjustified
financial help, would allow a more appropriate application of KA 6 to the system.
                                                        28


assets and liabilities, etc.”. Reportedly, the KDIC has developed some internal criteria for the
appropriate performance of due diligence exercises, which would make the least cost principle’s
application more precise.

78.     Exceptions to the application of the least cost principle. Whenever the KDIC
Committee considers that the liquidation or bankruptcy of an insolvent financial institution
“might seriously undermine the stability of the financial system”, the KDIC can provide the
financial assistance or pay the insured depositors without regard to the least cost principle.74

79.     The exceptions to the application of the principle are rather general and
discretional. Considering that the KDIC is authorized by law to receive contributions from the
Government (DPA Act, Art. 24 (2) 2, that it can also borrow funds from the Government and the
BoK (DPA Act, Art. 26 (1)), and that it can issued Deposit Insurance Fund Bonds, guaranteed by
the Government, (DPA Act, Art. 26-2 (5)) the general formulation of the least cost principle and
the high degree of discretionality on which exemptions can be granted, may introduce a
significant moral hazard element into the system. The first of the above aspects (generality of the
definition) can be reduced by the criteria that may be included in the policy on Due Diligence
Requirements. Still it would be better to include those criteria in a higher level provision which
would provide more legal certainty. On the second aspect (discretionality for the granting of
exemptions), see the comments and recommendations presented below under “S ystemic
Implications”.

Recommendations

80.     Key principles for the application of the KDIC’s Least Cost Principle should be
included in higher level norms to improve legal certainty. The authorities should consider to
include some of the principles that clarify and complement the definition of the Least Cost
Principle, currently reflected only in KDIC internal policies, in higher level norms (e.g. the DPA
Enforcement Decree) in order to improve transparency and also to provide a higher degree of
legal certainty in this very important part of the resolution regime75.

81.     Exemptions to the application of the Least Cost Principle should be clearly linked to
the parameters used to define “systemic Implications”. Once the parameters and key criteria
to define “systemic implications” will be identified, as described below, the exemptions to the
application of the Least Cost Principle by the KDIC should be clearly linked to those parameters
either by Law or the Enforcement Decree.




74
     DPA, art. 38-4 (3).
75
  The appropriate application of the least cost principle as recommended in this paragraph will be in line with KA 6
by reducing the likelihood of the use of public funds in unjustified cases.
                                                   29


                                       C. Systemic implications

82.    There are a number of cases under the Korean financial laws on which terms
implying “systemic implications” trigger a number of special funding possibilities. Under
the Korean Laws there are a number of cases on which different languages suggest the
requirement of some degree of systemic implications as prerequisite for certain actions to be
taken by the authorities in relation to insolvent financial institutions, as follows:

       a. In order for the KDIC to be able to provide financial assistance to insured financial
          institutions, it is required, under Art. 38 (1) 2 of the DPA, that the insolvent financial
          institution would need the assistance for the protection of depositors and “the stability of
          the credit market”. No additional precision or developments of the expression, for the
          exercise of one of the “regular” functions of the KDIC.

       b. Under Art. 36 of the DPA Act, the Corporation (KDIC) may “make arrangements” for a
          merger, business transfer or takeover of an insolvent financial institution or its parent
          financial holding company, where it considers it necessary for the protection of
          depositors and “the maintenance of financial stability”. In this case, although the basic
          power to order the merger or transfer remains with the FSC (Art. 11 of the Law on
          Structural Improvement) and the FSC does not need to invoke any kind of “systemic
          implication”, the KDIC, in addition to the above mentioned power to “make
          arrangements” for the merger or transfer, gets two additional powers by invoking the
          maintenance of financial stability, one is the possibility to request the FSC to take “the
          necessary measures”76 and the second one is that, under Art. 38 (1) 1 of the DPA Act, the
          Corporation can provide financial assistance to the sound financial entity that is willing to
          participate in the merger or transfer.

       c. Under Art. 36-3 of the DPA Act, the Corporation may establish a Financial Resolution
          Institution (FRI, which is a kind of “bridge bank”) with the approval of the FSC, to take
          over the business and contracts of an insolvent financial institution, when “deemed
          necessary for the protection of depositors and maintenance of the stability of the
          financial system”. This is a more “special” power since the FRI is fully capitalized by
          the KDIC and can perform a number of functions, including to develop the whole
          resolution process. The FRI can exercise its functions for an initial period of up to five
          years, which may be extended by the FSC.

       d. Under Art. 38-4 (3) of the DPA Act, the Corporation may pay insurance money, or
          provide financial assistance beyond the limits of the “least cost principle”, whenever its
          Committee deems that the liquidation or bankruptcy of the insolvent financial institution
          “might seriously undermine the stability of the financial system” In this case the

76
     DPA Act, Art. 36-2 (1).
                                                         30


         expression “seriously undermine” is added, but we need to take into account that
         considering the very wide possibilities of official (and private) funding and guarantees
         that the law gives to the KDIC. This is a power that may have tremendous implications
         in financial and stability and moral hazard terms.

83.     The above key expressions are not identical but none of them is specifically defined
by law, and all of them generate additional funding powers. From all of the above can be
seen that under the Korean laws there are a number of expressions suggesting the presence of
systemic implications, used to allow the financial authorities, specially the KDIC, to use special
powers to provide different kind of assistance to insolvent financial institutions. The expressions
are not identical, and none of them is specifically defined by law or regulation.

84.      The lack of precision in all the above cases but specially in the granting of
exceptions to the least cost principle seriously reduces accountability and legal certainty.
The lack of precision of the used terms described in the above paragraphs, especially in the case
that allows for exceptions to the KDIC’s least cost principle, is a weakness in the system that
may allow the financial authorities to take case by case decisions, undermining the basis for
accountability, all of which affects the certainty of the legal rules and the credibility of the
resolution scheme.

85.     In line with the recommendations of the BCBS in its key documents on Domestic
Systemically Important Financial Institutions (DSIFIS), the financial sector authorities
shall continue its efforts to develop parameters to objectively identify systemically
important FI and then to reflect them in norms. In accordance with the above paragraph, we
consider that sustained progress should be made in the current efforts of the financial authorities
to identify parameters that can objectively help to identify the degree of systemic importance that
a financial institution or financial holding company may have, and then to reflect those
parameters in appropriate norms, in order to reduce the high degree of discretionality implied in
the current system and to improve accountability and legal certainty77.

Recommendations

86.     The financial authorities shall step-up its current efforts to establish criteria for the
identification of systemically important financial institutions and to reflect those in norms
to be integrated into the resolution regime. In order to be able to apply the KA directed at G-
SIFIS in an appropriate manner, the financial authorities should continue their efforts to develop
objective parameters and criteria to identify systemically important financial institutions and
groups, and the FSC shall reflect those criteria in norms integrating the resolution regime. For
that purpose, the authorities shall follow the Assessment Methodology Principles reflected in the

77
  The BoK, in coordination with industry members is currently developing studies in order to establish appropriate
criteria and parameters to identify domestic Systemically Important Financial Institutions. The plan of the financial
authorities is to develop those parameters and to reflect them in regulations by 2016.
                                                       31


BCBS D-SIB framework, with special regard to Principle 5 in relation to the bank-specific
factors that should be taken into account in order to determine those which should be considered
as D-SIFIS in the Korean context. The financial authorities should be empowered to take all
necessary measures since an early stage, to reduce the potential cost of resolving systemically
important FI, and to facilitate the progressive implementation of resolution operations as needed.

87.     As part of the process mentioned in the above paragraph, the authorities should
modify the existing legal definitions of systemic implications, systemic stability, and similar
expressions used in the different laws, to be in alignment with the domestic application of
the principles reflected in the BCBS D-SIB framework. Those definitions should be replaced
by new ones resulting from the application of the BCBS D-SIB framework in Korea, and, once
the definitions are reflected in the domestic laws and regulations, KA directed at G-SIFIS shall
be applied, including KA 8 on CMGs, KA 9 on institution specific cooperation agreements
(COAGs), KA 11 on Resolution and Recovery Plans (RRPs), and KA 10 on Resolvability
Assessments.78




78
  The KDIC has since engaged in consultation with the FSC for identifying the domestic SIFIs and applying the
relevant FSB KAs.
                                                                              32


                                                                       APPENDIX
                                              Table 1: Financial System Structure79
                                                                 No of
                                                                                                                   Total Assets
                                                             institutions
                                                               2012                       end-2010                          end-2012
                                                                            (billion won)       (in percent)      (billion won) (in percent)
 Banks                                                           57                   1,884,114              54.4      2,194,879         54.4

 Non-bank depository institutions                              3,983                        531,768                       15.3             536,220                     13.3
     Merchant banks 1)                                           1                           24,242                        0.7              14,468                      0.4
     Mutual savings bank                                        97                           91,271                        2.6              49,388                      1.2
     Credit cooperatives                                       3,884                        360,863                       10.4             412,163                     10.2
      Credit unions                                             982                          48,763                        1.4              55,340                      1.4
      Community credit cooperatives                            1,525                         92,101                        2.7             104,836                      2.6
      Mutual banking                                           1,377                        219,999                        6.3             251,987                      6.2
     Postal savings                                              1                           55,392                        1.6              60,200                      1.5

 Insurance companies                                                                        536,068                       15.5             735,318                     18.2
  Life insurance companies                                       24                         408,495                       11.8             547,827                     13.6
  Non-life insurance companies                                   31                          98,987                        2.9             151,794                      3.8
     Postal insurance2)                                           1                          28,586                        0.8              35,697                      0.9

 Securities companies 3)                                         50                         189,384                         5.5            250,710                          6.2

 Collective investment business entities 4)                      84                         325,279                         9.4            317,273                          7.9
 (asset management companies)

 Total                                                                                     3,466,613                    100.0            4,034,399                      100
 GDP (nominal)                                                                             1,235,161                                     1,272,460
 Financial Sector as % of GDP                                                                  280.7                                         317.1
Source: BoK
1) Includes consolidated financial accounts of banks and securities companies
2) As of end-2011
3) Excludes foreign branches
4) Based on investment trust accounts
 Table 2: Banking Sector Structure (end-2012)                                                                  Table 3: Top 10 banks
                                          end-2012                      % Change                                                                             Total assets
                                                                                                                                                             (KRW billion)
                                                           % of                                                                                                (% of total % growth
                           # of         total assets1)   banking                              BANK (Name of Financial Holding Company)                    2012 banking) 2011-2012
                                                                                              Kookmin Bank (KB)                                        280,310      13%         1.2%
Banks                      institutions (billion KRW)     sector 2011-2012 2010-2011
                                                                                              Woori Bank (Woori)                                       265,614      12%         2.9%
commercial banks            52 1,578,043 70.6%  2.0%                                5.0%      Shinhan Bank (Shinhan)                                   253,955      11%         1.2%
                                                                                              NH Bank* (NH)                                            206,466       9%         3.9%
            national banks   7 1,226,827 54.9%  0.6%                                5.4%
                                                                                              Industrial Bank of Korea*                                205,668       9%         8.5%
                local banks  6   147,082   6.6% 8.6%                                9.5%      Hana Bank (Hana)                                         168,124       8%         0.8%
    foreign bank branches   39   204,134   9.1% 5.7%                               -0.9%      Korea Development Bank* (KDB)                            167,132       7%        12.2%
                                                                                              Korea Exchange Bank (Hana, since Feb2012)                123,058       6%         2.0%
specialized banks            5   657,359 29.4%  7.0%                                9.6%      SC First Bank (Standard Chartered Korea)                  69,354       3%        -3.0%
Total Banks                 57 2,235,402 100.0% 3.4%                                6.2%      Citibank Korea (Citigroup Korea)                          66,402       3%       -10.5%
                                                                                                                                         Top 5 total 1,212,013      54%         3.2%
Source: FSS                                                                                                                            Top 10 total 1,806,083       81%         2.8%
total assets = (banking account + trust account +                                                                                    National totals 2,235,402                  3.4%
merchandise banking account) - (inter transactions
among banking, trust and merchandise banking                                                  Source: FSS
accounts)                                                                                     *Specialized banks



79
     As of end-2011 - source: BOK, Financial Institutions, Markets, and Infrastructure in Korea, April 2012.
