                                                                             93697

     Crises and Contradictions: Understanding the Origins of a
           Community Development Project in Indonesia
                        Scott Guggenheim


         It was a brilliantly clear morning in Central Sulawesi when the
villagers first spied the large pile of lumber. One of the delivery truck
drivers stood lazily by the wood, smoking a cigarette that he blew over
his steaming coffee. He’d come from Palu, the provincial capital. The
golden lettering embroidered on his hat told the villagers that he and the
silent man in the neatly pressed green safari suit also sipping his coffee
worked for the Public Works Department there.

         The villagers were curious. Just last year they had gotten funds
from the Kecamatan Development Project to build a stone road from
their rice fields to the market route, and now here were the materials to
repair a bridge. Had the government finally noticed their plight?

        “Friend, what is this wood for?

        “It’s to build a bridge”

        “How much wood is there? What did it cost?”

       “That’s none of your business. Just be thankful that the
government will be building you a bridge.”

         “But we want to know. This is our new rule here. You have to
come to the balai desa and tell us about the project. Then you have to
post a signboard so that all of us know how much this bridge costs. If
KDP does it, we want you to do it too.”

        “You are mistaken. KDP is KDP and it has KDP rules. This is a
government project and we follow our rules. Just be thankful that you are
getting a bridge”.

         The villagers were troubled. That night the village elders met.
Some people said they should just accept the wood because the village
needed the bridge. But many more villagers were angry. This was now
the era of reformasi and people had a right to know about projects.

         Early the next morning, even before the first rays of sunlight
pierced the dark clouds, the villagers had heaved the wood back onto a
large truck owned by the son of the village council head. Two truckloads
of villagers and scores of motorcycles joined the procession to the
district parliament. When the first parliamentarians arrived for work that
morning, they were met by a quiet delegation of villagers standing atop a
large pile of wood wrapped in an enormous white cloth.

        “What is this? They asked”



                                          1
                     “This is the cloth we use to wrap our dead,” the village head
            replied, “and dead is what this project is. We would rather have no
            bridge and no wood than go back to the corrupt ways of the New Order.
            From now on we only want projects that involve us in decisions. If KDP
            can do it, other projects can do it too.”

                   And with those words, the villagers got back on their trucks and
            went home.1


       I.       Introduction


            KDP – the Kecamatan Development Project – is the largest community
development project in Southeast Asia. Covering more than 20,000 villages, the billion-
dollar program extends from the northern tip of Sumatra to West Papua/Irian, three time
zones away.


            KDP is among the first large development projects funded by the World Bank to
draw directly on social theory, and, in particular, on writings from agrarian studies and
comparative history. KDP supports development plans made and approved by
communities. By focusing primarily on the process by which local development projects
are planned and managed rather than on what gets built, KDP marks a sharp departure
from the traditional ways in which large development projects are conceived and carried
out.


            This paper is about the genesis of KDP. In keeping with the overall theme of this
volume, the paper will primarily look inwards, towards the opportunities and constraints
that challenge social scientists working within large development bureaucracies. KDP
provides a useful way to organize such a discussion. For while there is much to be said
for the role played by the World Bank as a forum for testing and provoking critical
thinking about international development, what the World Bank actually does is lend
very large sums of money to developing countries. Social scientists who think that the
Bank must change the way it does development must find a way to change its operations.


1
    Story collected by Enurlaela Hasanah.


                                                   2
        The paper is divided into three sections. The first section of the paper describes
the project and raises the question of what specific historical factors opened the space to
allow for an experiment like KDP. While KDP undeniably draws on a broad range of
community development experiences both in Indonesia and elsewhere, it is also true that
the “here” and “now” questions pose an analytical problem that is crying out for answers:
why could what must have been seen as a progressive and potentially risky project move
forward in a large, highly centralized, quasi- military government as was Indonesia in
1998.


        In the second section, I will give a brief overview of KDP’s ethnographic roots.
The purpose of the argument in this section is to show that KDP is substantively different
from standard development projects, and that this difference reflects not only changing
fashions in development – which to some extent it does – but also the effect of seeing
community-state relationships through the glasses of an anthropologist rather than those
of a development economist, rural planner, or an irrigation engineer.


        The concluding section of the paper draws the case study back to the over-arching
theme of this book, the question of how development’s vocabulary can be expanded to
include the critical insights of social scientists. The argument here is that while the scope
for structural alternatives to standard models may be limited, it is not insignificant. Social
scientists can play catalytic roles, but to so effectively, they must learn to work in the
culture of development institutions. Applied social development must deliver results that
matter in the language and terminology used by decision- makers within government and
big agencies such as the World Bank. Very few of those people are social scientists.


        This paper carries with it an internal contradiction that must be acknowledged up-
front. The author is both informant and analyst. As a project team leader inside the World
Bank, this gives me one kind of special advantage when writing about historical events
such as what really happened behind the closed negotiating doors – for most of the closed
door sessions referred to in this paper, I was sipping tea at the table as we argued about



                                               3
terms and conditions. Enough has been written on the virtues and faults of introspective
anthropology that for the moment a word to the wise about the problems that self-
reporting poses to any ethnographic account is sufficient to warn readers about the
inherent partiality of the discussion that follows below. 2


II.     KDP in Brief3

        “Kecamatans” (pronounced “ketchamatan”) are the administrative subdistricts of
the Indonesian government. There are anywhere between some 20-50 villages in a
kecamatan; on average a Javanese Kecamatan will have about 50,000-75,000 people in it,
while a kecamatan in the sparsely populated eastern islands can have as few as 10,000-
12,000 inhabitants. Although many kecamatans were mapped onto the boundaries of pre-
existing principalities, off-Java kecamatans are often large enough to contain a number of
different cultural groups, particularly in the areas of high immigration.


        The basic architecture of the Kecamatan Development Project is deceptively
simple. It consists of a system to give block grants directly to kecamatan councils, which
they can use to fund development plans prepared through a 4-6 month long participatory
planning process. The funds, which range from approximately US$60,000-$110,000 per
kecamatan, can be used for almost anything villagers believe to be a development
priority. As in many poor parts of the rural world, villagers tend to place a premium on

2
  Even though much of the discussion in this paper is written in the first person, in fact the analysis, the
ethnography, and the project are from first to last the product of a very large number of people, only some
of whom can be acknowledged here. Michael Cernea not only survived mentoring me for many years in the
ways of giant bureaucracies, but his writings on social organization as “entry points” for development
shaped much of my own thinking. Ben Fisher, now retired, was the founder of the Bank’s social and
environmental group for Indonesia. Gloria Davis led the three-country local-level institutions study. Team
leaders for the LLI studies were Kamala Chandrakirana, Pieter Evers, Kastorius Sinaga, Leni Dharmawan,
Anna Wetterberg, Silvia Werner, Yando Zakaria, and Erwin Fahmi. Anna Wetterberg in particular deserves
a special acknowledgment. Ibnu Taufan, Muhammed Roesli, Sentot Satria, Enurlaela Hasanah, Susan
Wong, Sri Kuntari, Steven Burgess, Linda Citra, Taufik Rinaldi, Richard Gnagey, Victor Bottini, and Nani
Zulminarni are daily contributors to KDP. Herman Haeruman, Tatag Wiranto, Bito Wikantosa, Samsul
Widodo, Ayip Muflich and the late Pramono provided critical insights into how the government sees
community development. Thanks for comments on drafts of this paper go to Kamala Chandrakirana, Leni
Dharmawan, Cyprian Fisiy, Enurlaela Hasanah, Richard Manning, Lant Pritchett, and Susan Wong.
33
   For a particularly fine summary of KDP that provides many more details on its design and performance,
see the first phase evaluation report, “Kecamatan Development Program Phase One Final Report, 1998-
2002” It is available from the Ministry of Home Affairs, Community Development Agency in both
Indonesian and English.


                                                     4
roads, bridges, and irrigation, but in both theory and practice KDP funds can be used for
almost any kind of public good as well as for village- level revolving funds. 4


         The kecamatan councils are themselves somewhat of an odd beast. Formally
composed of the elected heads of the village planning group and chaired by the
subdistrict hear, for many years they were inert, meeting at most once a year. Under KDP
they have been revived. Additional non- voting members are elected by popular acclaim.
All project proponents are also invited to join the meetings, which means that the final
gathering for the competition among proposals can be very large.


         Each village can submit up to two proposals to the kecamatan council. This
always leads to more proposals than there are funds, so the villagers must negotiate
among themselves which proposals are the most worthy. KDP rules require that any
village group submitting a proposal must send a delegation of at least two women and
one man to the kecamatan decision meeting where villagers present and decide on which
proposals will be funded. Negotiations lead to plenty of horse-trading among villagers.
Once the kecamatan forum agrees on which proposals merit funding, nobody further up
the system can modify them. Funds are released from the provincial branch of the
national treasury directly to a bank account held in the name of all of the villages.


         Planning is helped by a tiered system of facilitators. In each KDP village, the
villagers elect a man and a woman to represent the village within the project. Their main
job is to introduce the project to all of the informal as well as the formal institutions
within the village, which in effect means that they spend large amounts of time in the
hamlets rather than the village proper. The next level up is the kecamatan, where the
project places a social and a technical facilitator. The social facilitator explains the
project’s rules, monitors participation, and trains the village facilitators; the technical
facilitator helps the villagers assess the quality of their infrastructure and trains them in




4
 A small negative list bans items such as paying official salaries, purchasing weapons, planting tobacco,
buying pesticides, etc.


                                                     5
maintenance. District engineers 5 supervise the quality of physical works, and at the
province there is a management unit that conducts training, supervises progress in the
field, and acts on complaints received from villages.


         For me, some of the most interesting bits of KDP lie in the details of how the
project helps (and sometimes hinders) villagers take control of how the money gets spent.
For example, when villagers buy construction materials, they have to get prices from
three different suppliers and read them out to a village meeting. Initially many villages do
not want to do this – they have their own favorite suppliers where they have bought
goods for decades. They are nearly always shocked to find that comparative shopping
lowers costs. Villagers also form monitoring teams that, for example, count the contents
of delivery trucks as they arrive to make sure that what suppliers send is what the
villagers purchased. They report their checklist back to the village forum.


         The project has a strong battery of monitoring instruments. Most interesting,
given that it was conceived in the waning days of the New Order government, is that the
project has the legal obligation to contract independent NGOs in each province, and to
provide a blind contract for the Indonesian Association of Independent Journalists to
publish stories on how the project is performing in the villages. [The “blind contract”
means that the project funds an intermediary NGO to pay for a fixed number of trips to
the field but the project never knows who is going where nor is there any prior review of
what the journalists publish]. So far the journalists have published some 850 articles in
regional newspapers, about a third of which deal with corruption or other forms of abuse.


         Monitoring also includes kecamatan cross-audits and participatory monitoring by
villagers themselves, and a number of case studies on special topics, such as women’s
participation in meetings or how villagers adapt the core design to “adat” (customary)
forms of organization. The case studies are summarized in a colorful bi- monthly
newsletter that goes to all 20,000 villages. During one ten-day trip across Java, I asked all

55
   “Districts” are the translation of “kabupaten”, which are also called “regencies” in the literature.
Indonesian districts are quite large, and can have as many as two or three million inhabitants, although one
million is closer to the norm for Java.


                                                     6
the villagers I met which of the case studies they thought was the most interesting. It was
no contest. The hands-down winner was the story of the village head who went to jail for
stealing KDP funds from his village.


         KDP has evolved over time 6 . In its first years nearly all of the focus was on
firming up the planning system and breaking through the government’s taboos on using
loan funds to involve NGOs and independent monitoring in development projects. Its
second phase consisted of strengthening village internal capacities by sponsoring broad-
based training programs in book-keeping and procurement, infrastructure assessments,
and village-wide development planning. The current installment is trying to
institutionalize the system by helping the district government pass regulations that ensure
democratic village government. These include guidelines on how village heads and
councils are elected and recalled, how village development planning happens,
consolidating village rights to review development projects proposed for them, and so on.


         KDP also serves as a laboratory for a number of experiments. In 2001, two
provinces ran pilots to provide legal aid services to poor villages; this will now be scaled
up to cover five provinces 7 . Another large pilot linked to KDP works with a group of
women’s NGOs to help widows in conflict areas, primarily through training, micro-
credit, and an impressively innovative use of documentary photography.                   In Papua, the
program found that it simply could not find sufficient numbers of trained Papuan
engineers, so it developed its own two-year training program for more than 200 Papuan
students recruited from different rural kecamatans. The current year is running a
competition to see which field teams can come up with the most creative ways to actively
involve women in village-wide decision meetings 8 .




6
  A summary of the structural changes to KDP between 1998-2003 is given in the Project Appraisal
Document for the Third Kecamatan Development Project, available on the World Bank website,
7
  KDP also provides technical assistance for villagers seeking legal redress; by 2002 at least 12 government
officials had been fined or jailed for unauthorized uses of KDP funds on the basis of complaints brought by
villagers.
8
  See also C. Buchori et. al. 2003.


                                                     7
         The preceding discussion should, hopefully, convince anyone familiar with
standard international development projects that KDP is a creative deviant from the
norm. And yet KDP is not a small pilot operation tucked away amidst a huge program of
dam and airport building. From 2001-2003, KDP has accounted for more than half of
World Bank lending in Indonesia. What explains why a quasi- military government as
was Indonesia’s New Order regime in 1998 would borrow large amounts of money to
bypass its own bureaucracy, assign paralegals to rural villages, and pay independent
journalists to publish newspaper stories on development corruption? Why would the
World Bank abandon its love of highways and irrigation networks to embrace micro-
investments in thousands of impossible to manage communities? Perhaps the timing was
right.




                                            8
III.       Indonesian Development in 1998: Three Institutions in Crisis


           Indonesia under the late New Order -- Few countries have traversed the path from
crown jewel to tarnished paste as rapidly as Indonesia. When I first arrived in Indonesia
in 1994, the country was a tribute to the power of the neoclassical development model.
Between 1976 and 1993, Indonesia’s census figures reported that poverty dropped from
40.1% of the population to less than 15%. Between the early 1960s to the late 1980s,
average per capita calorie and protein supplies rose by 45% and 50% respectively. 9
Universal education was assured by a mass building program that saw 200,000 schools
built within five years, and a country whose people had no problem recalling what foods
they ate during the recurrent famines were suddenly facing the bizarre problem of rising
rates of heart attacks from too much fat in their diet and too little exercise in their homes.
In 1995, the United Nations crowned President Suharto as a “Hero of Development”, a
reward he received with reserved grace in the large ranch he maintained in the hills of
Western Java.


           By 1999, all of the praise showered on Indonesia had vanished In a cloud of
smoke. Exposed as the architect of New Order kleptocracy, and accused of the systematic
violation of human rights in East Timor, Aceh, Papua and elsewhere, few people today
would call Suharto a Hero of Development. “Corruption, collusion, and nepotism” have
become the virtual anthem for a generation of commentators on Indonesian development
practice. World Bank reports speak of Indonesia “muddling through,” and development
in Indonesia today is more concerned with preventing catastrophe than it is with
bounding along the path of sustainable growth.


           Despite the current scorn for the achievements of the Indonesian New Order, it is
worth reviewing the mechanisms that the government used to obtain those impressive
results. The macro story of stability and a secure and predictable investment environment
is well known by now, as is the country’s welcoming of large amounts of foreign

9
    H. Hill, 1996.


                                               9
investment to help turn its abundant natural resources and large population into
productive assets for fuelling its development push. But the New Order government’s
social achievements should not be downplayed. Mass programs to immunize children,
build primary schools, and construct economic infrastructure all across the sprawling
archipelago also contributed enormously to Indonesia’s development spurt. 10


         By the mid 1990s, however, it was increasingly clear that not all was well in
Indonesia. Suharto’s success brought with it problems whose severity were already
casting a pall across the country even before the May 1998 uprisings that eventually
toppled the New Order government. Among analysts of the time, the main concern lay in
the fact that while Suharto had successfully institutionalized not just one-party but also
one-person rule, he had failed to find a way to identify a successor who would be
sufficiently competent to run the country and yet not so competent that he would threaten
Suharto’s own grip on power. 11


         Corruption had always been endemic to Indonesian development. But with the
maturity of Suharto’s children, corruption attained an entirely new magnitude. Very few
of the national industries, banks, commodity trading companies, or development projects
were free of their grasp. But corruption was not confined to national elites. Subsequent
developments were to make shockingly clear the extent to which the entire political
system had come to depend on illegal rents. 12


         Commentators, including analysts inside the government, increasingly noted that
many people in Indonesia believed that inequality was worsening across the country.

10
   A key insight into why New Order mass development programs is in Lant Pritchett and Jessica
Poppele’s Poverty Report (World Bank, 2000), where they argue that the highly centralized New Order
development agencies should be compared to the design of the equally centralized armed forces. National
programs such as school building or immunization campaigns could be delivered through centralized
military-like campaigns. Programs requiring local adaptation or close attention to quality rather than
quantity were simply beyond the capabilities of organizations designed for mass, standardized delivery.
11
   A. Schwartz, 2001
12
   The 2001 Corruption Perception Index (CPI), released by Transparency International in June 2001, ranks
Indonesia as 88th out of a survey of 91 countries, above only Nigeria and Bangladesh. The survey is a ‘poll
of polls’ from various different sources and attempts to measure perceptions of corruption across countries.
Transparency International, 2001.


                                                    10
Quantitative reviews did not support this perception. Nevertheless, the government’s
more sensitive political antennae had already detected the currents of popular
disillusionment. Even before analysts or donors voiced concern over rising inequality,
planners in the powerful National Planning Agency (Bappenas) began to prepare a series
of targeted programs to reduce poverty.


           Just how fragile the New Order had become by the late 1990s is blindingly clear
in retrospect, but it was not so obvious at the time. People were not so naïve as to think
that Indonesian growth was without its flaws, but the primary concerns were about how
to consolidate gains so that Indonesia could successfully make a transition into the
company of middle- income nations. To be sure, there were some Cassandras calling out
that the end of the New Order was nigh, but the common speech in development circles
was one of “course corrections” rather than structural reform.


           Nevertheless, the government itself perceived a need to shore up its base among
the masses. In the middle part of the decade, the government launched a series of poverty
reduction programs called the Inpres Desa Tertinggal (“the program for left-behind
villages”). These were a series of block grants given to poor villages across the country.
The brainchild of a university professor at the country’s largest university13 , the IDT
program built on Hernando de Soto’s views 14 that the problem of poverty was not lack of
skills, but government red tape and insecure property titles. Above all, the Indonesian
interpretation of de Soto argued that all these barriers blocked poor people from access to
the seed capital that they needed to launch their own micro enterprises that would left
their families out of poverty. IDT would provide it.


           As the core of a final push in its war on poverty, the New Order government
adopted IDT and declared it to be the country’s premier national anti-poverty program.
Backed by the personal support of Suharto himself, the project was directly managed by
the powerful National Planning Agency rather than any technical agency so that the


13
     See, for example, Mubyarto, 1996.
14
     De Soto, 1989


                                              11
country’s top planners and project administrators would make sure that the project was
well planned and managed. Approximately $200 million of government money was
committed to the first phase of the project, with an assurance of more to follow. The
World Bank and UNDP were asked to provide independent monitoring of the project, and
the government formed a high-powered IDT Secretariat to make sure that the program
would not become to bureaucratic.


           Initially supported by academics and NGOs, the program soon soured when it
became clear how corrupt the local administration of the program had become. IDT’s
objectives were laudable and the project’s targeting appeared to be reasonable, but the
program simply could not be implemented through the government bureaucracy. Large
amounts of money went missing; when the money did reach the village, all too often
village heads preferred to give it to local elites with a demonstrable track record of using
money effectively rather than poor people who would be unlikely to pay it back. An ex
post statistical evaluation of IDT three years after it was halted found a total net impact
on poverty of zero. 15


           Other programs followed suit. Emergency public works to counter-act the
spreading economic crisis became watchwords for corruption and theft, to the point of
triggering mass demonstrations outside of the once all-powerful Ministry of Planning.
But the government was trapped. The consolidation of a rentier bureaucracy had left the
government with virtually no way to implement its own programs, even when it
genuinely wanted to shore up its base among the increasingly restive population.


           The World Bank – If Indonesia was feeling a little shaky as the century drew to
close, the World Bank was facing its own crisis of legitimacy both within the world at
large and within the smaller world of Indonesia. As shown by J. Fox and others16 , the rise
of the world environment movement brought into the open a range of difficult questions
about the impacts of Big Development that until then had been shr ugged off as the


15
     Molyneau and Gertler, 1999
16
     See Fox and Brown, 2001


                                               12
necessary costs of growth. Independent scrutiny of several of the biggest development
schemes supported by development agencies around the world confirmed that their costs
were much higher and their benefits much lower than internal appraisals had suggested. 17


        Involuntary resettlement had proven to be a particularly ugly problem. Following
the deeply critical independent review of the Narmada Sardar Sarovar Projects in western
India 18 , the Bank commissioned an internal, bankwide review of all projects that involved
involuntary resettlement to see what measures would be needed to bring Bank funded
operations in line with institutional policy19 . Although the Bank was funding only a small
percentage of projects that caused resettlement, these projects were often the largest and
most visible development activities within a country in that they symbolized the
development mentality as a whole 20 .


        World Bank support for the New Order government had been consistent and
strong for nearly thirty years, and it is no surprise that the Bank was closely identified
with the New Order’s development ideology as a whole. Within Indonesia, activists
singled out two projects in particular for special attention: the multi-billion
transmigration programs; and a large dam called Kedung Ombo, which displaced more
than 35,000 villagers as part of a multipurpose irrigation project for Central Java. NGOs
rallied around the two projects as illustrations of destructive development. The Bank
initially ignored the protests, but over time the pressure to acknowledge the problems
mounted even as internal doubts grew about what was going on in the two projects and
what role the Bank should be playing as it became clear that too many of the accusations
were turning out to be true.

17 17
     Within the World Bank, the single biggest impetus was the traumatic events associated with the
Narmada river development projects. Public criticism reached such a pitch that the World Bank’s then
president, Barber Conable, commissioned an independent review chaired by Bradford Morse, a former
UNDP administrator, Unfortunately, for the most part the independent review confirmed the criticism,
particularly with respect to the poor planning for the 200,000+ people who would be involuntarily resettled
by the project (Morse et. al. 1992). A follow-on internal review of World Bank projects causing
resettlement that was produced by a team led by Michael Cernea and myself (1994) documented the
pervasiveness of the resettlement problem and the failure of ensure that people displaced by Bank financed
projects would receive compensation sufficient to restore their lost living standards.
18
   Morse et. al. 1992
19
   Cernea and Guggenheim, 1994
20
   Rich, 1994


                                                    13
       The 1994 Bankwide Review on Involuntary Resettlement highlighted the wide
deviations between the World Bank’s own resettlement policy and the projects funded by
the Bank in Indonesia (among others). The two biggest systemic problems appeared to be
the wide gap between the standards and rules required by the Bank’s policies and those
used by the Indonesian government; and the fact that within the Bank’s operational
programs there was virtually nobody who knew the social impact policies well or had a
special interest in making sure that they were properly implemented, especially if that
would lead to a slowdown in the approval of projects.


       Responses to the Bankwide review varied across the World Bank’s country
departments. In Indonesia the response was to form a small environment and social unit
that would report directly to the country director. The unit’s tasks were to oversee the
environmental and social aspects of the Bank’s portfolio in Indonesia, and narrow the gap
between Bank and government policies. Four people joined the unit; I was one of them.


       It soon became clear that this was going to be too little, too late. Resettlement’s
problems were but a symptom of a much bigger problem with the Bank’s relationship
with Indonesia. Evidence that the “Indonesian miracle” was not all it was cracked up to
be was mounting: even the Bank’s own managers were starting to raise questions about
how come rural services in the villages they visited looked so bad when the project
reports kept highlighting how well projects were performing.


       Three events in particular brought the rising doubts to a head. The East Asian
crisis that began in 1997 not only brought out into the open the fragility of the country’s
banking system and the systematic looting of the economy that had been going on, but it
also saw nearly half the country suddenly drop below the poverty line. How could this
have happened when report after report had shown Indonesia’s success at reducing
poverty at an unprecedented rate? Suddenly the objectivity of Bank analysis and
reporting was called into question.




                                             14
           The second event that rattled the Bank was the extent to which the crisis revealed
just how effectively the fragility and corruption of the financial system had been hidden
from the Bank and IMF. Bank macroeconomic staff in particular were genuinely rattled
that not only did it turn out that the country was effectively bankrupt, having seen its
banking system eviscerated of its resources to fund the money- losing enterprises of the
country’s elite, but that their most trusted counterparts were either not aware of what was
going on, or, more likely, were too cowed to speak. This ex post realization that the IMF
and Bank’s own monitoring and reporting had failed produced a crisis of self-confidence
that reverberated all the way back to the top floors of Washington. 21


            At least as damaging were a series of revelations showing that the Bank was
aware of the extent of corruption within Indonesia’s development projects. With
development agencies no longer protected by government censorship of Indonesian
critics and the rationalizing comfort of 7% annual growth, civil society groups and
political leaders freely criticized the Bank for having willingly aided and abetted the New
Order government in looting the country and papering over the facts, even whilst
claiming to be supervising its projects. Nationalist and reformist politicians in the new
government and parliament quickly joined in the chorus of criticism. The Bank found
itself on the defensive.


           That it was the New Order’s government’s own bureaucracy – the Bank’s
statutory counterparts -- that lay at the root of the economic crisis presented the Bank
with three major problems. First, the pressure to find ways to prevent a poverty and
humanitarian crisis across the collapsing economy – which freakishly coincided with a
recurrence of El Nino-caused crop failures – was met by a realization that the tools to act
either did not exist or were themselves likely to divert much of any aid that might be
delivered. Second, the scale of the popular backlash against the government’s chief
financier alarmed World Bank management and demoralized the staff. Third, the Bank
itself was over-exposed on Indonesia’s debt, and a debt moratorium by an incoming



21
     P. Blustein, 2001


                                               15
government would have affected the World Bank’s credit rating worldwide. Thus, by
mid-1998, the World Bank in Indonesia was facing a crisis of its own.


         The crisis of leadership in Indonesian Villages -- Indonesia’s 65,000+ villages
had not escaped the New Order’s social transformations. On Java, the “closed corporate
peasant community” described by Eric Wolf in the early 1950s had ceased to exist, 22
replaced by a system of village government defined by the Village Law of 1979 and the
implementing regulations that followed.


         As with all New Order administrative designs, the two keys to the new Village
Law were the standardization of bureaucratic form and the centralization of authority and
resources. The new law forced all hamlets 23 to come under the authority of a village. The
village head was notionally elected, but his election needed to be ratified by the district
head, which in effect gave him veto power and control over who would be acceptable or
not. Village chiefs, in turn, became the pre-eminent source of power within the village;
they were the statutory heads of the village planning (LKMD) and consultative councils
(LMD), while the wife of the village head became the head of the mandatory association
of women.


         Having established an administrative structure to bring Indonesia’s diverse village
organizations into the ambit of state control, the next twenty years saw the systematic
weakening and often destruction of all alternative sources of social organization.
Government land titling and water user programs replaced traditional forms of land and
water management groups. Traditional law was subsumed by the civil code, which,
however overwhelmed and ineffective the courts were, could find no space to
                                                                       24
accommodate traditional dispute resolution mechanisms.


22 22
      If, indeed, it had ever existed at all. See E. Wolf, (1957, 1986) and Koentjaraningrat 1967.
23
   “hamlet” here is the translation of “dusun”, a co-residential spatial unit below the village. Hamlets are
not part of Indonesia’s formal public administration.
24
   Strictly speaking, traditional “adat” institutions were not banned outright from playing a role in local
governance, but regulations specified that adat mechanisms could play a role in local government only if
they contributed to Pancasila, support national stability, and are guided by the government (see Evers,
2000).


                                                      16
           Development programs were active contributors to this state-building project.
Virtually all development programs channeled their resources through the village chief or
the LKMD, which was itself chaired by the village head. Development programs also
blithely funded the user groups that competed with traditional forms of social
organization, and the fact that they brought with them resources and skills as well as
government approval gave strong advantages to the people who joined.


           Without access to state institutions or development resources, traditional leaders
lost much of their space to maneuver. In many areas, particularly off-Java,
marginalization of traditional leadership actually led to an increase in appeals to “culture”
– the importance of exerting authority through magic, tradition, and spirituality since
these were the domains that remained open to them. But changing demographics
weakened this strategy since the large number of immigrants generated through
transmigration and off Java job creation brought with them populations who simply did
not believe in the efficacy of cultural means of control and would not accept culturally
based claims to village governance. 25


           Understanding the crisis of village leadership also requires understanding that not
all of these changes were perceived to be for the worse. Indonesian villages before the
New Order were not homogenous, egalitarian or solidary. The New Order’s changes
opened up much welcomed opportunities for many people on the bottom rungs of the
social ladder. Similarly, for all their problems of patronage, poor quality, and mandated
participation, the mass construction programs brought broad-based benefits to villagers
that paid off in longer life spans and higher incomes. Our field interviews across rural
areas suggest that the strategies of opposition embedded in notions of peasant resistance
can easily oversimplify perceptions of development in Indonesia. Most villagers saw
development as a mixed bag that brought with it desirable opportunities as well as
unwanted risks and controls.




25
     K. Chandrakirana, pers. comm. 2003


                                                17
        If this mix of regulatory marginalization and economic competition created a
crisis among traditional leaders, the government leaders who that competed with them
did not rest on very secure foundations either. Lacking a base of popular support within
the communities, village chiefs in particular relied on cultivating close ties to the district
head both for political support and also to release development resources and budgets.
District heads relied on village leadership to secure political loyalty and to ensure
political stability, and the failure to deliver either was the most common grounds for
dismissal. Development soon became both the justification and the reward for
consolidation of the new political order.


        Finally, a third factor affecting both traditional and modern leadership was the
achievement of universal education. For the first time, children of both the traditional and
modern elite could attend school beyond primary levels and, with that education, get
reasonably good jobs in Indonesia’s rapidly growing cities. Many did. 26 This rural to
urban demographic transition dramatically shrank the pool of future village leaders, a
point that was repeatedly commented upon by reflective villagers when the Bank started
its first round of village ethnographies in 1996.


        IV.      The Roots of a Development Project


        It would be nice to be able to write that the design for a billion dollar, nationwide
community development program came from an initial grand concept that guided the
team from the outset. Nice, but it would not be true. If the argument of the first part of
this section is that the historical conjuncture of crises within the Indonesian government,
the World Bank, and village leadership opened the door to what became the Kecamatan
Development Project, the argument of this section is that it is largely a matter of
historical coincidence that a project like KDP fell through it.




26
  Between 1976 and 1991 alone, Indonesia’s census figures show that the country went from 26% urban to
45% urban.


                                                 18
          My version of KDP history begins with a series of village case studies we began
in 1996. Called the Local-Level Institution studies, the LLI research program was part of
a three-country study to see if the ideas on social capital published in Robert Putnam’s
book on Democracy in Italy made sense in the context of other developing countries 27 .
Was “social capital” a useful way to think about building democratic institutions from the
bottom up?


          For many of us in the World Bank’s social group, the social capital vocabulary
served an additional function. It provided a much needed bridge to the Bank’s economists
in a way that the traditional vocabulary of social structure, social organization and the
like didn’t. While to some extent we all recognized that there was a certain amount of
“old wine in new bottles” re-packaging going on, the social capital framework also
provided an exciting chance to put to the test a number of questions about how social
organization pragmatically links into political structure and notions of political
leadership. Putnam’s notion that a diverse associational life provided the kinds of
learning games that could translate well into different kinds of social controls on local
governance passed the intuitive test of why all projects in culturally rich Bali seem to
work well no matter how much development experts screw up their designs. And, given
the rumblings of social change that could be heard off in the Indonesian horizon, the
theory gave some direction for why it would make sense to focus on grassroots
organizing and not just national political actions should the New Order finally be giving
way to a more broad-based form of government.


          The LLI studies began in 1996, when the luster of the Indonesian development
may have been fraying a bit at the edges but by and large among most Bank staff, the
country’s star was still shining brightly. Villagers had been the beneficiaries of thirty
years of development, and numerous studies had documented the positive changes
transforming the countryside as a result. I didn’t quite buy into this vision – Indonesian
villages didn’t look all that different from the peasant villages I’d studied in Latin
America – but I was having a hard time making sense of the dissonance between the

27
     R. Putnam, 1993


                                              19
glowing reports circulating in the development world and what appeared to be somewhat
unimpressive results in the field. On the time-honored principle that when in doubt,
commission a study, we launched LLI both to provide an empirical assessment of what
was really happening in Indonesian villages as well as to provide a rigorous cross-country
test of new thinking on social capital.


         The LLI teams selected three provinces as far apart as possible – NTT in the east,
Central Java, and a newly colonized part of Sumatra, the province of Jambi -- to carry out
a 1,200 HH survey and 48 village ethnographies on the nature and quality of social
capital, community capacities, and village government 28 . Developing the study’s
methodology involved a much closer relationship than the Bank’s usual arms- length
relationship with consultants. Ensuring that the researchers would have the space to carry
out time-consuming ethnographic research rather than rapid rural appraisals or random,
easy to quantify surveys required the hands-on involvement of the Bank’s core social
staff, including repeated visits to the field sites over the course of the study.


         All three LLI studies produced the same core findings. 29 The first set of questions
looked at local capacity within villages, with “capacity” defined as the ability of villages
to solve self- identified problems. Here the studies found that villages carry out nearly the
same range and scope of projects that government and development agencies were doing,
and that community-owned projects performed better than projects from the government
or from NGOs. Community owned projects also had higher participation of the poor,



28
   Research was conducted in two districts in each of the three provinces selected in order to pursue
relationships in different local institutional, geophysical, and political contexts. The research was conducted
in two phases. The first phase, which was prior to KDP, was conducted between 1996 and 1997. The first
phase involved a 1,200 HH survey and 48 village mini-ethnographies on the nature and quality of social
capital, community capacities and village government; this study team also constructed a unique database
of more than 800 village development projects classified by type, quality, coverage etc. The same villages
and households were re-studied in 2001, after the economic crisis and fall of the New Order government.
Six-week mini-ethnographies were conducted in five villages, followed by week-long rapid appraisal
exercises in all 40 villages and a 1,200 HH re -survey of the original panel. (the re-study had one few
district than the original because of civil unrest and natural disasters in West Timor).
29
   This section draws heavily on the individual team reports: P. Evers (2001); K. Chandrakirana (2000); L.
Dharmawan (2002); and A. Wetterberg (2002).. The reports can all be located on the World Bank
Indonesia website.


                                                     20
greater participation of women and significantly greater contributions from the villagers
themselves.


           The second set of questions compared the morphology of community owned
organizations versus the organizations formed by the government for development
purposes. Again there was a high contrast: community organizations had existed for long
periods of time, were multi-purpose, and had played a social role beyond their immediate
practical purpose. By contrast, development project organizations sprang up for specific
project purposes and left behind a litter of organizational shells. Community
organizations also included mechanisms that would allow members to challenge leaders
and to call for reflective “breaks” should disputes remain unsettled. By contrast,
development project organizations did not brook challenges to leadership, and where
villagers were directly involved in them at all, it was primarily to carry out the project,
not to criticize its founding assumptions. A final structural difference was that while
development projects functioned at the level of the villages formed by the 1979 Village
Laws, in the villages studied the effective unit of local planning was the much smaller
hamlet, not the village.


           The third set of findings came from looking at organizing capacity from a
dynamic perspective: what led to the strengthening or weakening of capacity in
communities? Here the studies pointed to a strong disconnect between community
organizing capacities and the government. The government’s bottom-up planning system
was ineffective – less than 3% of the village proposals generated through the mandatory
annual development planning process ever got funding – and there was no evidence that
the government ever provided incentives or rewards for the communities that did manage
to organize well. Most strikingly, there appeared to be an inverse correlation between the
presence of a project-based organization and the participation of the poor in that same
activity. That is, not only were elites capturing development project organizations, but the
very presence of such organizations actively undermined and weakened the organizations
that the village poor joined. This finding later received statistical validation. 30

30
     V. Alatas, L. Pritchett, and A. Wetterberg, 2003


                                                        21
        Finally, the studies looked at cases of local success. The patterns were striking.
First, in the best cases, government officials from the sub-district level made a positive
difference even on community projects because they could play roles of conflict
mediation, coordination, facilitation, and problem solving together with community
leaders and village-based extension workers. Second, in both high capacity and low
capacity villages, effective groups could take advantage of project schemes that provided
them with funds, clear accountability rules, and the space to implement their own projects
without interference. Third, communities benefited from strong leadership and somebody
who could play a facilitating role to share information, invoke dispute resolution
procedures, and help villagers find external assistance when that was needed. Finally,
there were a number of success cases where villagers formed alliances with civil society
                                                   31
groups operating at the level of the district.          In such cases, outside organizations could
provide access to technology or engineering skills, but, more importantly, they could curb
problems of corruption or other abuses of authority.


        It is important to be clear about the challenges that LLI raised to the familiar ways
of doing community development projects in Indonesia. Standard project designs
recognized many though not all of the problems turned up by the LLI teams, but they
treated them as technical problems that could be solved with more technical assistance,
better fiduciary controls, and tighter supervision by project managers. By contrast, the
LLI studies suggested that these methods could never lead to sufficient improvement
because the root of the problem lay with the fundamental assumptions being made about
projects, about villages, and about the implementing agencies themselves. What was
needed was a radical departure away from the model of “projects as tools for resource
delivery” and towards a framework where projects provided resources and opportunities,
but where communities would make their own interpretations and adjustments. That is,
away from a construct that sees projects as something that delivers a particular product




31
   Political parties were banned from villages by decree, and few NGOs were given the necessary permits
or space to work in villages.


                                                   22
and towards a model that sees projects as a way to trigger and support a process that
would help villagers solve self- identified development problems.


       The LLI studies served an additional purpose that sounds like a minor side benefit
but is highly relevant to the purposes of this volume. Whereas standard World Bank
contact with villages is through one-off visits to supervise the quality of project funded
infrastructure, with the LLI team there was an entire pool of reasonably well-studied
villages that would reveal a far from ordinary story to visiting World Bank officials.
Fortunately, the World Bank’s President, James Wolfensohn, had recently launched his
“spend a week in a village” re-education program for World Bank staff, so ambitious
Washington managers were on the lookout for opportunities to write movingly eloquent
back-to-office reports on how they had directly experienced the lives of the poor.


        I remember the first time I was able to accompany the World Bank’s country
director – the Bank’s top official working on Indonesia – to one of the LLI villages in
Central Java. Aside from me, nobody from the Bank or the government joined the field
trip. We had planned to stay for two days, including over- nighting in the house of one of
the villagers where we would get a de-briefing from the field team that was just finishing
up their interviews


       We arrived towards the end of the rainy season. One side of the highway was
flooded; the other side was suffering from drought. The contractor who built the highway
had ignored the design requirements to build culverts so that water could drain across the
barrier formed by the newly built road. As a result, farmers on both sides of the road had
lost their crop. We next walked to an irrigation drain, where two farmers were prying
open a large iron gate. Our hopes to hear a song of thanks for bringing precious irrigation
to the fields were dashed when one of the farmers explained that what they were actually
doing was trying to tear down the gates, which had been so poorly hung that they were
leading to salt water intrusions onto their fields. (Fortunately, it was a project funded by
the Asian Development Bank). And so it went: water supply projects that stopped
producing water just weeks after the NGO that provided it left; a health clinic with no



                                             23
medicine in it because it was being rented out to a television-watching rental business
owned by the village head’s family; and a dam safety project whose quality was so poor
that the engineers overseeing the reservoir re- lining fled under cover of night so that the
villagers wouldn’t catch them. Stories like these lasted well into the night, with villagers
and our young research team laying bare for our visiting director just how different life in
the villages was from what the reports arriving on her desk were describing.


        Other opportunities for Bank managers to contrast the reports with the reality of
village life followed. My personal favorite picked up on an LLI finding that one reason
(not the only one) why village schools were in such bad shape was that many districts had
passed regulations that prohibited village groups from maintaining primary schools and
clinics, requiring instead that all maintenance be done by district contractors. After
passing through the 7th village studded with collapsed government school buildings that
were surrounded by immaculately maintained private houses and gardens, a Bank
director (whose professional background was in research on educational economics) who
joined us on a long slog through 15 poor villages in West Java couldn’t resist
commenting that he was starting to get some sense of an emerging pattern. Amusingly
enough, the only reply from the Minister of Education to whom he passed his field report
was that his sample wasn’t statistically representative. 32


V.      Building the Kecamatan Development Project


        LLI described the problem of community development primarily as one of
changing the development project process. That is, the problem with projects lay not with
what they did, but how they did it, whatever the “it” was. Top-down needed to change
into bottom- up, or, as we phrased it for the internal market, projects needed to respond to
community demand, not to agency supply. Turning the findings from 48 village studies
into a nationwide development project required a giant leap across disciplinary and



32
  A follow-on education project in West Java that switched over to direct school grant financing for
primary school construction, though far from perfect, achieved an immediate average cost reduction of
40%.


                                                   24
cultural boundaries, from the world of critical research to the world of projects.
Fortunately, there were several stepping-stones along the way.


          What always strikes me about KDP is how simple the core design is. Stripped to
its essentials, the entire project consists of little more than a disbursement system linked
to a facilitated planning and management procedure. Financial records are kept on
stripped down formats, and no form in KDP is more than three pages long. (By way of
contrast, the standard contract required on development projects is a minimum of 80
pages of densely packed legalese). Unlike most projects, KDP has virtually no “content”,
no specification about the kinds of groups that can join the project and make proposals. 33


          This simplicity is no accident. Indonesia is one of the world’s most diverse
countries. Virtually any assumption about what the social content of the project should be
would be sure to be wrong for big swathes of the population. While at the time there was
no alternative to using the formal administrative system – the kecamatan – as the
project’s formal management unit, making the project be about the community planning
process itself provides virtually unlimited scope for allowing communities to adjust the
project to local conditions.


          Since the fall of the New Order government and the subsequent resurgence of
regionalism across the country, communities increasingly alter, revise, and improve the
way they go about developing proposals. Several provinces have produced their own
operational manual, which most typically replaces the kecamatan with the negari, mukim,
or marga in West Sumatra, Aceh, and North Sumatra respectively. Kecamatans have also
invented a rich diversity of variants on the core design. Of special interest are their
proposals for adding different “wise people” to the village and kecamatan councils,
people outside the government whose job is to ensure transparency, mediate disputes, and
certify to villagers who could not attend the meeting that their proposal was reviewed
fairly.

33
   Building on LLI findings about un-rooted project-created shells, however, KDP does specify that groups
must have existed for at least a year. The project also includes some positive rules about an earmarked
allocation for proposals from women.


                                                   25
        From a project design perspective, the two key stumbling blocks facing the
development of a program to support village planning were how to get the money to the
villagers without going through the government transfer system, and how to introduce
facilitators who were not part of the government bureaucracy. But neither concept was
entirely alien to government development planners. For all of their flaws, the poverty
programs of the early 1990s had, in fact, worked on the basis of a block-grant like system
– each village received a flat amount of Rps. 20 million. Furthermore, the annual national
development planning process, though dysfunctional, did mean that large numbers of
people were already familiar with the idea of development planning. KDPs only apparent
twist to this system was that rather than have the plans flow to the center for aggregation
and review, the funds to support them would move down the system, directly to the
villages. 34


        Contracting consultants outside of the bureaucracy to work in villages was not
entirely unfamiliar either. A genuinely innovative predecessor of KDP called the Village
Infrastructure Project, also assisted by the World Bank, assigned a consultant engineer to
clusters of villages who would help them manage small road, bridge, and water supply
projects. KDP borrowed quite a bit from this program, particularly the operational
manuals and financial management formats, although it again introduced a twist to the
idea of consultants who support villagers by specifying that they should first and
foremost be people familiar with general social facilitation, as recommended by the LLI
studies, rather than being limited to engineers. 35


        KDP’s third building block was in some ways the hardest. Everyone can agree in
principle that promoting transparency in development projects is a great idea; yet the
collective wisdom on how best to do this in thousands of rural villages is extremely
34
   Yogana Prasta of the World Bank’s Jakarta office was the inspired person who with one sharp blow cut
right through the Gordian knot of Indonesian fiscal transfers to figure this disbursement system out.
35
   Other innovative aspects of KDP were slightly more technical in nature and are not relevant for what is
being discussed here. For example, KDP included methods to avoid extensive pre-financing by the
government, and, in later phases, a unique form of direct procurement of the facilitators. These are
described in the project’s formal documentation, the project appraisal report, which can be found on the
Indonesia page of the World Bank web link, www/worldbank.org.


                                                    26
limited. KDP relies on two kinds of mechanisms, neither of which works perfectly and
both of which pose interesting challenges for anyone interested in actually doing a
community development project.


       The first consists of the internal rules and procedures that can promote
transparency. At the national level, these can consist of requirements to publish audit
reports, adopt project transparency policies, and release procurement committee reports.
Procedures used within villages can also promote transparency: a KDP example is the
requirement that all suppliers present their quotations within public meetings, not through
sealed bids given to local officials. As the example noted at the opening of this article
shows, KDP’s requirement to post all financial information on signboards that are
displayed in public places is a sharp departure from practices of the past.


       In all these examples, it is important to note that they are applications of the
formal rules and requirements that any project requires in its operational manuals. They
are not examples of winning the hearts and minds of a constituency eager to see more
transparency in development. Yet with bureaucracies, the formal rules are key tools: that
single instruction from the Ministry of Home Affairs to post project budgets on
signboards in public places led to 20,000 villages knowing for the first time just what
their daily wage entitlement was for work on a government development project.


       The other main mechanism used to promote transparency in KDP is simply to
increase the number of non- governmental actors involved in the project. Rather than
invent entirely new “stakeholder forums” or the like, KDP uses the existing
administrative institutions of government but requires that communities elect additional
representatives at each one whose job is to monitor transactions and report to the
community at large. At the national level, the government contracts independent NGOs to
monitor each province, and it has also managed a “blind” contract with the association of
independent journalists to investigate and publish, without any prior review, stories of
KDP performance in the villages.




                                             27
           It is impossible not to pause here for an anecdote. The blind contract with the
journalists is actually a legally binding condition of the project, which means that project
funds from the World Bank could not flow without it being followed. Surprising enough
all by itself, what is even more surprising is that at the time the condition was written, the
Independent Journalists Association was a legally banned organization by a government
all too aware of the threat posed by an independent press. And yet the condition was not a
last minute afterthought slipped into the legal documents without the government’s
awareness – it was discussed and agreed with the very sophisticated negotiating team that
spent two days in detailed review of each clause within the project loan documents. It
would be hard to find a clearer example of the contradictions of government policy at the
end of the New Order era.


           The final building blocks for KDP have been the new or reformulated institutions
created by Indonesia’s ongoing decentralization program, primarily the ones that provide
some checks and balances on the overly powerful and unaccountable executive positions
of the New Order. KDP’s initial strategy to improve the quality of local governance was
simply to increase the involvement and awareness of people who joined the village and
kecamatan meetings where decisions about the project were made. Project staff and their
World Bank advisers were not convinced that the new groupings were not just new
platforms for domination by the familiar village and district elites. But a second round of
LLI studies documented that reformasi had triggered unexpected changes in a large
number of villages across the country. Many of the old leadership dynasties were out; the
new village leaders and councils had been democratically elected and were indeed more
responsive to village needs. Providing support to help the new leaders do their jobs is a
constructive intervention that KDP can do well provided that stays flexible enough to
match its support with local capacities. 36


           How well has KDP performed? Clearly it is too soon to make any definitive
assessment of KDP’s impacts on local governance, nor could KDP effects be
convincingly extracted from other events more linked to Indonesia’s tumultuous political

36
     Ministry of Home Affairs, 2002


                                                28
economy. While this is not the place to enumerate all of the project’s flaws 37 , it is worth
highlighting some of the main problems, particularly the unexpected ones. Nobody
expected a highly participatory project implemented through a bureaucrasy nurtured on
top-down development to be smooth sailing, and many of the initial problems have to do
with various attempts by line agencies and local government to “explain” to the villagers
what their best development choices are. Unpunished corruption is also an anticipated but
always disconcerting event. 38 Central government management of the project has been
erratic, ranging from highly supportive and helpful for solving problems, to causing long
delays because of in- house squabbling and inefficiency.


        Other problems have been less predictable. We clearly hadn’t appreciated just
how effective the New Order restriction on access to villagers had been at preventing the
development of a cadre of facilitators skilled at community development. Both the
quality of facilitators and the practicality of the training programs given in the project
have been problematic. While there is some exciting innovation taking place in the field,
for the most part facilitators see themselves as contractors whose job is to implement
project manuals, not to enable local responses to development problems.


        How powerful local contractors are is another unanticipated finding. KDP itself
can resist most attempts to impose contractors rather than use village labor on projects.
Bu this is only because there is a strong project there to back the villagers. When local
governments adopt their own version of KDP, which many now do because of its local
popularity, the very first item to go are the limits on using contractors. While there are
some cases where contractors can bring in machinery and technologies not available to
the villagers, by and large contract management remains poor, un-transparent, and
resistant to any form of redress for poor quality works. This continued reliance on
contractors does not bode well for the long-term sustainability of KDP.



37
  A future technical paper on KDP will address these issues in more detail.
38
  KDP has produced some interesting documentation on corruption and how the project recovers missing
funds. See Woodhouse, op. cit (2002) and the KDP Final Report (2002), both available on
www.worldbank.org.


                                                 29
        KDP faces a number of dynamic challenges in coming to grips with
decentralization and the revival of traditional (“adat”) institutions. Adat varies greatly in
its rules and strength, but across the country very few adat institutions are especially
democratic when it comes to the voices of the poor or open to the participation of
women. In many cases, KDP has found ways to negotiate with adat leadership so that the
program can work within the adat umbrella and still remain inclusive, but all such
arrangements are ad hoc. It is too soon to tell how many of the new restrictions will
become formalized and what opportunities there are to work out more progressive
accommodations. 39


        Finally, KDP’s record at reaching the very poorest of the poor is at best mixed.
The program’s approach of negotiating decisions through group meetings carries built- in
limits for involving the highly vulnerable. Many of these problems could be overcome
with better training for facilitators and a more flexible planning structure that would
allow intensive training in small groups. But KDP’s design and management structure are
too rigid to allow this on a large scale. A pilot program in four provinces run by a strong
women’s advocacy NGO to help organize widows to the point where they can
collectively rejoin group decision making has shown that positive solutions to the
problem of subvillage poverty targeting are possible – but without significant changes to
its management design, KDP will not be the structure for doing it.


        Nevertheless, the anecdotal body of evidence that KDP jars open stuck doors is
large and growing. Three domains have been of particular interest. First, the significant
participation of women in KDP processes stands out, and this separates KDP from both
standard development projects but also from traditional adat decision- making. Of course
women’s participation in KDP varies from mutely sitting against the back wall of village
meeting halls, to equal participation in all parts of the process. Evidence on changes is




39
   For example, before the latest fighting in Aceh, KDP, the NGO forum, and the leaders of adat
institutions (“mukim”) had formed a working group to identify opportunities to work together
constructively under Aceh’s special autonomy rules.


                                                   30
both quantitative and anecdotal40 . There are a small number of cases where all of the
women’s proposals in a kecamatan get funded and none from the men do. There are even
anecdotal reports of spillovers from KDP to adat, such as an unverified case in Nias
where the wife of a village chief marched into a community meeting and declared that if
she and the other women could co-manage KDP discussions, they could damn well sit in
the adat councils too. We still do not know if what followed was just a stunned silence or
genuine acquiescence, but field staff continue to report a major change in the gender
make-up of village meetings.


        The second notable domain where change can be seen is in the area of corruption,
both its incidence and the tolerance of villagers for it. Infrastructure built through KDP
costs significantly less than roads and bridges built by public agencies and traditional
projects, even controlling for quality and technical sophistication. While some of KDPs
lower costs can be attributed to very high voluntary labor contributions from the
villagers, most of the cost savings are due to KDPs use of transparency and social
controls. That per unit costs of KDP construction are so much lower than through public
agencies is not going unnoticed by other levels of government, which under the new
decentralized administration must worry about fiscal efficiency and delivering the goods
in time for elections.


        But more interesting than the “facts” of corruption are the perceptions of it and an
understanding of the triggers that would make villagers act to end it. A Bank-funded
study called “Justice for the Poor” is documenting villager’s willingness to pursue
corruption cases in KDP using both informal and formal dispute resolution procedures.
Nearly 1,400 cases of financial abuse of different kinds were reported over the project’s
first three years41 ; in nearly half of them, most or all of the money was recovered. KDP
villagers are surprisingly vocal, and as confidence that there will be a response to their



40
   KDP has not yet conducted a proper evaluation of whether increased women’s participation within KDP
carries over to other cultural domains or whether – and which -- villagers simply bracket KDP as something
apart from local practice. .
41
   To give a sense of proportion, however, there were 55,000 subprojects.


                                                   31
complaints grows, villagers file more and more reports of abuses by officials that would
have been hushed up in the past42 .


         The third domain is the revival of interest in village and kecamatan meetings tied
to issues of governance. Village meetings in Indonesia are usually attended only by a
core elite, while the kecamatan forum is in most places close to defunct. But in KDP
areas, attendance at both levels is usually high, with as many as 60-100 people joining the
village meetings and 200-300 villagers making the trip to the kecamatan decision-forum.
Having a focal point for villagers to meet government has a number of immediate
benefits. On Java in particular, growing numbers of technical agencies and
parliamentarians are attending kecamatan meetings to review programs and meet
constituents. Another possible spillover benefit currently being studied by the KDP crew
is the apparent pattern that ethnic groups that have gone through kecamatan negotiations
are less likely to join the disputes that have ripped apart large areas of Indonesia’s Outer
Islands.


         KDP continues to evolve, and we all continue to learn from its mistakes and many
inadequacies. From being an innovative little project intended to test some hypotheses
about socia l capital in development, KDP is now at risk of being mainstreamed in both
Indonesia and the World Bank, with all the rigidities and complacencies that
mainstreaming entails. Nor does KDP replace in any way the need for a more
fundamental restructuring of state-society relationships in Indonesia. But the project does
show that even within the narrow confines of large international organizations, there are
ways to do development differently.


VI.      Reflection


         This article has tried to explain how a project like the Kecamatan Development
Program came to exist. It has argued that historical developments in Indonesia and the

42
  An ongoing controlled experiment within KDP is quantifying corruption responses to different kinds of
social controls by using different methods to increase villager participation; results will be posted on the
World Bank and KDP websites.


                                                     32
World Bank created a dynamic that opened the door for a national community
development program that at once aimed to transfer resources to poor villages and to
contribute to the re-working of state-society relationships in Indonesia.


        Yet the motivations that made KDP possible varied among the different players
involved, a point which is important. Much modern writing on development emphasizes
the importance of “stakeholder ownership” for successful projects. But the KDP that the
government owns is not quite the same KDP as the one supported by the Bank. Senior
ministers in government support KDP because it builds large amounts of infrastructure in
hard to reach areas, because it disburses its funds faster than any other project supported
by the World Bank in Indonesia, and because it requires next to no pre-financing from the
national treasury. The Bank’s management likes it because it provides a way to engage
poverty and governance reform at a time when its portfolio of lending to Indonesia
shrank by 75%. Bank staff like it because it is very rewarding to hear villagers openly
state that they like a project and think that this one is different from how they have
encountered development previously.


        In this concluding section, I would like to reflect on my own role in this process
since I was both team leader for the LLI studies and, until recently, have also been what
the World Bank calls a “task manager” – the project head – for the KDP program. While
it is what Indonesians call “malu” to talk about oneself in an article that purports to
present an analysis of a historical case (at least while the author is still alive), it would
also be disinge nuous to pretend that the team leader was just someone I happened to
interview in passing!


        An understanding of the role that social science discourse has played in the
Bank’s Indonesia program begins not in Jakarta, but in Washington. There is no questio n
whatsoever that any of the changes that have taken place in the Indonesia program would
have been possible had the Bank not been headed by the socially aware president James
Wolfensohn. And, as noted earlier in this paper, much of the overall impetus to reform
the Bank came from the growing criticism of international groups who no longer



                                               33
accepted the Bank’s self-perpetuating calculations of the costs and benefits of giant
development schemes.


       Responses inside the Bank to these pressures varied. The World Bank’s Indonesia
team responded to the criticism of its resettlement management by forming a social and
environmental impact unit staffed by four core staff members who reported directly to the
country director. By contrast, the Bank’s India department, which had received even
more criticism for its deviations from World Bank resettlement policy, confined itself to
carrying out further internal reviews, without any structural change to its internal team
organization.


       In Indonesia’s case, the decision to form a free-standing social and environmental
impact unit meant that there were individuals within the organization who had an
immediate interest in opening channels to critical groups in Indonesian civil society who
had previously been closed to the idea of contract with the Bank and who were generally
bypassed by Bank staff members. My own experience on the Bankwide resettlement
review had been a good lesson in the value of external alliances for introducing
unpopular changes inside the organization.


       Activities undertaken during the group’s first years included reviews of NGO
operating environments, land policy towards traditional communities, parks and other
protected areas, and a series of meetings between Bank president Wolfensohn and
leading members of Indonesian civil society and growing human rights movement.


       Reflecting on the KDP experience, there were three specific challenges to the
standard project model where familiarity with social science made a direct contribution.
The first of these was something that lies at the heart of anthropology: the continuing
tradition of ethnographic fieldwork. Ethnography is often treated in the literature as a
particularly anthropological methodology, but this to me seems incorrect. It is far more




                                             34
accurately defined as an epistemology, a way of knowing reality that is different from
that of the deductive disciplines. 43


         For the case of the World Bank in Indonesia, legitimating ethnography as a style
of inquiry was a two-step process. One step required the immersion of trained social
researchers in villages for a long enough time for them to unravel at least some of the
complicated relationships and histories that lay beneath individual events. But it was just
as important to be able to translate those findings into a language that could be grasped
by the Bank and government officials in charge of development. For that, the field visits
proved to be key44 . Field-based research of differing qualities and depth has now spread
to several other areas of Bank work in Indonesia. 45


         The second specific challenge lies in the explicit focus of KDP on the political
institutions of community development. KDP is not about how to help government
agencies bring development to villages, nor is it a way to simply give resources to village
organizations. The project focuses on the relationship between villagers and the state, and
it uses the institutions of both. 46 KDP begins with a focus on both the social capital
embedded within local culture and social structure, but over time it increasingly
concentrates on moving upwards, towards what Woolcock has called the “linking social
capital” that would bind well- grounded community organizations into a healthier
relationship with the organizations of a democratic state. 47


         The third challenge has been to introduce the idea of historical process to Bank
analyses of local politics and local economies. Very few people, for example, realized the


43
   See, for example, Geertz, 1971, Wolf 1964.
44
   It is important to repeat the importance of the signal from the top to pry open the door here. J.
Wolfensohn’s order for managers to visit villages may in some senses sound naïve, but it nevertheless
made senior managers find time to do it. Some benefited more from the experience than others, of course.
45
    See, for example, S. Teggeman on field studies of corruption and the urban poor; K. Kaiser on
participatory public expenditure reviews in Aceh, etc. These can be found in the Indonesia website,
www.worldbank.org.
46
   Village-based development is of course not the only way to formulate this problem. The KDP model in
fact for the most part excludes super-village networks and associations that may be critical institutions that
operate within villages.
47
   M. Woolcock, 2000


                                                     35
extent to which the villages they were visiting for their projects were the creation of a
1979 law on village structure; still fewer were aware that the lamentable loss of
traditional mechanisms for social control was the direct outcome of development
interventions meant to improve it. Today there is much more humility and uncertainty in
the Bank’s program; people are both conscious of their own mixed history and also quite
aware that there aren’t any simple formulas that can predict where Indonesia will go next.


        The paper has also argued that the participation of social researchers in the
shaping and management of KDP has made a difference to how the project has
developed. The LLI and other ethnographic studies “proved” that direct support to local
organizations was a better starting point for community development projects than was
working through the official hierarchy. But even the LLI findings would have made little
impact without a way to express the language of social research in a vocabulary that
could be assimilated by a development institution. 48 The core argument here, hopefully
made without too much self-justification, has been that to have social specialists sitting in
the belly of the beast allowed a translation of ethnographic findings into project designs
and mechanisms that would not have happened otherwise.


Concluding Remarks


        So there you have it, warts and all. 49 KDP’s innovations and on the ground
performance should not be over-estimated, and this narrative perhaps does not give full
voice to the problems and difficulties that can make project work so frustrating.
Corruption; authoritarianism; incompetence; resistance to change, resistance to involving
the poor, resistance to the participation of women; KDP provides almost as many



48
   For example, one sympathetic WB economist noted that “An important part I think of the space created
within the Bank for KDP was tied to the use of four terms: "incentives", "competition" (between
proposals), "demand-driven" and "budget transparency" which appealed strongly to an audience of
economists within the Bank not normally convinced of pink and fluffy social projects.” pers. comm..
49
   For fascinating, more in-depth examples of some of the warts, see A. Woodhouse on corruption in
“Village Corruption in Indonesia” (forthcoming, 2003); and N. Zulminarni on the straitjacket of KDP’s
“project” mentality in her review paper, “ Program Pemberdayaan Perempuan Kepala Keluarga”, ms. 2003.
Both papers are available in draft format on the World Bank website.


                                                  36
materials for seeing the failures of development projects as it does for studying the
potential for change..


         As we approach the end of this discussion, it might be useful to recapitulate what
the underlying premises, strengths, and weaknesses of the program are, at least as seen
from the perspective of community development in a transitional time of Indonesia’s
history. I hope that two core arguments have stood out in this review. The first is the
extent to which KDP is a product of a particular set of histories. KDP came about at least
in part because the project concept provided a way out for powerful institutions tha t were
each facing a major crisis of credibility. Reforming community development both met a
perceived need in each of the institutions involved in formulating the program, and it also
provided a way to introduce new notions of process into a development model that had
bypassed it. For these very same reasons, we can expect KDP to become obsolete, and
indeed, in some areas it may already be possible to see how KDP could be a step
backwards rather than the beacon of progress it often likes to think that it is 50 .


         The second argument threading through this discussion has been that a
development project like KDP can contribute towards a re-ordering of local political
relationships. The New Order’s model for development obviated political process as a
necessary foundation for programs that require local adaptation and ownership. Cast in
the language of participation, transparency, and accountability, KDP has been a bet that
Indonesia’s reform succeeds in moving away from the development authoritarianism of
the New Order government and towards a model built on representative institutions. The
tale of the white shroud for the unwanted lumber that began this story shows that
villagers have their own moral economy of development. 51 Whether and how stories like
these multiply depends on developments far outside the control of KDP or the villagers,
but small steps forward matter. KDP’s underlying premise has been that villagers learn
about democracy by practicing it. The avid interest shown by villagers across Java in the

50
   KDPs rootedness in Indonesia’s historical context are also why proposals to “replicate” or “scale-up” the
model should be treated with great caution.
51
   KDP abounds with anecdotes about how threatening authorities find KDP’s disclosure rules. One
subdistrict head for example, actually passed an official regulation banning the public posting of financial
information about development projects.


                                                    37
stories about officials jailed for stealing KDP funds testifies to their wish to believe that
their actions count.


       Late in 2002 I was visiting Aceh to see how the ill- fated cessation of hostilities
agreement would play itself out in that beautiful but battered landscape. It wasn’t my first
visit there; I’d been to Aceh several times when the project was first starting so that I
could help the KDP facilitators thread a neutral way between the government and rebels.
We always made a point of joining those earliest village meetings to repeat the message
that they and only they could decide how to use their KDP funds. During those first visits
I’d at times be taken aback (and a bit amused) by the toughness of the questioning. “Why
should we believe you?” seemed to be the dominant theme, and indeed, the story of
development in these broken villages was an unending tale of broken promises and barely
disguised theft.


       But now we were sitting on the tiled floor outside of the village mosque drinking
young coconut juice and lazily swatting flies as the villagers walked us through their
record books and pictures. They still seemed a bit suspicious, as if I was one last hurdle
come to snatch back the money or to tell them that they had done a rotten job designing
the stone road that now led from their bright green sawah to the town market. But the
frowns smoothed into smiles as we talked about how they had decided who would be the
village facilitators for KDP, and then how the whole village had joined in laying the
stones for the road.


       I knew one of the old women who was talking from the time of my first visit to
this village. She was a tough old crank, who would very disconcertingly interrupt a
conversation to spit tobacco juice on the ground. The last time we had spoken she’d
either had an exceptionally large plug of tobacco in her mouth or else was even more
expressive than the rest of the village as they had listened to us explain that KDP’s fate
lay entirely in their hands. So I decided to ask her straight out whether she thought that
KDP had done anything worthwhile or whether it was just more meaningless words and




                                              38
promises. She looked at me for a long, long while before the shadow of a smile cracked
her wrinkled face. “Not bad,” she said, “Not bad at all.”




                                            39
                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alatas, V.; L. Pritchett; and A. Wetterberg, “Voice Lessons: Evidence on Organizations,
Government Mandated Groups, and Governance from Indonesia’s Local Institutions
Study”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 2981, March 2003.
Buchori, C. et. Al. Meningkatkan Partisipasi Aktif Perempuan World Bank Jakarta:
Jakarta, 2002.
Chandrakirana, K. Local Capacity and It’s Implications for Development: The Case of
Indonesia, unpublished LLI ms, 1999. http://www.worldbank.or.id/
De Soto, H. The Other Path New York: Harper and Row, 1989.
Dharmawan, L. “Village Leadership in Central Java”, unpublished ms. 2002.
http://www.worldbank.or.id/

Evers, P. Resourceful Villages, Powerless Communities: Rural Government in
Indonesia, Unpublished LLI ms. 2001 http://www.worldbank.or.id/
Fox, J. and D. Brown The Struggle for Accountability: The World Bank, NGOs and
Grassroots Movements Cambridge: MIT Press 1998.
Geertz, C. “Organization of the Balinese Subak”, in Koentjaraningrat, op. cit.
Geertz, C. The Interpretation of Cultures New York: Basic Books, 1971.
Hart, G.; Turtun, A.; and White, B. Agrarian Transformations: Local Processes and the
State in Southeast Asia Berkeley: University of California Press 1989.
Hefner, R. The Political Economy of Mountain Java Berkeley: University of California
Press 1979.
Koentjaraningrat, ed. Villages in Indonesia Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967.
Migdal, J. Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relationships and State
Capabilities in the Third World New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1988.
Ministry of Home Affairs, Community Development Agency, Kecamatan Development
Program:Phase I Final Report 1998-2002. unpublished report, Jakarta, Indonsia, 2002.
Mintz, S. “A Note on the Definition of Peasantries” The Journal of Peasant Studies 1:
91-106, 1973.
Mintz, S. “The Rural Proletariat and the Problem of Rural Proletarian Consciousness”
Journal of Peasant Studies 1: 291-325, 1974.



                                            40
Molyneaux, J. and P. Gertler, “Applying a Simple Method to Measure Program Impact :
An Evaluation of a Large Scale Micro-Credit/Poverty Alleviation Program in Indonesia”,
Berkeley: Rand Corporation/UC Berkeley Press.
Morse, B. and T. Berger, Sardar Sarovar: the Report of the Independent Review
Vancouver, Canada: Resources for the Future, 1992.
Mubyarto, Ekonomi Rakyat dan Program IDT Jogjakarta: Aditya Media Press, 1996.
Putnam, R. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1993.
Rich, B. Mortgaging the Earth: The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment, and
the Crisis of Development Boston: Beacon Press, 1994.
Schwartz, A. A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia’s Search for Stability Boulder, Westview
Press 2000.
Skocpol, T. States and Social Revolutions New York: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Tilly, C. Roads from Past to Future Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield, 1997.
Transparency International, Corruption Perception Index 2001, Transparency
International, 2001.
Wetterberg, A. Social Capital, Local Capacity, and Government: Findings from the
Second Indonesian Local Level Institutions Study, unpublished LLI ms. 2001.
http://www.worldbank.or.id/

Wolf, E. “Closed Corporate Peasant Communities of MesoAmerica and Central Java,
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 13: 1-18, 1956.
Wolf, E. “La Formacion de la Nacion” Ciencias Sociales 4: 50-61, 1953.
Wolf, E. Anthropology Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1964.
Wolf, E. “The Vicissitudes of the Closed Corporate Peasant Community" American
Ethnologist 13: 325-329, 1986
Wolf, E. Envisioning Power: Ideologies of Dominance and Crisis Berkeley: University
of California Press 1999.

Woodhouse, A. “Village Corruption in Indonesia”, unpublished manuscript, 2003.

Woolcock, Michael "Social capital and economic development: toward a theoretical
synthesis and policy framework" Theory and Society 27(2): 151-208, 1998.



                                          41
42
