                                       93729



SCALING
THE HEIGHTS
Social Inclusion and Sustainable Development
in Himachal Pradesh
  Maitreyi Bordia Das
  Soumya Kapoor-Mehta
  Emcet Oktay Taş
  Ieva Žumbytė
SCALING
THE HEIGHTS
Social Inclusion and Sustainable Development
in Himachal Pradesh
  Maitreyi Bordia Das
  Soumya Kapoor-Mehta
  Emcet Oktay Taş
  Ieva Žumbytė
© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and con-
clusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board
of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee
the accuracy of the data included in this work. The findings of this work are not binding on the
Government of India.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemi-
nation of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial
purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20433, USA; fax:
202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Photo credit: Will Vousden / www.flickr.com/photos/willvousden/
	                                                                                     i




                                                               Contents
    Foreword	v
    Acknowledgments 	                                                           vii
    Abbreviations 	                                                             xi
    Summary	xiii
    1. Introduction	                                                             1
        1.1.	Key questions, data, and methodology	                               5
    2. Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	          9
        2.1.	Land market	                                                       12
        2.2.	Labor market	                                                      20
        2.3.	Education	                                                         29
        2.4.	Health	                                                            33
        2.5.	Sanitation and infrastructure services	                            43
    3. Understanding “Why”: The Possible Drivers of Social Inclusion	           47
        3.1. Special status and fiscal space 	                                  47
        3.2. Tradition of a strong, benevolent, accountable state	              48
        3.3. Independence of the bureaucracy	                                   49
        3.4. High incidence of public sector jobs	                              49
        3.5. Difficult, hilly terrain results in unique context of political and
             economic cohesion	                                                  50
ii	                                                      SCALING THE HEIGHTS




      3.6. Small size makes many things possible, but is also a mixed
           blessing	50
      3.7. Women’s participation and gender norms	                      51
      3.8. Caste and religion foster social cohesion	                   51
      3.9. Social inclusion: long-time priority of the government	      53
4. Looking Ahead: Sustaining Social Inclusion and Sustainable
   Development in Himachal Pradesh	                                     57
      4.1. Channels of change in Himachal Pradesh	                      58
Appendix A: Illustrative Examples of Recent Reforms 	                   69
Appendix B: Methodology	                                                73
References	77
Notes	87


Tables
Table 2.1. Poverty Decline Benefitted All Social Groups 	               11
Table 2.2. Childhood Mortality in Himachal Pradesh Lower Than National
  Average and Neighboring States, But Neonatal Mortality High	      35
Table 2.3. Malnutrition Below National Average, But Still An Urgent
  Issue in Himachal Pradesh	                                            37


Figures
Figure 2.1. Fourfold Decline in Himachal Pradesh’s Poverty Rate,
   Greatest Gains in Rural Areas	                                       10
Figure 2.2. Land Distribution across Social Groups More Equal in
   Himachal Pradesh Compared to Other States and All India, 2011–12	 16
Figure 2.3. Average Land Owned by Social Groups in Himachal Pradesh
   Converged during 1983–2012	                                      18
Figure 2.4. Female Labor Force Participation in Himachal Pradesh Higher
   Than Other States and National Average, 2011–12	                    21
Figure 2.5. Higher Proportion of Himachal Pradesh Workers in Regular
   Salaried Jobs, More Rural Women Self-Employed Farmers	            22
Contents	                                                                  iii




Figure 2.6. Share of Public Sector Jobs in Himachal Pradesh Higher Than
   Other States and National Average 	                                  24
Figure 2.7. Construction Sector Jobs Increased during 2004–07 and
   Flattened after 2009	                                                 26
Figure 2.8. Himachal Pradesh’s Employment Outcomes More Inclusive
   Compared to Neighboring States, 2011– 12	                             27
Figure 2.9. Himachal Pradesh’s Educational Outcomes for Excluded
   Groups Better than in Other States, 2011–12	                          30
Figure 2.10. Largest Improvements in Educational Attainment among
   Traditionally Excluded Groups in Himachal Pradesh (Urban and
   Rural, 1983–2011)	                                                    32
Figure 2.11. Himachal Pradesh Ahead in Availability and Use of Public
   Health Facilities	                                                    36
Figure 2.12. Fertility Rate in Himachal Pradesh Similar to that in France
   and Lower than that in the United States	                              39
Figure 2.13. Sharp Loss of Young Girls Compared to Boys, 1981–2001	 40
Figure 2.14. Share of Elderly Higher in Himachal Pradesh and Rising
   Faster Than National Average, 1961–2026	                              40



Boxes
Box 2.1. Land Reforms in Himachal Pradesh: Result of Decisive
  Legislation and Its Implementation	                                    13
Box 2.2 Claiming Space, One Step at a Time: Mixed Tale of Gender
  Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Himachal Pradesh	                  41
Box 2.3 Himachal Pradesh: A Sudden Trail Blazer in Total Sanitation	     44
Box 3.1. Sharing the Benefits of Infrastructure-Led Growth: Himachal
  Pradesh’s Local Area Development Fund and Cash Transfer Scheme	        54
Box 4.1. Malnutrition among Young Children: Some Recent Lessons	         61
Box 4.2. Balancing Growth with Environment: Discussions in Two
  Villages	63
Box 4.3. Training Girls in Nepal: The Adolescent Girls Employment
  Initiative	65
	                                                                                   v




                                                                Foreword

    We are often asked: “what does social inclusion and sustainable development
    look like?” While the question really doesn’t have a clear answer, because it is
    so context-specific, we use Himachal Pradesh as something of a benchmark.
    This small Himalayan state in India stands apart in advancing sustainable
    green growth as well as social inclusion. It has achieved and maintained a
    degree of equality—across income, caste, tribe and gender—that is admirable
    by any standard. The state and its citizens have created public goods of global
    significance, such as by vowing to become “carbon neutral” by 2020 and by
    their remarkable sense of environmental consciousness. There are few coun-
    tries in the world where governments have banned the use of plastic bags and
    smoking in outdoor public spaces, and where citizens and the state jointly
    enforce the ban, such as in Shimla, the capital of Himachal Pradesh.
        The fact that Himachal Pradesh has achieved good outcomes in health,
    education, gender equality, and access to rural infrastructure is well known
    in India, but no single piece of work has actually analyzed why this may be
    the case. It is true that central government funds, due to its “special category”
    status, have allowed Himachal Pradesh a degree of fiscal flexibility. But why
    did it spend so responsibly? Why did it focus on public service delivery and
    on improving outcomes? Why is the state as accountable to its citizens as it
    is? This report peels through to many of the underlying drivers of Himachal
    Pradesh’s social inclusion. In that sense, it is the first macrosocial analysis of
    Himachal Pradesh that sets the context, then paints a picture, looks to the
    likely drivers of future progress, and finally, prognosticates on the way ahead.
        Scaling the Heights: Social Inclusion and Sustainable Development in Hi-
    machal Pradesh tells us that commitment of the state and progressive policies
vi	                                                          SCALING THE HEIGHTS




are important, and that they are achievable. It points to land reforms as a
critical factor in enabling all groups to take part in rising prosperity. It tells us
about legislation that has protected the environment, and about policy that
ensures that citizens share benefits in a new phase of infrastructure-driven
growth. It moves away from the fatalism contained in explanations of social
exclusion that imply that culture, social norms, and practices are immutable.
In short, Scaling the Heights demonstrates that the state can be the foremost
propeller of social inclusion.
    At the World Bank, we have committed to ending extreme poverty and
boosting shared prosperity. Himachal Pradesh shows us that great strides can
be made in reducing extreme poverty within a generation, while at the same
time, sharing prosperity even with groups that were historically left behind.
That is a powerful demonstration for other contexts. It also helps us think of
shared prosperity as income growth, sustainability, and inclusion of tradition-
ally disadvantaged groups. The World Bank Group is proud of its long-stand-
ing partnership with Himachal Pradesh. Our Country Partnership Strategy
for India has social inclusion as one of its pillars and we are committed to
sharing knowledge across different contexts. This documentation of Himachal
Pradesh’s journey will stand us all in good stead.
    Yet, as Himachal Pradesh forges ahead, it will have to deal with new chal-
lenges. This is because social inclusion is an ongoing process, where progress
in one area will inevitably affect others, and new issues will arise as a conse-
quence of previous successes and new realities. Himachal Pradesh’s previous
achievements create confidence in its ability to maintain the kernels of success
and to adapt to the state’s new development context. While the narrative con-
tained in this report is primarily intended as an assessment of the state’s track
record of social inclusion, it will be an important resource for other states and
countries that have committed to their own journeys in the same direction.


Onno Ruhl	        Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
Country Director	 Senior Director
India	           Global Practice on Social, Urban,
                  Rural and Resilience
	                                                                               vii




                                            Acknowledgments

    The authors express their gratitude to Charles Cormier (Practice Manager,
    Global Practice for Energy and Extractives, GEEDR, World Bank) and Py-
    ush Dogra (Senior Environment Specialist, Global Practice for Environment
    and Natural Resources, GENDR, World Bank), successive Task Leaders of
    the Development Policy Operation, under which umbrella this research was
    undertaken.
        Muthukumara S. Mani (Lead Economist, Office of the Chief Economist,
    South Asia Region, World Bank), Rohit Mittal (Senior Energy Specialist,
    GEEDR, World Bank), I. U. B. Reddy (Senior Social Development Special-
    ist, Global Practice for Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience, GSURR, World
    Bank) and Sona Thakur (Senior Communications Officer, South Asia Region,
    World Bank) were part of the extended team that provided inputs at different
    stages of this report. Valuable comments were also received from Smrithi Tal-
    war (Social Development Specialist, GSURR, World Bank) and Kamila Galeza
    (Knowledge Management Consultant, GSURR, World Bank). Special thanks
    are due to Elizabeth Acul, Pamela Patrick, Lakshmi Narayanan, and Binny
    Varma who provided invaluable administrative support. John Blomquist (Pro-
    gram Leader, South Asia Region, World Bank) and Jill Armstrong (Country
    Program Coordinator, South Asia Region, World Bank) supported the internal
    review process and gave valuable suggestions.
        The peer reviewers, Shrikant Baldi (Principal Secretary, Finance, Planning,
    Economics and Statistics, Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP)), Philip
    O’Keefe (Lead Economist, Global Practice for Social Protection and Labor,
    GSPDR, World Bank) and Anuradha Thakur (former Advisor to the Execu-
    tive Director for India, World Bank) gave very useful feedback and guidance.
viii	                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




In addition, Deepak Sanan (Additional Chief Secretary, Animal Husbandry,
GoHP) provided valuable comments.
    Many others helped to refine the findings contained in this report. These
included representatives of various Departments of Government of Himachal
Pradesh, who met with the authors during workshops, field visits, and key
informant interviews. In particular, the Directorate of Energy; Department of
Forests, Environment, Science, and Technology; Department of Rural Devel-
opment and Panchayati Raj; Department of Agriculture; and Department of
Planning shared important insights. In addition, the authors thank members
of civil society, academics and private sector representatives affiliated with the
Agro Economic Research Centre of Himachal Pradesh University; Indian In-
stitute for Advanced Study; Community-Led Assessment, Awareness, Advoca-
cy, and Action Program for Environment Protection and Sustainable Develop-
ment; Himachal Pradesh Power Corporation; SJVN Limited; Mid-Himalayan
Watershed Development Project; Rampur Forest Committee Management
Project; and representatives of local districts, blocks, and villages, who made
time for fruitful discussions and field trips.
    The report has also drawn on comments and suggestions from and con-
versations with Surinder Jodhka (Professor of Sociology, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi); Sharad Negi (Director, Department of Environment
and Forests, GoHP); Nagin Nanda (previously Director, Department of Envi-
ronment, Science and Technology, GoHP); Tarun Shridhar (Additional Chief
Secretary, Forests, Fisheries, Environment and Scientific Technology, Horti-
culture, GoHP) and Suresh C. Attri (Principal Scientific Officer, Department
of Environment, Science and Technology, GoHP). It has also benefitted from
discussions with participants of focus groups and seminars held at Indian In-
stitute for Advanced Studies, Himachal Pradesh University, and Aryabhatta
Geo-informatics and Space Application Centre; researchers who conducted
background ethnographic work in Mandi, Kinnaur, Bilaspur, Shimla, and So-
lan; and researchers who accompanied the team during field visits in Shimla
and Solan. Findings of the report were presented in Shimla in September 2014
at an event convened by the Chief Secretary of the Government of Himachal
Pradesh and attended by state officials. While this report has been discussed
with the Government of Himachal Pradesh, it does not necessarily bear their
approval for all its contents, particularly the authors’ interpretations, opinions
and policy recommendations.
    The generous financial contributions of the Australian Agency for Interna-
tional Development (AusAID) and the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Poverty
and Social Impact Analysis (MDTF-PSIA) are gratefully acknowledged.
Acknowledgments	                                                       ix




    Finally, this report would not have been possible without the support
of Onno Ruhl (Country Director for India, World Bank); Ede Jorge Ijjasz-
Vasquez (Senior Director, GSURR, World Bank); Maninder Gill (Director,
GSURR, World Bank); Maria Correia (Practice Manager, Social Development,
South Asia Region, GSURR, World Bank); and Bernice van Bronkhorst (Prac-
tice Manager, Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change, South Asia
Region, GSURR, World Bank).
     
	                                                                 xi




                                           Abbreviations

    AGEI 	 Adolescent Girls Employment Initiative
    AGI 	  Adolescent Girls Initiative
    AIDS	  acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
    APL 	  above poverty line
    ASER	  Annual Status of Education Report
    BCG	   Bacillus Calmette–Guérin
    BPL 	  below poverty line
    CAG 	  Comptroller and Auditor General of India
    CAS	   casual labor
    CLAP	 Community-Led Assessment, Awareness, Advocacy and
           Action Program
    CLTS	  community-led total sanitation
    CPS 	  Country Partnership Strategy
    CSS 	  centrally sponsored schemes
    DHS	   Demographic and Health Survey
    DPT	   diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus
    EF 	   Employment Fund
    FLFP 	 female labor force participation
    FSE	   farm self-employed
    GDP 	  gross domestic product
    GoHP 	 government of Himachal Pradesh
    HPMC 	Himachal Pradesh Horticultural Produce Marketing and
           Processing Corporation
    IAS 	  Indian Administrative Service
    ICDS 	 Integrated Child Development Services
xii	                                           SCALING THE HEIGHTS




IHDS	    India Human Development Survey
IIPA 	   Indian Institute of Public Administration
IIPS	    International Institute for Population Sciences
ITIs 	   Industrial Training Institutes
LADC 	   Local Area Development Council
LADF 	   Local Area Development Fund
LFPR 	   Labor force participation rate
MGNREGS	Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
         Scheme
MTA	     mother-teacher association
NCERT	   National Council of Educational Research and Training
NFHS 	   National Family Health Survey
NFSE	    nonfarm self-employed
NGO	     nongovernmental organization
NLF	     not in labor force
NSDC	    National Skills Development Corporation
NSS 	    National Sample Survey
OBCs 	   Other Backward Classes
ODF	     open defecation free
PDS 	    public distribution system
PROBE	   Public Report on Basic Education
PSIA 	   Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
PTA	     parent-teacher association
R&D	     research and development
REG	     regular wage labor
SCs 	    Scheduled Castes
SRS	     Sample Registration System
SSA	     Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
STs 	    Scheduled Tribes
T&E	     training and employment
TFR 	    total fertility rate
UNDP	    United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF	  United Nations Children’s Fund
WBG 	    World Bank Group
                                                             Summary

Infrastructure is likely to be the main engine of growth in India, and the Hima-
layan state of Himachal Pradesh is no exception. Simultaneously, the discon-
tents of infrastructure—both potential and actual—have been salient in India’s
public discourse for some time now, as they have been elsewhere. Concerns and
questions have been raised about whether infrastructure-led development will
exacerbate traditional forms of exclusion; whether it will be environmentally
sustainable; whether benefits will be shared equitably; whether such growth will
respect institutions or assist in building new and effective ones; and whether citi-
zens will have a voice in decisions about timing and location of infrastructure, as
well as in other processes. In short, will infrastructure-led growth be “inclusive”?
    Himachal Pradesh has the reputation of being stable, inclusive, cohesive
and well-governed and it stands apart in many respects from its neighbors in
northern India. It has additionally, achieved remarkable growth, especially in
the last two decades, which has been accompanied by very good human de-
velopment outcomes. Despite being a predominantly rural society, educational
attainment in Himachal Pradesh for instance, is among the best in the country;
poverty headcount is nearly one-third of the national average; life expectancy
is 3.4 years longer than the number of years an average Indian expects to live;
and, per capita income is the second highest among “special category” states
in India. Underlying its strong economic and social development outcomes is
Himachal Pradesh’s commitment to expand access to public services to the
remotest areas, across tough, hilly terrain and its strong institutional founda-
tions. Inter-group disparities are low in a state where traditionally disadvan-
taged groups such as the Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs)
make up a solid 30 percent of the population.
xiv	                                                             SCALING THE HEIGHTS




       Main messages
       1.	 Himachal Pradesh is a success story in poverty reduction and has
           some the best human development outcomes in India.

       2.	 Historically excluded groups such as Scheduled Castes (SCs), Sched-
           uled Tribes (STs) and women have better access to markets and ser-
           vices in Himachal Pradesh than they do in most other states.

       3.	 The state is on a path of high growth that will likely be driven by
           sectors such as energy, watershed development, tourism and indus-
           trial development. While growth is expected to result in significant
           economic gains, it can also entail potential costs.

       4.	 Himachal Pradesh’s previous record shows that it has effectively bal-
           anced economic growth with social inclusion, and achieved this be-
           cause it had fiscal space, an accountable bureaucracy and leadership,
           and a cohesive society.

       5.	 Going forward, Himachal Pradesh is poised to build on its strong foun-
           dations, but will also deal with unresolved issues from the past and
           new issues of social inclusion and sustainability. It will need to strike a
           balance between the aspirations of its citizens, who have high expecta-
           tions from their government, and the state’s new path of high-growth.



    Clearly, Himachal Pradesh’s formal and informal institutions have remained
robust to change; yet literature that can help understand why it has had such a
positive trajectory is lamentably sparse. Are its development outcomes merely
a coincidence of history and culture, or are there actions that can be replicated
elsewhere? Can we predict whether good outcomes will sustain in the wake of
change and in a new phase of infrastructure-driven growth? How can policy
maintain the state’s previous successes as new and different types of develop-
ment challenges arise, while also addressing the areas in which the state has
traditionally lagged behind? This report explores answers to these questions
within the context of the evolution of state policies and the changing demo-
graphic profile and development context of Himachal Pradesh.
    Scaling the Heights: Social Inclusion and Sustainable Development in Hi-
machal Pradesh is a macrosocial account of the state’s achievements over the
past several decades. Simultaneously, it is an interdisciplinary attempt to un-
Summary	                                                                             xv




derstand the confluence of factors that allowed Himachal Pradesh to move to-
ward social inclusion and sustainable development. The report peels through
the underlying drivers of the state’s success, including for instance, the state’s
much celebrated social fabric and its strong institutional foundations that
have enabled it to remain inclusive and stable. In doing so, the report serves as
a strong, empirical demonstration for other states and countries that are going
through similar transitions.
    The report focuses on three main questions based on looking back, under-
standing why, and prognosticating:

     1.	 Has Himachal Pradesh’s success in reducing poverty and its prog-
         ress in social and human development outcomes been noteworthy
         enough to generate confidence in its track record of delivery?

     2.	 What have been the institutional and policy foundations of Himach-
         al Pradesh’s outcomes? Why has Himachal Pradesh achieved rela-
         tively good outcomes?

     3.	 What are the likely issues for sustainability of social and human
         development and for environmental outcomes as the state ramps up
         its infrastructure-led growth trajectory? Will the previous correlates
         of success remain robust to the rapid churning taking place across
         Himachal Pradesh?

    The main argument of Scaling the Heights is that given Himachal Pradesh’s
positive record of social development and human development outcomes over the
last few decades, the chances that the future will be a reflection of the past are high.


Has Growth in Himachal Pradesh Been Inclusive?
“Inclusion” or “social inclusion” is not easy to measure. It is all too often
many things to many people. A recent report Inclusion Matters: The Foun-
dation for Shared Prosperity (World Bank, 2013b) defines social inclusion
as “the process of improving the ability, opportunity, and dignity of people
disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part in society.” It points
out that individuals and groups seek to be included in three interrelated do-
mains—markets, services and spaces—which form the microcosm of their
lives and represent both barriers to and opportunities for inclusion. Scaling
the Heights focuses on two of these three domains. For markets, it focuses
on land and labor, which are two key areas of exclusion for disadvantaged
xvi	                                                      SCALING THE HEIGHTS




groups, especially in the Indian context. For services, it focuses on education,
sanitation, health and infrastructure that have all witnessed fairly dramatic
improvements in Himachal Pradesh. It does not dwell on the idea of spaces,
except to highlight ways in which women in the state have claimed social and
political spaces over a period of time.
    A sharp decline in poverty heralded the greatest change towards social
inclusion in Himachal Pradesh. This occurred especially in rural areas, where
over 90 percent of the state’s population lives. Between 1993–94 and 2011,
rural poverty in Himachal Pradesh declined from 36.8 percent to 8.5 per-
cent—a fourfold decline, impressive by any standard. Admittedly, while rural
poverty continued to decline after 2004, urban poverty changed only mar-
ginally between 2004 and 2011. This poverty decline moreover, benefitted all
social groups across rural and urban areas.
    Land reforms that were first introduced in the 1950s and deepened in the
early 1970s, have perhaps been the foundation for social inclusion in Himach-
al Pradesh. Almost 80 percent of rural households in the state possess some
land; distribution of land across social groups is also more equal in Himachal
Pradesh compared to its neighbors and to the rest of India. Perhaps because
of this, Himachal Pradesh also has relatively smaller landholdings on average,
with the majority of households in the state possessing less than one hect-
are of land, and medium and large farmers accounting for only 4 percent of
all landholdings. Crucially, SCs who have been historically over-represented
among the landless, and often bound in a range of oppressive relations with
landowners, elsewhere in India, tend to own land in Himachal Pradesh. The
differential between them and other groups in terms of average landholding
size has converged over time.
    The labor market in Himachal Pradesh has been another area for rela-
tively more inclusive outcomes, when compared to elsewhere in India. Men’s
employment rates are similar to the rest of the country and to neighboring
states, but the bigger success story is in women’s employment. In 2011–12,
about 63 percent of rural women in Himachal Pradesh reported themselves as
being employed. This places Himachal Pradesh second in female labor force
participation in the country, after Sikkim, and significantly above the all-India
average of 27 percent. In urban areas, the female labor force participation rate
in Himachal Pradesh was much lower, at 28 percent in 2011, in keeping with
the “classic” Indian pattern, but was nonetheless, double that of neighboring
states. In fact, urban women’s employment in Himachal Pradesh was at exact-
ly the same level as those in urban areas of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Much of
this is driven by the fact that women in rural areas in Himachal Pradesh are
more than twice as likely as their male counterparts to report themselves as
Summary	                                                                       xvii




being self-employed in agriculture. But urban women are also more likely than
their counterparts in neighboring states to have regular salaried jobs.
    Himachal Pradesh’s high rates of labor force participation are driven by
two major factors. First, a large public sector gave jobs to citizens as part of an
implicit social contract, and this is borne out in the data. Almost half of urban
men and one-fifth of urban women in Himachal Pradesh had regular salaried
jobs in 2011; further, among those who were employed in 2011, almost one-
third held public sector jobs. In contrast, only 10 percent of all employed Indi-
ans work in the public sector. The high wage bill that Himachal Pradesh con-
sequently incurs is reflected in the state’s budget numbers. The second reason
for Himachal Pradesh’s high employment rates is that agriculture is still the
mainstay of its largely rural economy, and predominantly agricultural econo-
mies tend to have higher labor force participation rates.
    Also interesting is the fact that inter-group inequalities in occupational
distribution are much lower in Himachal Pradesh when compared to other
northern Indian states. Half or more of the population in each social group
holds agricultural jobs, mostly a reflection of the fact that many people in
Himachal Pradesh own and work on land. While the SCs have a higher pro-
portion of persons engaged in manual jobs, the differences between them and
other social groups are much less pronounced compared to neighboring states.
Further, an increasing proportion of SCs in Himachal Pradesh seem to have
opted out of casual work and have become more likely to be employed in
general, during the period 2004–2011. Horticulture seems to have been re-
sponsible for many positive outcomes with SCs initiating cultivation of apples
and such other high-value, off-season fruits and vegetables. However, SCs lag
behind when it comes to the kind of “regular jobs” they land up with, getting
fewer professional jobs than those who belong to the general category.
    In terms of education, Himachal Pradesh outperforms its neighbors and
many other Indian states. Its success in education is well known from the
policy literature and data from the National Sample Survey (NSS) 2011–12
suggest that Himachal Pradesh has the lowest share of individuals with no
education among northern states, a trend that holds across all social groups in
rural areas. Himachal Pradesh also made substantial progress in improving its
primary and secondary schooling outcomes in the decade between 1993–94
and 2004–05, and thereafter in post-secondary educational attainment. The
progress in educational attainment among historically excluded groups is par-
ticularly notable. More members of the SCs and STs have completed second-
ary or higher levels of schooling, both in urban and rural areas, compared to
other states, including southern states such as Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
Urban Himachal Pradesh recorded huge progress, where the share of resi-
xviii	                                                    SCALING THE HEIGHTS




dents with post-primary education increased across social groups, especially
among STs. Finally, the state’s success in increasing female education is also
significant, despite the fact that there are continuing disparities between men
and women in rural areas. In sum, not only did the past two decades see an
improvement in educational attainment, but the improvement was larger in
magnitude among traditionally excluded groups.
    There has also been steady progress in health and sanitation in Himachal
Pradesh. This reflects its efficiency in delivering services that have a strong
foundation of community involvement. Himachal Pradesh has the lowest in-
fant, child and under-five mortality rates among northern Indian states. In
immunization coverage, it stands out nationally and in comparison with its
neighbors, in having three-fourths of its children fully vaccinated, as opposed
to less than half of all Indian children being so. In the field of sanitation,
where India trails countries far below its income level, Himachal Pradesh is
something of a trail-blazer. Its rapid progress has made it the first state in
northern India that is close to being “open defecation free.” Data from the
NSS 2011–12 suggest that more than 70 percent households in rural areas
and nearly all households in urban areas had access to an improved source of
toilet in 2012. Other accounts indicate that a community-led total sanitation
(CLTS) approach, combined with strong leadership and champions, as well
as a move away from a subsidy-based approach, enabled change in behaviors
and increasingly made “open defecation” an unacceptable practice in the state.
    Finally, improvements in rural infrastructure played a role in propelling the
state’s progress in human development outcomes, and in doing so, towards
social inclusion. In spite of its adverse terrain and scattered settlements, near-
ly all households in Himachal Pradesh had electricity in 2005–06, according
to the National Family Health Survey (NFHS). Data from the NSS 2011–12
further show that virtually all households in rural areas in Himachal Pradesh
have access to an improved source of drinking water.


Understanding “Why”: The Possible Drivers of Social
Inclusion in Himachal Pradesh
Himachal Pradesh has had a solid foundation of underlying conditions that
have contributed to its path towards social inclusion; yet, most remain un-
documented. For example Himachal Pradesh’s status as a “special category”
state and the attendant central allocations of funds is cited as a reason for
its investments in service delivery. This has certainly given the state govern-
ment easier access to funds through large-scale development programs. Yet,
Summary	                                                                      xix




this cannot explain why Himachal Pradesh invested its resources responsibly
and accountably, why these investments led to positive outcomes, and how the
state maintained inter-group equity in access to markets, services and political
spaces. Other states also have special status and receive large central grants,
but their outcomes are not nearly as good as those of Himachal Pradesh.
    In addition to availability of funds, there are other reasons for Himachal
Pradesh’s successful journey towards social inclusion and sustainable develop-
ment. It has a unique and “benevolent” system of governance where hierar-
chies stay intact, but local level accountability is high and citizens have both
voice and leverage. Despite its feudal past, the state is seen as caring for its
citizens, who in turn, give it unstinting loyalty. There are few protest move-
ments and conflicts are resolved informally, even as the state takes care of ba-
sic needs. Himachal Pradesh also has a culture of closeness and transparency,
which makes for strong and accountable local institutions, even when it does
not necessarily make for devolution of functions or raising resources from
the local level. Finally, the state’s distinct and difficult topography has meant
that local administration with the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officers
and state civil officers at the helm, have to continually innovate to remain
functional, given that districts and sub-districts can get cut off from the state
capital under inclement weather conditions.
    Himachal Pradesh’s hilly terrain has resulted in a unique context of politi-
cal and economic cohesion in other ways as well. The state has very low den-
sity of population that lives mostly in small villages. When combined with the
difficult terrain, the smallness creates incentives for collaboration, reinforces
inter-dependence, helps transcend caste divisions, and strengthens networks
across different groups. It also binds the citizens in a common social and re-
ligious attachment to the Himalayas, its flora, fauna and water sources. The
Himalayas are central to the Himachali identity and tie the citizens in a bond
of social cohesion.
    In general, small size makes states and countries more manageable, but
is not an unequivocal harbinger of good outcomes. Other Indian states with
similar topography, smaller populations and low population density (such as
Tripura, Meghalaya, Manipur and Nagaland) do not come close to Himachal
Pradesh in outcomes. The same is true for many other small countries the
size of Himachal Pradesh. In the case of the latter, smallness has meant that
politicians, administrators, service providers and citizens are in close physical
proximity, which makes for greater accountability and transparency, especial-
ly when accompanied by the fact that inequalities in land and other assets are
low. But small size can be a double-edged sword. For instance, while it may
have been easier in Himachal Pradesh to transform informal institutions into
xx	                                                      SCALING THE HEIGHTS




formal ones, due to its size and closeness, personal contacts and a “culture of
informality” has created expectations of patronage and favoritism in adminis-
trative and governance processes in recent years. Such expectations have to do
in particular, with access to government jobs, or transfers and appointments
of state employees.
    The nature of social stratification in Himachal Pradesh and the numerical
composition of social groups have also minimized social conflict. Although
the caste system is deeply entrenched, some characteristics mediate for greater
social solidarity. First, the proportion of SCs in Himachal Pradesh is much
higher than the national average, at 25 percent, and second only to Punjab.
However, unlike other states, SCs in Himachal Pradesh, for the most part, own
land, and have benefitted from the rapid decline in poverty. Their numerical
strength, access to land and their inclusion in the progress of the state has
preempted the possibility of caste based assertion or conflict. Second, although
STs in Himachal Pradesh are in a lower proportion than the national average,
their comparatively high socioeconomic status makes them a strong group.
Third, Himachal Pradesh is fairly homogenous in its religious composition.
About 95 percent of the local population is Hindu. This preponderance of
Hindus has made religious competition an unlikely political or social force,
despite the fact that religion itself and religious norms continue to exercise
strong social control.
    Social inclusion has also been possible due to positive norms around gen-
der that have enabled strong participation of women in development pro-
grams. This is linked to a culture where female seclusion is not as normative
as it is in neighboring states. Data from the NFHS 2005–06 show that 65
percent of urban women in Himachal Pradesh and 56 percent of rural women
participate in household decisions. When combined with a strong tribal ethos,
diverse marriage patterns and the accompanying autonomy for women, it has
been easier for Himachal Pradesh to enlist women’s participation in programs
such as sanitation, immunization, and other health-related campaigns than it
has been for neighboring states. Finally, women in Himachal Pradesh have a
strong tradition of protest movements against environmental degradation and
male alcoholism.
    At the crux of Himachal Pradesh’s path towards social inclusion and sus-
tainable development is a committed state. Several policies of the state gov-
ernment attest to the fact that the state government is conscious of potential
caste divisions and ensures that cohesion remains a priority. Land reforms are
a case in point. Other, smaller schemes also point to the consciousness of the
government in trying to ensure that new social divisions do not destabilize
the state’s historically cohesive society. Most recently, as an example, there
Summary	                                                                       xxi




were press reports that the government would provide cash incentives for in-
ter-caste marriages and that traffic policemen were asked not to wear their
(caste identifying) surnames on their name badges.


Looking Ahead: Sustaining Social Inclusion and
Sustainable Development in Himachal Pradesh
In the coming years, Himachal Pradesh will have a different development con-
text than before; one that will likely test its social and institutional moorings.
This is because reforms often create winners and losers, or introduce new
ways of life that may disrupt previous structures. Future economic develop-
ment is expected to come from large investments in infrastructure, notably in
the power sector, in addition to tourism and agro-business. The state govern-
ment is also investing in a range of rural development programs, including in
community-based watershed management, so as to maintain growth in the
primary sector. In addition, new issues of social inclusion and of social ex-
clusion can emerge as a result of Himachal Pradesh’s previous successes. For
instance, while the work of primary education seems nearly done, ensuring
that the large youth cohorts have adequate skills for jobs is (and will continue
to be) a key policy issue. At the same time, as Himachal Pradesh’s agricultural
landscape becomes more productive through agri-business, it will be import-
ant to keep an eye on household food security since over one third of the
children under the age of five suffer from malnutrition.
    Urban growth will be an inevitable part of Himachal Pradesh’s growth in
the coming years, whereas currently, it is the least urbanized of Indian states.
Cities and towns afford greater economic opportunity and better education-
al prospects, but in Himachal Pradesh many social development and human
development outcomes currently appear worse in urban areas. These include
poverty levels among SCs and STs and higher mortality of girls compared to
boys. Second, the state has until now made good progress in the provision of
essential infrastructure like water, sanitation, education and health in rural ar-
eas. Unless urban growth is well planned, there are chances of these gains stall-
ing for urban residents. Finally, urban areas are also home to migrants who
come from other parts of the country or from neighboring countries like Ne-
pal. While there is no comprehensive data on migrants in Himachal Pradesh,
small surveys indicate that migrants are likely to have poorer outcomes.
    Balancing the needs of growth with social and environmental sustainabili-
ty, especially in the wake of significant economic transformation and changes
in population structure, will be an important challenge for Himachal Pradesh.
xxii	                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Field work undertaken for this report showed that while people’s attitudes
toward economic development are positive, their support for future develop-
ment is conditional on the extent to which the state’s social and environmental
assets will be protected. Participants in our discussions displayed a strong
sense of pride in their state and its accomplishments, but almost every dis-
cussion led to a conversation on the interplay between development and the
environment. Realizing this challenge, the state government has put in place
a generous system of benefit sharing for hydropower projects. Its success and
the broader approach to hydropower development will depend on fair imple-
mentation, the transparency with which new projects are commissioned, and
the extent to which local residents see a joint purpose in the development of
new infrastructure.
    There are, additionally, areas where Himachal Pradesh has not been able
to replicate the progress made in health and education coverage, one of which
is malnutrition among children. While Himachal Pradesh has been among the
best-performing states in reducing the proportion of underweight children be-
tween the two rounds of the NFHS surveys (1999 and 2005–06), from 43.6
percent to 36.5 percent, more than one-third of Himachal Pradesh’s children
continue to be either underweight or stunted. Another worrisome trend, and
in many ways a puzzle in Himachal Pradesh, is the dramatic decline of female
children compared to male. This is despite the fact that women’s health and
wellbeing have shown considerable progress in Himachal Pradesh over the
years. The state has, for example, completed its fertility transition and fertil-
ity rates are well below replacement level. In such a context and one where
education, health, sanitation and overall growth are all examples for others
to emulate, the excess mortality of female children comes as a surprise. The
sharp decline in sex ratios adverse to girls, implicates sex selective abortions
and gross neglect of female children in a fertility regime characterized by a
preference for small families and a strong bias towards sons.
    Demographic trends in Himachal Pradesh also mean that the state current-
ly has a youth bulge. As of the 2011 Census, almost 20 percent of Himachal
Pradesh’s population is between the ages of 15–24. Their aspirations for jobs
are still anchored in the public sector, which is unlikely to be the driver of
employment for reasons of economic and fiscal sustainability. It is also well
recognized that while Himachal Pradesh has done well in education, its record
in tertiary education has been less impressive, except in the field of agricul-
tural and veterinary sciences. With the growth of infrastructure, industry and
tourism, a different set of skills will be needed for local youth, if they are to
share in the bounty that growth will confer. Apart from the economic and
social needs of young people, another area—that of women’s employment—
Summary	                                                                       xxiii




needs attention. It cannot be taken for granted that high overall employment
rates among women will be sustained as the private sector becomes a more
important provider of jobs. Moreover, it is not clear whether the needs that
arise from women’s care responsibilities will be addressed, so that their time is
freed up to undertake market work.
    Even as the present youth bulge is of policy concern, a rising median age
in the state suggests that very soon, Himachal Pradesh will have a high share
of the elderly. While persons aged 60 and above constituted just 7.4 percent
of Himachal Pradesh’s population in 1961, it is projected that they will con-
stitute 14.7 percent of the state’s population in 2026. This will have implica-
tions for the labor market and for economic growth, as well as for the care
of the elderly and their caregivers, who are most likely to be women. When
combined with increasing urbanization, larger cohorts of older people may
imply a change in living arrangements. In a society where women do most of
the caregiving, the pressures of elderly parents may well have implications for
women’s access to economic opportunities. On the fiscal side, social pensions
for the elderly could become a major burden, with larger numbers of those
eligible. On the side of epidemiology and the burden of disease, the state will
have to deal with infectious diseases and childhood-related illnesses on the one
side, and on the other, also have to cope with geriatric illness and non-commu-
nicable diseases. This would require a fresh look at existing health facilities,
which are currently doing a good job in tackling the former set of diseases.
    Himachal Pradesh has been a cohesive society so far, but it is important to
realize that power dynamics may change in light of other trends. As reforms
progress and changes take place in other arenas, chances are that caste-based
norms will also change. Any impact this may have on social cohesion as well as
group dynamics can be mediated by public conversations around caste and its
changing role. Finally, political power and social stratification are intrinsically
linked in Himachal Pradesh. Reforms are likely to bring in new players into the
socio-political milieu. These could be previously non-dominant castes, a new
middle class, migrants from other states, private companies and their employ-
ees, non-governmental organizations, to name a few possibilities. It is important
for the state government as well as for opinion leaders and citizens of Himachal
Pradesh to be prepared for such possibilities and their likely implications.
     Finally, change brings with it huge transformations in the expectations,
aspirations and ambitions of citizens, that need to be managed. Expectations
and aspirations are double-edged swords, where on the one hand, people seize
new opportunities and make better lives, but on the other, when expectations
are not matched with reality, it can lead to frustration. Our qualitative work
shows that Himachalis have high aspirations for their state, but they are anx-
xxiv	                                                          SCALING THE HEIGHTS




ious about the effect that rapid development will have on their values and
culture. The biggest fear seems to be that rapid progress may lead to a loss of
tradition and values like honesty. While people trust their politicians, there are
some anxieties and wishes, particularly around large infrastructure projects.
For instance, a source of anxiety is the perceived manner in which land is be-
ing bought and sold; another is the desire for a better-regulated tourism sector,
since citizens seem to believe that unprofessional and untrained tourist guides
“bring Himachal a bad name.”
   A tribal man interviewed by the authors in Nirsu, near Shimla, succinctly
summed up the hopes and fears of citizens during a period of reform: “My
only hope for Himachal is that the culture of trust is kept alive.”
   Much of the churning in Himachal Pradesh that may accompany reforms
can be managed if the kernels of success remain intact or adapt to the state’s
new development context. These include, among others, transparency and ac-
countability at the local level; independence of the bureaucracy; incentives for
innovation; and good implementation. This report closes with a quote from
Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity, which illustrates
that many of the policy issues faced by Himachal Pradesh are shared globally
and notes that Himachal Pradesh is well positioned to build on its previous
successes and continue moving forward:

        From an economic perspective, future policy will need to provide rap-
        id and effective responses to expanding numbers of youth and the
        elderly, while fulfilling the basic needs of an increasingly urbanized
        and unequal population, without leaving a large carbon footprint for
        the generations to come. From a political perspective, it will be es-
        sential to understand the changing attitudes, behaviors and demands
        of the youth and middle class, and to create new opportunities and
        mechanisms for greater participation in decision making. At the same
        time, responsive governance and careful targeting of public services
        to a new profile of (global) citizens will be essential. From a social
        perspective, future policies and institutions will need to promote the
        affiliation of different social groups with the evolving social, political
        and economic reality of increasingly diverse societies.
	                                                                                           1




                                                      1. Introduction
        “Nobody is a crorepati (millionaire) or a beggar... everyone has a
        house.”

        “No one makes anyone suffer. No one suppresses the poor. Everyone
        is happy in their own place.”

        “The culture here is very open and trusting. If you forget your bag in
        a market, in all likelihood you will find it.”

                                          Interviews in rural Kufri and Nirsu, Shimla District


    Infrastructure is likely to be the main driver of growth in India, and the Hi-
    malayan state of Himachal Pradesh is no exception. Simultaneously, the dis-
    contents of infrastructure—both potential and actual—have been salient in
    India’s public discourse for some time now, as they have been elsewhere. Con-
    cerns and questions have been raised about whether infrastructure-led devel-
    opment will exacerbate traditional forms of exclusion; whether it will be en-
    vironmentally sustainable; whether benefits will be shared equitably; whether
    such growth will respect institutions or assist in building new and effective
    ones; and whether citizens will have a voice in decisions about timing, location
    of infrastructure, and other processes. In short, will infrastructure-led growth
    be “inclusive”?
        Contemporary Himachal Pradesh exemplifies the dynamics and the con-
    sciousness of sustaining historical gains in social inclusion during a period of
    anticipated growth. In the early 2000s, the state embarked upon a new phase
    of growth, driven by infrastructure. Policy focused specifically on harnessing
    hydroelectric capacity, developing watersheds, tourism and industry, while si-
2	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




multaneously working to make growth sustainable and inclusive. Realizing
the concerns around its new growth trajectory, the government of Himachal
Pradesh (GoHP) put in place a number of innovations to ensure that citizens
participate in the change process and reap the benefits. Himachal Pradesh is
also ahead of many other Indian states as well as other countries, in creat-
ing public goods of global significance. For instance, it has vowed to become
“carbon neutral” by 2020; it is the first state in India to have banned the use
of plastic bags; and climate and environmental preservation appear to be col-
lective responsibilities of the state and its citizens (The Economic Times 2012;
see appendix A for an illustrative set of policy actions). These are not trivial
developments by any measure. But do we anticipate these pursuits to be “win-
win” solutions? And how would we know? This report tries to answer these
and other related questions, framed in terms of a Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis (PSIA) (see appendix B for methodology). It is simultaneously a look
back at Himachal Pradesh’s track record of outcomes during a period of eco-
nomic reform as well as a projection of the expected effects of the big push for
infrastructure-led growth.
    While grounded in the context of Himachal Pradesh and the priorities of
GoHP, this analysis is also in tandem with the World Bank Group’s (WBG)
twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. It is
widely documented that Himachal Pradesh has reduced poverty successfully,
but its progress in sharing prosperity is also noteworthy. This report identifies
the kernels of shared prosperity and social inclusion in Himachal Pradesh. It
is in line with the WBG FY2013–17 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
India, the overarching goal of which is “to help India accelerate poverty reduc-
tion and increase shared prosperity, so that more and more people, regardless
of gender, caste, or whether they live in villages or cities, or in low–income or
more advanced states, can enjoy the benefits of more balanced growth and
development” (World Bank 2013a). This report draws its conceptual founda-
tions from a global report on social inclusion, Inclusion Matters: The Founda-
tion for Shared Prosperity (World Bank 2013b), which asks questions such as:
Who should be included, and in what? What does the idea of social inclusion
add to the idea of poverty reduction? What can propel change toward social
inclusion? This report is an empirical application of these concepts and ques-
tions in the context of Himachal Pradesh.
    The opening quotations in this report attest to Himachal Pradesh’s rep-
utation as a stable, inclusive, cohesive, and well-governed state that stands
apart from its peers in northern India. Himachal Pradesh has maintained a
good track record for growth and human and social development outcomes,1
especially in the last two decades. When it gained statehood in 1971,2 the
Introduction	                                                                     3




growth rate of its real per capita income was significantly lower than the na-
tional average, and the primary sector accounted for 60 percent of its econo-
my. In the early 1990s, the state underwent major structural change, spurred
by infrastructure investments largely financed by central government funds
allocated to Himachal Pradesh because of its “special category” status.3 These
investments were accompanied by concerted policy efforts through the 1990s
to promote private sector growth, especially in the industry and tourism sec-
tors.4 As a result, the secondary and tertiary sectors grew at 7.2 percent and
8.9 percent annually between 1993–4 and 2005–6, compared to 3.3 percent
growth in agriculture (World Bank 2007). At the same time, agricultural activ-
ities became more focused on niche sectors, such as horticulture and floricul-
ture. Since the early 1990s, the annual growth rate in Himachal Pradesh has
remained consistently above the national rate for India, as well as above those
of neighboring states Punjab and Haryana. From 2005–6 to 2013–14, Him-
achal Pradesh grew at 7.8 percent per year, and its slowdown during 2012–14
(to around 6 percent annually) is similar to national trends (GoHP 2014).
    Himachal Pradesh’s strong economic performance has been accompanied by
notable progress in social and human development outcomes as well. Similar to
post-1990 economic indicators, the development indicators for Himachal Pradesh
surpass those of its neighbors and the rest of India, largely as a result of govern-
ment investments in public service delivery (Sanan 2008; World Bank 2007). De-
spite being a predominantly rural society with only 10 percent of the population
living in urban areas, the literacy rate in Himachal Pradesh is 90 percent among
males and 76 percent among females. Poverty headcount is nearly one-third of
the national average; life expectancy is 3.4 years longer than the national average;
and per capita income is the second highest among “special category” states in
India (GoHP 2014). Accordingly, the 2011 Indian Human Development Report
ranks Himachal Pradesh third among Indian states in human development, after
Kerala and Delhi. Although some group-based disparities exist, particularly along
caste and gender, Himachal Pradesh also has a better female-to-male ratio than
the national average, at 974 females per 1,000 males (compared to the national
average of 940). As discussed later, though, child female-to-male ratios remain
adverse to girls across many parts of Himachal Pradesh.
    As in other contexts, there has been a gradual shift in Himachal Pradesh’s
policy direction, although some elements have remained intact despite change.
While policy reforms during the 1960s and 1970s focused primarily on build-
ing basic infrastructure as a way of overcoming the state’s geographical con-
straints (particularly a road network to achieve greater connectivity), efforts
since the 1980s and 1990s have explicitly targeted private sector involvement,
especially in industry and tourism. This has resulted in a gradual transforma-
4	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




tion of the state from an agrarian economy to a more diversified one. At the
same time, the second round of policy reforms during the 1990s incentivized
agricultural activity in strategic primary commodities, such as horticultural
goods and tropical fruits. In the last decade or so, the state’s development par-
adigm has shifted further toward utilizing its hydropower potential and even
greater private sector participation in the state economy. This change partly
reflected an effort to make better use of the state’s natural assets, and partly
a fiscal necessity to generate more revenue. Yet, the focus on service delivery,
provision of employment by the state, and the tradition of local accountability
remained intact. In a peculiar way, the very actions that led to social inclusion
earlier became fiscally unsustainable, necessitating a new round of reforms, as
described later in this report.
    When Himachal Pradesh found itself on the cusp of a new development
trajectory in the early 2000s, there were concerns about the social and en-
vironmental sustainability of this new path. The new growth agenda of the
GoHP was expected to result in significant economic gains, but it also entailed
some potential costs. On the one hand, the reliance of the economy on public
spending and investments, and the perceived role of the state government as
the employer of first resort, continued to pose a risk for public finances and
intergenerational debt. The new growth model could potentially address some
of these risks through resource mobilization, rapid growth, and increased fis-
cal space. On the other hand, the selected model of development also involved
some potentially adverse impacts. As noted by Sanan (2004), rising pollution
in industrial areas, suspicion of inequalities in access to markets and public
services, and the growth of an educated but underutilized workforce have
led to greater sensitivity regarding productivity losses, environmental degra-
dation, and social disparities. In 2007, the World Bank recommended aug-
menting the state’s capacity to manage its economic resources more efficiently,
while continuing to preserve the fragile Himalayan ecosystem and keeping
citizens at the core of development (World Bank 2007).
    In response to concerns about its development model, GoHP has made
several policy changes to make growth more sustainable. In many ways these
changes build upon the gradual policy shift that had been going on for nearly
two decades, corroborated in successive five-year plans and budget speech-
es since the early 1990s. Four sectors were identified as the main drivers of
growth: energy, rural development, tourism, and industry. The period after
the early 2000s was marked by a series of government initiatives aimed at
increasing productivity and private sector involvement in these four sectors
(see appendix A for details). The World Bank served as a partner in these ef-
forts by both providing financial and technical support that cut across these
Introduction	                                                                  5




key sectors as well as identifying the social and environmental risks posed by
growth and suggesting ways to manage them. GoHP has also complemented
its macro vision with a variety of policies, rules and acts of environmental
sustainability, which suggests a culture immersed in environmental awareness
and preservation, as well as sensitivity to lingering citizen concerns about the
new growth trajectory.
    The sustainability of GoHP’s chosen development path rests critically on
a robust understanding of the potential impacts of the new drivers of growth,
as well as on citizens’ response to the rapid economic change. Underlying
Himachal Pradesh’s economic and social development outcomes, and the evo-
lution of its development model, is its reputation as a cohesive society with
good governance (Sanan 2003). Its institutions have historically been robust
to change; yet literature that can help understand why its outcomes are better
than those of its neighbors, or how the subsequent reform programs contrib-
uted to these outcomes, is lamentably sparse. It is important to understand
why good outcomes have been achieved in some areas, but not in others, and
what role policy played in this process if we are to hold up Himachal Pradesh
as an example of social inclusion. Are its development outcomes merely a co-
incidence driven by history and culture, or are there kernels of actions that can
be replicated elsewhere? Can we predict whether good outcomes will remain
robust to change and to the new phase of infrastructure-driven growth? How
can policy maintain the state’s previous successes as new and different types
of development challenges arise, while also addressing the areas in which the
state has traditionally lagged behind? This report explores answers to these
questions within the context of the evolution of state policies and the changing
demographic profile and development context of Himachal Pradesh.


1.1.	 Key questions, data, and methodology
This report is, first, an attempt to understand the progress that Himachal
Pradesh has made over the last few decades. Second, it is an attempt to simul-
taneously analyze the correlates and drivers of good outcomes in Himachal
Pradesh—the root elements in the state’s social fabric and in its historical and
institutional foundations that have enabled it to remain inclusive and stable.
The main argument is that, given Himachal Pradesh’s trajectory toward social
inclusion, as demonstrated by its social development and human development
outcomes, there is a strong chance that the future will be a reflection of the
past. This has implications for other states and countries that are attempting
6	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




similar reforms. The report focuses on three main questions based on looking
back, understanding why, and prognosticating:

     1.	 Has Himachal Pradesh’s success in reducing poverty and its prog-
         ress in social and human development outcomes been noteworthy
         enough to generate confidence in its track record of delivery?

     2.	 What have been the institutional and policy foundations of Himach-
         al Pradesh’s outcomes? Why has Himachal Pradesh achieved rela-
         tively good outcomes?

     3.	 What are the likely issues for sustainability of social and human
         development and for environmental outcomes as the state ramps up
         its infrastructure-led growth trajectory? Will the previous correlates
         of success remain robust to the rapid churning taking place across
         Himachal Pradesh?

    Evidence on the impacts of the economic transformation that is taking
place across Himachal Pradesh is sparse, anecdotal, or based on micro level
studies. For example, studies on environmental change in the Kullu Valley,
where, since the early 1990s, major infrastructure investments and commer-
cialization of natural resources have occurred,6 document impacts on the
Himalayan ecosystem resulting from large infrastructure projects (Cole and
Sinclair 2002; Sinclair 2003; Sinclair and Diduck 2000) and commercial tour-
ism centers (Batra 2002; Gardner 2002). Other studies show that levels of
environmental activism and community resistance to development projects
have increased over time in Himachal Pradesh (Gaul 2001; Chhatre and Sa-
berwal 2006; Lozecznik 2010; Agrawal and Chhatre 2007; Fischer and Ch-
hatre 2013). A few studies focus on the mixed impacts of some of the reforms
implemented over the years. For instance, commercialization of common pool
resources has been associated with an increased role for women in forest pres-
ervation (Bingeman 2001; Cranney 2001). Similarly, development of the road
network in Kinnaur, Chamba, and Kullu districts has not only reduced trans-
portation costs and contributed to rural incomes, but it has also produced a
range of environmental externalities, such as landslides, deforestation, and
exposure to construction debris (Sarkar 2010).
    Documentation of the institutional drivers of Himachal Pradesh’s success
is also thin, incomplete, or focused on individual sectors. Some studies reflect
on the state’s economy, culture, and political landscape (see, for instance, Ah-
luwalia [1998], Verma [1995], Negi [1993], and Tiwari [2000]). The Himach-
al Pradesh Human Development Report (GoHP 2002) maps the education,
Introduction	                                                                  7




health, and infrastructure indicators of Himachal Pradesh and assesses the
state’s performance in poverty reduction, governance, and livelihood gener-
ation through the late 1990s. The district human development reports for
Shimla, Kangra, and Mandi do the same at the district level for subsequent
periods. Other studies focus on development outcomes in specific sectors and
highlight the rapid improvements that occurred through the 1990s and early
2000s, including in school participation rates in rural areas (Drèze and King-
don 2001) and in health and sanitation outcomes (Sanan 2010). Finally, there
are thematic reports published by different agencies within GoHP that outline
the objectives and outreach of specific development programs as well as mon-
itor the progress made in human development indicators.
    There is, nonetheless, a history of ethnographic and other forms of qual-
itative work that captures the diversity of Himachal Pradesh’s social organi-
zation and helps understand the state’s progress. For instance, Parry’s (1979)
seminal work Caste and Kinship in Kangra remains instructive to this day.
Ethnographic studies on religious practices across Himachal Pradesh (Vidal
1989; Conzelman 2006) and on the link between local deities, village au-
thority, and the state’s governance structure (Berti 2009; Sax 2006) are other
examples in this genre. Still other ethnographic work focuses on the identity,
traditions, and customs of specific groups of Himachalis, such as the Gaddis
(Newell 1961; Bhasin 1990), Pangwalas (Singh and Bhasin 1983), and Gu-
jars (Chatterjee and Das 2013), trader-pastoralists of Kinnaur (Singh 2004).
There are moreover, detailed accounts of women’s status, marriage practices,
and access to property in rural Himachal Pradesh, such as in Sharma (1980),
Sethi (2010), Snehi (2011) and Singh (2011). Recent qualitative work also
documents the role of women and other social groups in rural development,
including the high level of participation by women in local decision making
and natural resource management (Cranney 2001; Bingeman 2001; Girard
2014), and in organizing social movements against commercialization of nat-
ural resources (Gupta and Shah 1999) as well as against commercialization
impacts on tribal groups (Saberwal 1996).
    Building on this diverse body of work, this report adds to the empirical
and policy literature through an interdisciplinary macrosocial analysis of the
state’s progress and its challenges. It represents the first stage of a two-stage
policy research program, where the second stage will assess a select group
of recent reform actions taken by GoHP (see appendix B). This report uses
data from the National Sample Survey (NSS), the National Family Health Sur-
vey (NFHS), and the India Human Development Survey (IHDS) to examine
changes in: land and labor markets; access to education, health, and sanitation
services; and overall poverty reduction. It also uses qualitative data from focus
8	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




group discussions and key informant interviews held in the districts of Shimla
and Solan to elicit citizens’ reactions to the state’s chosen development path.
Finally, the report draws on the authors’ discussions with over 300 persons
from different backgrounds, who had different interests, during 2012–14.
These included government officers, academics, civil society and private sector
representatives, and community members.7
    How do we benchmark Himachal Pradesh’s progress? Himachal Pradesh
is a positive outlier in terms of its social and human development outcomes
compared to other states in northern India. Moreover, when initial results of
the analysis were presented to the state government and discussed with local
communities, there seemed to be a sense of puzzlement as to why Himachal
Pradesh was being compared to other northern Indian states instead of the
more progressive southern Indian states. Clearly, Himachal Pradesh’s goals
and aspirations as a state are high, albeit without too much fanfare in terms of
publicizing its own achievements. Perhaps it is because of the lack of fanfare
that these achievements have not been comprehensively analyzed. The analysis
presented in this report, therefore, compares Himachal Pradesh both with its
northern Indian neighbors as well as with the southern states of Kerala, Tamil
Nadu and Karnataka, with which Himachal Pradesh shares some common
traits and achievements. In some cases, the report compares Himachal Pradesh
to other countries as well.
    The macrosocial analysis presented in this report moves away from the
fatalism contained in explanations of social exclusion that imply that culture,
social norms, and practices are immutable. While this narrative on Himachal
Pradesh is primarily intended as an assessment of the state’s track record re-
garding social inclusion policy and its implementation, this report also aims
to inform other states and countries that have begun their journey toward
greater social inclusion. It demonstrates that change toward social inclusion
is possible, and, furthermore, that the state can be the foremost propeller of
social change. The concluding chapter of this report looks at the road ahead
for Himachal Pradesh, based on its transitions over past decades.
	                                                                                  9




      2. Poverty and Social Inclusion during
               a Period of Economic Growth

    The terms “inclusion” and “social inclusion” have become popular, especially
    so in the last decade, but they are not easy to define or to quantify. They imply
    something other than, or perhaps more than, poverty reduction. Let’s take
    the term “social inclusion,” which can mean many things to many people.
    The report mentioned earlier, Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared
    Prosperity (World Bank 2013b), defines social inclusion as: “the process of
    improving the ability, opportunity, and dignity of people disadvantaged on the
    basis of their identity to take part in society.” This leads to the question: who
    are these people that seek to be included? In Himachal Pradesh, as in most of
    India, these groups have distinct identities—Scheduled Castes (SCs), Sched-
    uled Tribes (STs), and women (World Bank 2011). The proportion of SCs and
    STs in Himachal Pradesh is much higher than the national average. Combined,
    they comprise nearly 30 percent of the state’s population; yet, historically Hi-
    machal Pradesh has had relatively low intergroup disparities or intergroup
    conflict compared to neighboring Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. The focus in Hi-
    machal Pradesh on ensuring the inclusion of historically disadvantaged groups
    has been particularly salient.8
        One of Himachal Pradesh’s achievements toward social inclusion has been
    its success in raising people out of poverty over the two decades leading up to
    2011. Himachal Pradesh is still predominantly rural, and between 1993–4 and
    2011, rural poverty (using the poverty line suggested by the Tendulkar Com-
    mittee) declined from 36.8 percent to 8.5 percent—a fourfold drop, which is
    impressive by any standard (figure 2.1). Yet, while rural poverty continued
    to consistently decline after 2004, urban poverty changed only marginally
 10	                                                                    SCALING THE HEIGHTS




 between 2004 and 2011. The overall poverty decline has benefitted all social
 groups across rural and urban areas, but some noticeable patterns emerge.
 While poverty among SCs and STs in rural areas declined, in terms of levels,
 rural poverty was still highest among SCs at 16.5 percent and among STs at
 9.5 percent (table 2.1). STs residing in urban areas, and, to some extent, SCs,
 who had very low poverty rates to start with, nevertheless saw an increase
 in poverty. The biggest gains in poverty reduction were recorded for Other
 Backward Classes (OBCs) in rural areas, among whom the poverty headcount
 dropped from 19 percent in 2004 to a mere 2.3 percent in 2011. Before spec-
 ulating on the reasons for these patterns, further analysis is necessary to better
 understand the dynamics of urbanization and socioeconomic status of the his-
 torically most excluded groups.



 Figure 2.1. Fourfold Decline in Himachal Pradesh’s Poverty Rate,
 Greatest Gains in Rural Areas

          40
               36.8
          35

          30
                                          25.0
          25
Percent




          20

          15
               13.6                                              12.5
          10
                                                                9.1                      8.5
                                        4.6
          5
                                                                                         4.3
          0
                1993-94                2004-05                2009-10                2011-12

                                           Rural        Urban

 Source: NSS rounds 50, 61, 66, and 68.
 Note: Planning Commission compares 2004–5 and 2011–12, because 2009–10 was a year of severe drought.
 Data refer to poverty headcount, that is, ratio of the poor population to total population.
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 11




Table 2.1. Poverty Decline Benefitted All Social Groups


                                Rural                                    Urban

                          2004–5             2011–12                2004–5              2011–12

         STs                 35.4                   9.5                  2.4                  4.0

         SCs                 39.5                 16.5                   9.2                  9.9

      OBCs                   19.0                   2.3                 10.8                  9.9

     Others                  18.3                   7.0                  2.5                  1.7

          All                25.0                   8.5                  4.6                  4.3

Source: NSS rounds 61 and 68.
Note: Data refer to poverty headcount, that is, the ratio of the poor population to total population.




    Qualitative work in select rural areas shows that citizens are both cogni-
zant and appreciative of the investments in physical and social infrastructure
made by the government. The most visible signs of progress are in the form of
all-weather roads and new schools and colleges. Participants in focus group
discussions spoke about better options to earn a living than they had earlier,
including jobs in hotels and in the services sector, on hydropower projects
and horticulture farms. Women spoke about the availability of banking and
credit sources and how these had contributed to their improved economic
status. Participants interviewed for the qualitative study, moreover, felt that
the implementation of development programs was largely efficient and, for the
most part, fair. In other words, they pointed to a transformation in the state
that seemed to have occurred within a generation, and attributed changes to
government investments and the rise of new economic opportunities.
    In assessing the nature of social inclusion in Himachal Pradesh, it is im-
portant to identify the domains in which inclusion and exclusion take place.
Inclusion Matters (World Bank 2013b) points to three interrelated domains
for inclusion: markets, services, and spaces. These domains are the micro-
cosm of the lives of individuals and groups and they represent both barriers
to and opportunities for social inclusion. This report focuses on two of these
three domains—markets and services. In terms of markets, the focus is on
land and labor markets, two key areas of exclusion for disadvantaged groups
in the Indian context. In services, the focus is on education, sanitation, health
and infrastructure, all of which have witnessed fairly steady improvements
in outcomes. This report does not dwell on the idea of “spaces,” except to
12	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




highlight ways in which women have claimed social and political spaces over
time. It does not, for instance, address the issue of political participation by
excluded groups.


2.1.	 Land market
Throughout history, land has been an important driver of exclusion world-
wide, and India is no different. For instance, the roots of the exclusion of
STs lie, for the most part, in their alienation from their traditional lands and
forests. SCs have historically been over-represented among the landless and
have been bound by a diverse range of oppressive relations with landowners
(see for example, Mandelbaum 1970). Conversely, in addition to economic
benefits, land confers status and standing, as well as political power, especially
in states where the remnants of feudal culture are still intact. There is also a
link between the large inequalities in landholding patterns and poor human
development outcomes (Desai et al. 2010).
    Himachal Pradesh is predominantly agrarian, albeit with small farm siz-
es. The southern part of the state has numerous valleys, while upper reaches
consist of high mountains that receive heavy snowfall and are covered with
forest. In fact, nearly two-thirds of the land in Himachal Pradesh is marked as
“reserved forest” and is unusable for agriculture. The terrain is also dominat-
ed with hills of varying altitudes and with rocky soil. As a result, less than 20
percent of the total area is cultivated, and cultivated areas are almost entirely
rain fed. Given these limitations, Himachal Pradesh has one of the highest
proportions of multiple cropping, as well as one of the highest cropping in-
tensities in India.
    Early policy reforms that reduced inequality in land relations have perhaps
been the foundation for Himachal Pradesh’s good outcomes in subsequent
years. Given the importance of land in what is primarily an agrarian society
with natural constraints on land use, policy makers in Himachal Pradesh im-
plemented reforms early in the development process. This also perhaps pre-
empted the rise of social disparities. Land reforms were first introduced in
the 1950s and deepened in the early 1970s, constituting possibly Himachal
Pradesh’s greatest push toward social inclusion (box 2.1). In addition to the
reforms, state land revenue rules framed in 1975 continue to forbid the sale
or lease of land to nonresidents, unless they use land for farming purposes in
compliance with the strict criteria outlined by the state’s agriculture and horti-
culture departments. Selling or leasing land for residential purposes is strictly
prohibited, with exemptions only for those individuals who have worked in
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 13




  Box 2.1. Land Reforms in Himachal Pradesh: Result of Decisive
  Legislation and Its Implementation
  Starting in the 1950s, a series of laws were enacted that led to
  wide-ranging changes in land ownership patterns. The Abolition of Big
  Land Estates and Land Reforms Act in 1953 gave proprietary rights to
  almost 57,000 tenants from 281 large estates (GoHP, undated b). The
  act confiscated land from those who owned above a certain threshold.
  The land from these large holders and local rulers was transferred to
  tenants by paying the former a compensation totaling 24 times the land
  revenue paid on the land (Agarwal 2010). The next big change came in
  1966, when some areas of the former Punjab were merged with Him-
  achal Pradesh. Due to disparities in land laws between the two regions,
  Himachal Pradesh passed the Transferred Territory Tenants (Protection
  of Rights) Act in 1968, which protected the interests of tenants in the
  merged areas and prevented them from being evicted. In 1972, two
  national laws were passed: the Tenancy and Land Reforms Act and
  the Ceiling on Land Holdings Act. The first called for abolition of in-
  termediaries and banned the transfer of land to non-agriculturalists. It
  mandated that those who had been cultivating land for the last 12 years
  would get proprietary rights to the lands they tilled, if they paid a nom-
  inal price for these rights. All other tenancies were declared “unresum-
  able,” meaning that the ejection of tenants was completely banned. The
  maximum rent a tenant was required to pay the landowner was fixed
  at one-fourth of the annual produce of the land—cash or kind (Agar-
  wal 2010). The Ceiling on Land Holdings Act fixed ceilings on vari-
  ous lands and defined tenants who could not be evicted. Ceiling limits,
  which conformed to national guidelines, varied from region to region
  based on soil conditions, land productivity, nature of crops sown, irri-
  gation facilities, and others (Bhatnagar 1981). The implementation of
  the Ceiling Act has been controversial, both in Himachal Pradesh and
  in many other states. Anecdotal evidence suggests that landowners were
  able to evade ceiling laws before they were implemented by dividing the
  land among the family members within the household.

  Source: Bhatnagar 1981; Agarwal 2010; GoHP (undated b).
14	                                                      SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Himachal Pradesh for more than 30 years or other eminent persons, as recom-
mended by the local body or committees set up specifically for this purpose.
These rules were mainly intended as a safeguard for the residents of Himachal
Pradesh and to ensure that “outsiders” do not engage in environmentally un-
sustainable living or businesses. But anecdotal evidence points to some con-
cerns regarding the ban on land sales to outsiders, especially as the price of
land continues to rise in Himachal Pradesh. Residents are also apprehensive
that this law may lead to increasing “benami” transactions (fictitious transac-
tions undertaken in the name of a third party, where the real buyer or seller’s
name may not appear at all).
    Land reforms in Himachal Pradesh have ensured that a majority of the
state’s population (nearly 80 percent) possesses some land. Perhaps because
of this, the distribution of land across social groups is more equal in Him-
achal Pradesh compared to its neighboring states and the rest of India. This
is clear from the kernel density curves shown in figure 2.2.9 First, the curves
for Himachal Pradesh are the closest to a bell shape, with a considerably large
number of households holding average plot sizes and only a small group hold-
ing extremely large or extremely small plots. In comparison, the curves for
neighboring states such as Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, as well as the curves for
all of India, have two humps, suggesting large inequalities between those who
hold small parcels (between 0.002 and 1 hectare; negative values on the log
scale) and those who hold larger plots (1 hectare and above; positive values on
the log scale). Second, the position and the ranges of the curves for Himachal
Pradesh on the horizontal axis (particularly, the clustering around the log val-
ue of zero) indicate that the average landholding size in Himachal Pradesh is
quite small (0.43 hectares).10 This plot size is smaller than neighboring north-
ern states and also the national average, which stands at 0.67 hectares. Third,
land ownership patterns are very similar across different social groups in Him-
achal Pradesh, as shown by the nearly overlapping curves for all social groups.
This is not the case in any other state, where SCs tend to hold marginal plots.
    A unique aspect of land distribution in Himachal Pradesh is that, unlike
other states, STs in Himachal Pradesh own large chunks of land. In fact, they
represent the second largest group among households holding parcels great-
er than 1 hectare. This is indicative of the nature of the tribes that reside in
Himachal Pradesh and the fact that they are not among the poorest, as is the
case in many Schedule V areas.11 Over 12 percent of STs and 15 percent of
the general category (others) in Himachal Pradesh have holdings larger than
1 hectare; the corresponding share is only 3–4 percent for SCs and OBCs. But
Himachal Pradesh also stands out in land ownership by SCs and OBCs. Even
in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, which otherwise have similar land distribution
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 15




patterns (albeit with even smaller average plot sizes), the SCs and OBCs have
considerably smaller landholdings than STs and the general category. The dis-
tribution of landholdings among STs in Himachal Pradesh, however, has grad-
ually worsened since 1983, with STs becoming more concentrated in the small
landholding category, despite the fact that they had higher mean landholdings
in 1983 compared to all other groups (figure 2.3). On the other hand, while
SCs still possess the smallest land parcels on average, the differential in the
size of average landholding of SCs and other groups has converged over time.
    Yet, the nature of the land reforms, the extent to which they benefitted
historically excluded groups, and the quality of land that was redistributed
are still debated in the literature (Bhatnagar 1981; Agrawal 2010). During the
authors’ qualitative fieldwork for this report, some respondents in a predom-
inantly SC focus group complained about inequalities in the quality of land
allotted to traditionally disadvantaged groups. In the words of one of them,
“Dalits [SCs] have very few economic avenues. They were given land under
land reforms but the quality of land they received was very poor, generally
uncultivable.”
16	                                                                             SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Figure 2.2. Land Distribution across Social Groups More Equal in
Himachal Pradesh Compared to Other States and All India, 2011–12

                     Himachal Pradesh                                           Bihar
          .6




                                                           .6
          .4




                                                           .4
          .2




                                                           .2
          0




                                                           0
               −10       −5          0           5              −10        −5           0         5



                         Haryana                                          Karnataka
          .6




                                                           .6
Density


          .4




                                                           .4
          .2




                                                           .2
          0




                                                           0




               −10       −5          0           5              −10        −5           0         5




                           Kerala                                     Madhya Pradesh
          .6




                                                           .6
          .4




                                                           .4
          .2




                                                           .2
          0




                                                           0




               −10       −5          0           5              −10        −5           0         5

                                         Log of land possessed


                              STs          SCs           OBCs          Others



Source: NSS round 68.
Note: The graph presents values of land possessed in hectares, which were trimmed by 0.2% at upper end.
The density scale for Punjab is different than the density scale for other states because Punjab has very few
observations for STs.
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 17




                 Punjab                        Rajasthan
    .4




                                   .6
    .3




                                   .4
    .2




                                   .2
    .1
    0




                                   0
         −10    −5     0     5          −10     −5      0     5



               Tamil Nadu                     Uttar Pradesh
    .6




                                   .6
                                   .4
    .4




                                   .2
    .2




                                   0
    0




         −10    −5     0     5          −10     −5      0     5



               Uttarakhand                      All India
    .6




                                   .6
    .4




                                   .4
    .2




                                   .2
    0




                                   0




         −10    −5     0     5          −10     −5      0     5
18	                                                                         SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Figure 2.3. Average Land Owned by Social Groups in Himachal
Pradesh Converged during 1983–2012


                      Himachal Pradesh                                    Bihar
           4




                                                       4
           3




                                                       3
           2




                                                       2
           1




                                                       1
           0




                                                       0
               1983      1994       2004 2011              1983        1994        2004 2011


                          Haryana                                      Karnataka
                                                       4
           4




                                                       3
           3
Hectares




                                                       2
           2




                                                       1
           1




                                                       0
           0




               1983      1994       2004 2011              1983        1994        2004 2011


                           Kerala                                 Madhya Pradesh
           4




                                                       4
           3




                                                       3
           2




                                                       2
           1




                                                       1
           0




                                                       0




               1983      1994       2004 2011              1983        1994        2004 2011


                            STs          SCs          OBCs          Others



Source: NSS rounds 38, 50, 61, 66, and 68.
Note: The graph presents values of land in hectares, which were trimmed by 0.2% at upper end. In NSS, data
for OBCs were not available before 2004.
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 19




                 Punjab                           Rajasthan
    4




                                      4
    3




                                      3
    2




                                      2
    1




                                      1
    0




        1983    1994      2004 2011   0   1983     1994    2004 2011


               Tamil Nadu                        Uttar Pradesh
    4




                                      4
    3




                                      3
    2




                                      2
    1




                                      1
    0




                                      0




        1983    1994      2004 2011       1983     1994    2004 2011


               Uttarakhand                         All India
    4




                                      4
    3




                                      3
    2




                                      2
    1




                                      1
    0




                                      0




        1983    1994      2004 2011       1983     1994    2004 2011
20	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




2.2.	 Labor market
Employment rates have been high in Himachal Pradesh ever since it attained
statehood. From 1983 up until 2011, the labor force participation rate (LFPR)
for men hovered around 87 percent in rural areas and 73 percent in urban
areas. In rural Himachal Pradesh, the male LFPR in 2011 was similar to that
in neighboring states, but slightly below the national average, while in ur-
ban Himachal Pradesh, it was higher than both other northern states and
the national average (figure 2.4, top panel). Yet, the bigger success story is in
women’s employment. In 2011–12, about 63 percent of rural women in Him-
achal Pradesh reported themselves as being employed (figure 2.4, bottom pan-
el). This places Himachal Pradesh second in female labor force participation
(FLFP) in the country, after Sikkim, and significantly above the all-India av-
erage of 27 percent, and the average for northern Indian states of 25 percent.
In urban areas, the FLFP rate in Himachal Pradesh was much lower, at 28.3
percent in 2011, in keeping with the “classic” Indian pattern, but nonetheless,
was still double that of neighboring states and above the rates seen in many
other states. In fact, urban women’s employment in Himachal Pradesh was at
exactly the same level as those in urban areas of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, and
higher than Karnataka. Much of this is driven by the fact that women in rural
areas in Himachal Pradesh are more than twice as likely as their male coun-
terparts to report themselves as being self-employed in agriculture (figure 2.5).
But urban women are also more likely than their counterparts in neighboring
states to have regular salaried jobs.
    Himachal Pradesh’s high rates of labor force participation are driven by
two major factors. First, a large public sector gave jobs to citizens as part of
an implicit social contract (Parry 1979; Verma 1995), and this is borne out in
the data. Figure 2.5 shows that Himachal Pradesh has a higher proportion of
workers in regular jobs compared to neighboring states and to the country
as a whole. Almost half of urban men and one-fifth of urban women in Hi-
machal Pradesh had regular salaried jobs in 2011. Figure 2.6 further shows
that among those who were employed in 2011, almost one-third held public
sector jobs. Our estimations, based on NSS data, suggest this to be a consistent
trend since 1983. In contrast, only 10 percent of all employed Indians work
in the public sector. The high wage bill that Himachal Pradesh consequently
incurs is reflected in the state’s budget numbers. Expenditure on salaries and
wages alone accounted for slightly over 23 percent of GoHP’s budget for the
financial year 2011–12. When pension payments were added, the total wage
bill came to about 32 percent of the budget (CAG 2012a).
          Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 21




          Figure 2.4. Female Labor Force Participation in Himachal Pradesh
          Higher Than Other States and National Average, 2011–12


      100                                                                      Male
          95
          90
          85                                            84                      84                                         85 84
                        82                                           82 81                          83 82                                                                      83
Percent




                                                             81                                                                            80 80                                    81
          80                        79                                                                       78                                                      79
                78                            78 77                                      78
          75                                                                                                       76                                         74
          70
                                         68
          65
          60
                 Himachal Pradesh


                                    Bihar


                                              Haryana


                                                         Karnataka


                                                                      Kerala


                                                                                  Madhya Pradesh


                                                                                                    Punjab


                                                                                                               Rajasthan


                                                                                                                             Tamil Nadu


                                                                                                                                             Uttar Pradesh


                                                                                                                                                                Uttarakhand


                                                                                                                                                                                All India
          70                                                                   Female
                63
          60

          50
                                                                                                                            43
          40                                            39
Percent




                                                                                                             36
                                                                                                                                                              34
          30            28                                           30 29      29                                                28                                           27
                                                             24
          20                                                                                                                                                                         19
                                                  13                                    15              14         14                       14                       14
          10                                                                                                                                        11
                                              9                                                     7
                                    6 6
           0
                Himachal Pradesh


                                    Bihar


                                              Haryana


                                                        Karnataka


                                                                     Kerala


                                                                                Madhya Pradesh


                                                                                                   Punjab


                                                                                                             Rajasthan


                                                                                                                           Tamil Nadu


                                                                                                                                          Uttar Pradesh


                                                                                                                                                             Uttarakhand


                                                                                                                                                                              All India




                                                                     Rural                         Urban


          Source: NSS round 68.
22	                                                                                                                                                   SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Figure 2.5. Higher Proportion of Himachal Pradesh Workers in
Regular Salaried Jobs, More Rural Women Self-Employed Farmers


                                        Himachal Pradesh                                                                                                       Bihar
                                                                                                                                                                                                95 96
          0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       0 20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                  75


                                       50                       53
                                                                                             38                                                       35                                            36
                                                                                                                                                                             34
                                                               25                           23 20                                                              26                              23
                              19        18            19                  20
                                             12                                                                                     15       13                                       11
                                                                                   9
                                   5              1        4         22        3        1                                  31            2                 1        130           3
                                                                                                                                                  1                                        1


                              REG                              FSE                          NLF                            REG                                 FSE                             NLF
                                            NFSE                          CAS                                                                NFSE                            CAS

                                                       Haryana                                                                                    Karnataka
                                                                                             91 87
          0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                                                                                                                     77

                                                                                                                                                                                                61
Percent




                                       35                                                                                           34                         32
                                                      27       29                                                                                     28                     29
                                                                                            24 26                                                                                                   21
                                                                          20                                                                                                  16               17
                              14                                                                                                                                15
                                        10 14                                      8                                       12        13 10
                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                   1              1        2        431        3        1                                       4                 4                  40                    4


                              REG                              FSE                          NLF                            REG                                 FSE                             NLF
                                            NFSE                          CAS                                                                NFSE                            CAS

                                                           Kerala                                                                        Madhya Pradesh
          0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                                                                                                                     86
                                                                                             77 77
                                                                                                                                                                                                71



                                                                          39                                                                                   41
                                                                                                                                    28                31                     29
                                       26             24                           26                                                                                                               24
                                             18                                             22 22
                              14        13                                                                                                                      15              13             16
                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                   7              4        6 722               9
                                                                                        4                                  5             6 9               6         5
                                                                 1                                                              1                 2                      1                 2


                              REG                              FSE                          NLF                            REG                                 FSE                             NLF
                                            NFSE                          CAS                                                                NFSE                            CAS


                              Rural Male                            Rural Female Urban Male Urban Female



Source: NSS round 68.
Note: Year 2011–12. REG = regular wage labor; NFSE = nonfarm self-employed; FSE = farm self-employed;
CAS = casual labor; NLF = not in labor force.
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 23




                                                       Punjab                                                                                    Rajasthan
                                                                                            93
   0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                      0 20 40 60 80 100
                                                                                                 87                                                                                                 86

                                                                                                                                                                                               64


                                38
                                                  32                                                                               31                         34
                                                                         28                                                                          28         26                                 27
                                                           21                              19 21                                                                            23                23
                       17                15
                                 10                                                                                                         12                                       12
                                                                                  7                                       8             6                 5                      7
                            2                 2        2        130           2        1                                       1                 2                     21                 2


                       REG                                 FSE                             NLF                            REG                                 FSE                             NLF
                                         NFSE                            CAS                                                                NFSE                            CAS

                                         Uttar Pradesh                                                                                           Tamil Nadu
   0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                      0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                            86 90
                                                                                                                                                                                                    74
                                                                                                                                                                                               59
                                                                                                                                                                            44
                                                  35       33                                                                      37
                                24                                       27
                                                                                           21 24                                                     22                      2320             17 18
                                         13                                       14                                      15        12 11                     13
                       6                               6        8                                                              5                 6        8        7                      5
                            1        3        2                     40        3        1                                                                               31


                       REG                                 FSE                             NLF                            REG                                 FSE                             NLF
                                         NFSE                            CAS                                                                NFSE                            CAS

                                          Uttarakhand                                                                                                 All India
   0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                      0 20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                 90
                                                                                                                                                                                                    82
                                                                                                                                                                                               74
                                                                                            68



                                                  36                                                                               35
                                32                           28                            28                                                        29       29            30
                                         19                22                                   23                                                                                            19 22
                       13                                                16
                                     5                                            7                                       9             9 13              6
                                                                                                                                                               11            1011
                            2                 1        4            30        1        0                                       2                 3                     31                 3


                       REG                                 FSE                             NLF                            REG                                 FSE                             NLF
                                         NFSE                            CAS                                                                NFSE                            CAS
 24	                                                                                                                      SCALING THE HEIGHTS




 Figure 2.6. Share of Public Sector Jobs in Himachal Pradesh Higher
 Than Other States and National Average


          40

          35                                                        35

          30
                                                                                                                         28
               26
          25

          20                                              20
Percent




                                                                                           19
                                     16                                                                         16                                17                 17
          15                              14                                                    15 14                              14
                                                               12            12                                               12             12                           12
          10            10
                             11 11             11 10 10                               11                11 10                           10             11 12 11 10
                    8                                                    8        8
                                                                                                                     7
           5

           0
                               2004–05                                                2009–10                                                2011–12

                Himachal                        Bihar                Haryana                      Karnataka              Kerala                          Madhya
                Pradesh                                                                                                                                  Pradesh
                Punjab                          Rajasthan            Tamil                        Uttar                  Uttarakhand                     All India
                                                                     Nadu                         Pradesh


 Source: NSS rounds 61, 66, and 68.
 Note: Figure shows public employment as a percentage of total employment. Compared to other northern India
 states and the three southern comparators, Himachal Pradesh has much higher levels of employment in the
 public sector, but compared to other “special category states,” it is much lower.


     The second reason that employment rates in Himachal Pradesh are so much
 higher than in other states is that agriculture is still the mainstay of Himach-
 al Pradesh’s largely rural economy, and predominantly agricultural economies
 tend to have higher labor force participation rates. Further, the growing agri-
 business sector in Himachal Pradesh has had positive job outcomes. Himachal
 Pradesh has been known for its apples and other fruits, but it recently also
 ranks as one of the major flower producing states. Ancillary products, such as
 mushrooms, ginger, honey and hops, too have become popular, helping local
 village economies. A large number of farmers in Himachal Pradesh have started
 growing off-season vegetables, such as tomatoes and mushrooms, for markets
 in neighboring states (GoHP undated c). In addition, farmers in many parts of
 the state have taken to floriculture and dairy farming. This growth in agribusi-
 ness has been part of GoHP’s strategy. The state has invested in agricultural
 research and training, expanded extension services, and created a network of
 support institutions, such as the Himachal Pradesh Horticultural Produce Mar-
 keting and Processing Corporation (HPMC), and research and development
 (R&D) institutions, such as the University of Horticulture and Forestry. GoHP
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 25




also insulates farmers from market fluctuations by smoothing potential shocks
through a number of policies (Sharma 2011). As a result of a growing demand
and state intervention, jobs in horticulture as a percent of all agricultural jobs
increased from 0.9 percent in 1983 to 28 percent in 2009–10 (Kumar, Kumar,
Singh and Shivjee 2011). Sharma (2011) also points out that the shift toward
growing fruit and vegetable crops in Himachal Pradesh has had a positive im-
pact on household income for all categories of landowners, including on “sub-
marginal” farmers (those who own up to half a hectare of land).
    Fieldwork by the authors in Solan district revealed that fruit and flower
cultivation has positively transformed communities. Successful entrepreneur-
ial initiatives involving cultivation of vegetables, fruits, and flowers are com-
mon. For example, among the respondents interviewed were three brothers.
A few decades ago, on a small plot of land, the three brothers jointly began a
business growing and selling flowers. Over the years, their business grew into
a profitable venture. They co-opted members of their extended family and
now have their own distribution chain with vehicles to transport flowers to
florists in Delhi and other big cities. The local horticulture university played
an important role in their success by providing technical assistance and inputs
such as seeds and fertilizer.
    As in many other states, the construction sector has been another key agent
for growth and jobs in Himachal Pradesh. It employed large numbers of work-
ers between 1983 and 2004, despite slowdowns in 2004 and again after 2009
(figure 2.7). At almost 16 percent, Himachal Pradesh has one of the highest
shares of workers in the construction industry. However, the sector has been
quite volatile in recent years, and this poses a concern for the stability of these
jobs. On the other hand, it is unclear the extent to which the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), which guaran-
tees 100 days of unskilled manual wage work to every rural household in In-
dia, influences household labor force participation. Himachal Pradesh has the
fifth highest participation rate in the scheme (that is, share of rural households
who worked as part of the scheme) across all states of India. It also has the
third lowest rationing rate (that is, the share of rural households that wanted
to work but did not get it [Dutta, Murgai, Ravallion and de Walle 2012]).12
    Notwithstanding changes in the occupational structure, Himachal Pradesh
has more inclusive employment outcomes across social groups compared to
other states. For instance, intergroup disparities in occupational distribution
are much lower in Himachal Pradesh compared to other northern Indian
states (figure 2.8). In particular, half or more of the population in each social
group holds agricultural jobs; mostly a reflection of the fact that many people
in Himachal Pradesh own and work on land. While the SCs have a higher
           26	                                                              SCALING THE HEIGHTS




           proportion of persons engaged in manual jobs, the differences between them
           and other social groups are much less pronounced compared to neighboring
           states. Further, more SCs in Himachal Pradesh seem to have withdrawn from
           casual labor during 2004–11, and instead moved into regular jobs or worked
           on farms. However, SCs still lag behind in the type of regular jobs they are able
           to find; far fewer SCs are employed in professional jobs compared to workers
           from the general category. Yet, the fact that a significant proportion of SCs
           work on farms, is in stark contrast even to some of the southern states, such
           as Tamil Nadu and Kerala, where very few SCs are engaged in agriculture. In
           most states, the majority of SCs do manual jobs.




           Figure 2.7. Construction Sector Jobs Increased during 2004–07
           and Flattened after 2009

          22
          20
          18
          16
          14
          12
Percent




          10
           8
           6
           4
           2
           0
                   1983              1994              2004      2007           2009         2011


                   Himachal Pradesh             Bihar             Haryana              Karnataka
                   Kerala                       Madhya Pradesh    Punjab               Rajasthan
                   Tamil Nadu                   Uttar Pradesh     Uttarakhand          All India

           Source: NSS rounds 38, 50, 61, 64, 66, and 68.
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 27




Figure 2.8. Himachal Pradesh’s Employment Outcomes More
Inclusive Compared to Neighboring States, 2011–12


                          Himachal Pradesh                                                                             Bihar
                                                                                                                       7274
          80




                                                                                         80
                 60
                       5354                                                                                                 53
          60




                                                                                         60
                     49
                                                                                                        43
                                             3634
          40




                                                                                         40
                                                                                                    30
                                            26                                                                                24
                                                   21                                            21                                             23
                                                                  17                               16
          20




                                                                                         20
                                                        11
                                                             85           66                                                            89           6        99
                                 1222                                  34                                                          1                      2
                                                                                                             0001
          0




                                                                                         0
                     agri clerical manual prof                         sales                      agri clerical manual prof                           sales

                                        Kerala                                                          Madhya Pradesh
                                              79
                                            77
          80




                                                                                         80


                                                                                                                        64
                                                 55
          60




                                                                                         60
Percent




                                                                                                                       49
                                                                                                 46 43
                                                                                                                            39
                                                   36                                                   34
                                                                                                                                                32
          40




                                                                                         40




                                                                  30
                                                                                                  21                          19
                            16                          18 19
                                                                               1413
          20




                                                                                         20




                          10                                                                                                                11                 11
                                                             8             7                                                            7                 76
                      4                5                               4                                           4               3
                 1               022                                                                         111                                     2
          0




                                                                                         0




                     agri clerical manual prof                         sales                      agri clerical manual prof                           sales

                                  Tamil Nadu                                                                 Uttar Pradesh
                                             80
          80




                                                                                         80




                                                                                                                        66
                                                 58
                                            54
          60




                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                       50
                                                                  46
                 40                                                                                 43                      42
                                                                                                        33
          40




                                                                                         40




                                                   30                                                                         28
                                                                                                   24                                           22
                                                                 17                              19
                                                                                                                                   15                15        13
                          13                                                       12
          20




                                                                                         20




                                       10                    8                 9                                                            7
                      6                                                    5                                     3                      4                 57
                               1 323                    2              0                                     111
          0




                                                                                         0




                     agri clerical manual prof                         sales                      agri clerical manual prof                           sales



                STs                         SCs                       OBCs              Others                                   (continued next page)




Source: NSS round 68.
Note: Occupations are aggregated at one-digit NCO-2004 codes into five broad categories: agri = agricultural
(6), clerical (4), manual (7, 8, 9), prof = professional, managerial (1, 2), and sales (5) (numbers in parentheses
are NCO-2004 codes).
       28	                                                                                                    SCALING THE HEIGHTS




     Figure 2.8. Himachal Pradesh’s Employment Outcomes More
     Inclusive Compared to Neighboring States, 2011–12 (continued)


                                 Haryana
                             Himachal Pradesh                                                               Bihar
                                                                                                          Karnataka
                                               77                                                                 7274
               80




                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                    70
                                              64
                    60
                          5354                                                                                         53
               60




                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                         60
                        49
                                                   46                                                             45
                                                                                                   43
                              38                                                             39                        37
                                               3634                                              32                                     33
               40




                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                  29                             30                      30
                             26               26     25                                            24                    24        25
                                                     21                                      21                                      23
                    18                                        20
                                                                17                             16
                                                                   13                          14                             11
               20




                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                         20
9                        8                                1110                                                                   10 9             9
                                                                                                                                                 98
                                                             85        66                                                         8          644
                                                          4         34                                       5                               4
                                     222
                                    11                                                                  02
                                                                                                        1 03
                                                                                                           01                  1               2
               0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                         0
s                       agri clerical manual prof                      sales                  agri clerical manual prof                       sales

                                         Kerala
                                         Punjab                                                      Rajasthan
                                                                                                   Madhya Pradesh
                                                79
                                                75
                                              77
               80




                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                              67
                                                                                                                   64
                                                   57
                                                   55                                                              57
               60




                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                         60
     Percent




                                                                                                50                49
                                                                                                                  48
                                                                                             46 43
                                                                                             45
                                                                                                                       39
                                                     36                                          34
                                                     32                                                                33               32
               40




                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                         40
                              30                                 30                           30 31
                                                                 24                                                      23             25
                                                          20   21                             21                         19
                            16                            18 19                                                                                     16
                                                            12          14
                                                                    13 13 13
               20




                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                         20
11                                                                                                                               11               11
                          10                                 8         7 10                                                     78            78
                         47           335                            4                                        4               5
                                                                                                                              3              24
                                                                                                                                                6
                    1
                    0               022                                                                 111
                                                                                                        0
               0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                         0
s                       agri clerical manual prof                      sales                  agri clerical manual prof                       sales

                                     Tamil Nadu
                                     Uttarakhand                                                           AllPradesh
                                                                                                        Uttar India
                                                80
               80




                                                                                     80




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                   68
                                                                                                                   66
                                                  58
                                              54
               60




                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                         60
                    49                          49                                                                50
                                                                  46                         44 43                45 47
                    40    40                                                                                         42
                      3837                                36
                                                   35                                              33                  35
               40




                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                     30           31                             30                    28
                                                                 21                            24 26                                    25
                                                                                                                                        22
                                                     18          17                          1917
13                                            13                                                                              15             15     13
                             13                                                12                                                13
               20




                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                         20


                                         10                   10             9                                                                      11
                         6                                     8
                                                                         5   68                             4                 68
                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                                             45
                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                7
                                    31 33                 2            2                                   13
                                  1 0 21                               02                                12
                                                                                                        12
               0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                         0




s                       agri clerical manual prof                      sales                  agri clerical manual prof                       sales



                    STs                       SCs                     OBCs          Others
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 29




2.3.	Education
That Himachal Pradesh has outperformed other Indian states in education
is well known in the policy literature. Drèze and Sen (2011) point out that
Himachal Pradesh started its journey much later than Kerala or Tamil Nadu,
but has rapidly caught up, pointing to a “revolution” in education, which
they ascribe to GoHP’s strong policy support. Data from the NSS (2011–12)
suggest that among northern states, Himachal Pradesh has the lowest share
of individuals with no education, a trend that holds across all social groups
in rural areas. Himachal Pradesh made substantial progress in improving its
primary and secondary schooling outcomes in the decade between 1993–4
and 2004–5, and thereafter in post-secondary educational attainment, which
doubled for all social groups. While less than one-third of Himachal Pradesh’s
rural population had no education in 2011, in most other neighboring states,
that number was nearly two-fifths or half of the population. Furthermore,
the overall proportion of residents with post-secondary education was the
highest in Himachal Pradesh in 2011 across northern states (except urban
Haryana)—nearly 15–17 percent of the rural population and 31 percent of the
urban population had received post-secondary education.
   The progress made by Himachal Pradesh in educational attainment among
historically excluded groups is particularly notable. More members of the SCs
and STs had completed secondary or higher levels of schooling, both in urban
and rural areas, compared to other states, including southern states such as
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu (figures 2.9 and 2.10). The only state that did
marginally better regarding educational attainment of these excluded groups
(particularly the SCs) was Kerala. There was huge progress in urban areas,
where the share of residents with post-primary education increased across
social groups, especially among STs (figure 2.10). For STs in rural areas as
well, the share of those with secondary education increased from 6 percent
in 1993–4 to 22 percent in 2011–12. In sum, not only did the past two de-
cades bring an increase in educational attainment, but the increase was higher
among traditionally excluded groups.
   Himachal Pradesh’s success in increasing female education is also note-
worthy, but there are remaining disparities between men and women in rural
areas. Nearly 17 percent of urban and 30 percent of rural women in Himach-
al Pradesh had received no education in 2011. While these figures are better
than those of other states, there are large gender inequalities when comparing
men’s and women’s educational opportunities in rural areas. The proportion
of uneducated rural women in Himachal Pradesh is twice as large as the pro-
portion of uneducated rural men. But these gender differentials disappear at
          30	                                                                                                         SCALING THE HEIGHTS




          Figure 2.9. Himachal Pradesh’s Educational Outcomes for
          Excluded Groups Better than in Other States, 2011–12

                                                                                Urban

                              Himachal Pradesh                                        Bihar                                     Haryana
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                    20 40 60 80 100
                                     13     12                             10                                           6       12
                                                                                  13      16                                           20
                                                                                               32                       20
                                                  41                       25                                                                 42
                                                                                  21                                            24
                             60             33                                            26
                                     40                                                                                 12             26
                                                                                  8
                                                                           18             12   27                       18      16
                                            16    26                              20                                                   12     25
                                     15                                    19                                                   16
                                                                                          23   11                                      18
                                            15    9                                                                                           10
                             29      18                                                        14
                                                                                  38                                    43                    11
                                                  12                                                                            32
                             1              24                             27             24                                           24
                             11      14           12                                           16                                             13
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                    0
                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                        STs     SCs OBCs Others

                                   Karnataka                                      Kerala                                     Madhya Pradesh
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                    20 40 60 80 100
                             13                                                                                         16      11     17
                                     20                                    24     20      20
                                            28
                                                  37                                           37                                             42
                             22                                                                                                 22
                                                                                                                        21             23
                                     30
                             10             29                                    41      41                                    16
                                                                                                                        14
                                                  28                       51                                                          18
                             16                                                                35                                             21
                                     12
                                            11                                                                          17      20
                                     15           8                               13      13                                           20     12
                                            14                             1                   11
                             38                   13                       10     11      13                                                  13
                                                                                               10                       32      31
                                                                                                                                       23
Percent




                                     23     19    14                       14     15      13                                                  13
                                                                                                8
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                    0




                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                        STs     SCs OBCs Others

                                     Punjab                                     Rajasthan                                      Tamil Nadu
                                                                                                    20 40 60 80 100
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                             8       13                                           9
                                            20                             22             16                            19      20     25
                                                  33                                           34
                                     20                                           22                                                          45
                             39                                            16             23
                                            29                                                                          29      28
                                     14                                           12                                                   28
                                                                           9              11
                                                  29                                           26
                             18      18     15                             13     22                                    14      16
                                                                                          20                                           15     28
                                                  11                                           10
                                            14                                                                          15      13
                             24                                                                14                                      14     9
                                     34           12                       40     35      30                                                  9
                                            22                                                                          23      23     18
                             11                   14                                           15                                             9
                                                                                                    0
          0




                                                        0




                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                        STs     SCs OBCs Others

                                  Uttar Pradesh                                 Uttarakhand                                     All India
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                    20 40 60 80 100




                                     10     13                                    11      14                                    15
                                                                                                                        20             21
                             36                   36                       31                  37                                             33
                                     24     20                                            21
                                                                                  31                                            27
                                                                                                                        27             27
                             12      12     12                             17
                                                  20                                      19                                                  28
                                                                                               23                               14
                                     16     17                                    21                                    14             13
                             18                                            26
                                                  10                                      18                                    16
                                                                                               10                       15                    11
                                                                                                                                       16
                             13                   15                              19
                                                                                               15                                             13
                                     38     37                             19             28                            25      28     23
                             21                   19                              18           15                                             15
                                                                           8
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                    0




                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                        STs     SCs OBCs Others



                                          No education Below primary                                                  Primary
                                                       Secondary                         Post-secondary


          Source: NSS round 68
          Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 31




                                                                                  Rural

                              Himachal Pradesh                                        Bihar                                        Haryana
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       20 40 60 80 100
                                                                            2     3           4                                     7
                             11      12     16                             13     10              17                       17             11     18
                                                  19                                      17
                                                                           8      12                                               20
                             22      26                                                                                                   23
                                                                                          12      27                       24                    27
                                            34    30                       30     24                                               19
                             18                                                           24                               6              15
                                     17                                                           11                                             13
                                            18    16                                                                       18      20     16
                             24      15                                                           21                                             16
                                            15    14                              51
                                                                           48             43
                                     29                                                                                    35      33     35
                             25                   21                                              24                                             27
                                            18
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                       0
                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                           STs     SCs OBCs Others

                                   Karnataka                                      Kerala                                        Madhya Pradesh
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       20 40 60 80 100
                             5       5      9                                                                               2      3      6
                                                  14                       10     11      14                               11                    17
                             19                                                                   23                               17
                                     26                                                                                                   21
                                            28                             25                                              15
                             9                    31                              41                                               17            28
                                     13                                                   41                                              17
                             21             11                             14                     42                       25
                                                                                                                                   19
                                     17           11                                                                                      21     17
                                            17                             14
                                                                                  16      15
                                                  16
                                                                                                  13                                             16
                             45                                                   14      15                               47      44
                                     40     34                             37                                                             35
                                                  28                                              12
Percent




                                                                                  18                                                             23
                                                                                          15      10
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                       0




                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                           STs     SCs OBCs Others

                                     Punjab                                     Rajasthan                                         Tamil Nadu
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       20 40 60 80 100




                             6       5                                      4      5          6                            2        8
                                            13    16                       11                     12                                      12
                                                                                  14                                       15
                                     21                                                   18                                                     33
                             34                                            13                                              7       23
                                            29                                    13              24                                      27
                                                  30                                      14
                                     19                                    19                                              20
                                                                                  22              15                               17
                                                                                          19                                              16     32
                             22      17     19    15
                                                                                                  20                               19
                                                                                                                                          17
                                            13    14
                                                                           53                                              55                    10
                                                                                  46      43
                             38      38                                                                                            32            12
                                            27    26                                              29                                      28
                                                                                                                                                 12
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                       0




                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                           STs     SCs OBCs Others

                                  Uttar Pradesh                                 Uttarakhand                                        All India
          20 40 60 80 100




                                                        20 40 60 80 100




                                                                                                       20 40 60 80 100




                             8       4      6                              7      6           8                            4        5     7
                                                  15                                              16                                             13
                                     16     18                                                                             17      19
                             16                                                   25      19                                              23
                             7       12           22                       35                                                                    26
                                            12                                                    28                       15      15
                                                                                          18                                              14
                             20      20           14                              22
                                            19                                                                             21      20            15
                                                                           19                     16                                      19
                                                                                          20
                                                  18                              21
                                                                           11                                                                    18
                                                                                                  18
                             49      48     44                                                                             43      41     37
                                                  31                       28             34                                                     28
                                                                                  26              23
          0




                                                        0




                                                                                                       0




                            STs    SCs OBCs Others                        STs   SCs OBCs Others                           STs     SCs OBCs Others



                                          No education Below primary                                                     Primary
                                                       Secondary                         Post-secondary
          32	                                                                                                                                                                    SCALING THE HEIGHTS




          Figure 2.10. Largest Improvements in Educational Attainment
          among Traditionally Excluded Groups in Himachal Pradesh (Urban
          and Rural, 1983–2011)
                                                                                                                           Rural
          120
          100
           80
Percent




           60
           40
           20
            0
                Primary

                           Secondary

                                       Post-Secondary

                                                        Primary

                                                                   Secondary

                                                                               Post-Secondary

                                                                                                Primary

                                                                                                           Secondary

                                                                                                                        Post-Secondary

                                                                                                                                         Primary

                                                                                                                                                   Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                Post-Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                 Primary

                                                                                                                                                                                           Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Post-Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Primary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Post-Secondary
                          1983                                    1993                                    2004                                     2007                                    2009                                   2011

                                                                                                STs                    SCs               OBCs                  Others




                                                                                                                        Urban
          140
          120
          100
Percent




           80
           60
           40
           20
            0
                Primary

                           Secondary

                                       Post-Secondary

                                                        Primary

                                                                   Secondary

                                                                               Post-Secondary

                                                                                                Primary

                                                                                                           Secondary

                                                                                                                        Post-Secondary

                                                                                                                                         Primary

                                                                                                                                                   Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                Post-Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                 Primary

                                                                                                                                                                                           Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Post-Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Primary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Secondary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Post-Secondary




                          1983                                    1993                                    2004                                     2007                                    2009                                   2011

                                                                                                STs                    SCs               OBCs                  Others



          Source: NSS rounds 38, 50, 61, 64, 66, and 68.
          Note: Cumulative percentages for each social group
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 33




the secondary level, suggesting that the inequality in education is primarily
driven by older cohorts.
    The reasons behind Himachal Pradesh’s successes in education are unclear,
but the state certainly has a long history of innovations in education, and sev-
eral factors seem to have played a role. For instance, GoHP was determined
to provide access to the remotest areas by adapting central government cri-
teria and norms to its topographical realities. Moreover, GoHP held district
officers accountable for educational outcomes in their areas. Social factors
seem to have been important as well. For instance, the Public Report on Basic
Education (PROBE) project attributed Himachal Pradesh’s success in educa-
tion outcomes to the existence of effective parent-teacher associations (PTAs)
and community involvement in the maintenance and improvement of school
buildings (PROBE 1999). Analyzing the PROBE survey that was conduct-
ed across Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Uttar
Pradesh quantitatively, Drèze and Kingdon (2001) found that while household
characteristics (such as parental education and dependency ratios) were the
primary determinants of school attendance in Himachal Pradesh’s neighbors,
village characteristics were just as important as household characteristics in
Himachal Pradesh. In particular, Himachal Pradesh had lower student–teach-
er ratios, better teaching standards, and more active PTAs relative to its neigh-
bors. It also has better community infrastructure (piped water, electricity, post
office, phone, and a waterproof school building) and women’s associations.
Drawing on field-work across northern India, Mangla (2014) points out that
the flexible bureaucratic norms in Himachal Pradesh facilitated these positive
outcomes. For instance, unlike Uttarakhand, a neighboring hill state which
has not been as successful on education, senior officials in the education de-
partment in Himachal Pradesh work closely with communities and with civil
society organizations.


2.4.	Health
Health indicators in Himachal Pradesh have also shown steady progress and
are yet another testament to strong state commitment and efficient service
delivery. Himachal Pradesh has made massive investments in its health in-
frastructure, which is one of the best in the country in terms of per capita
availability. Infrastructure, although laudable, is merely an input. The state
has recorded consistent progress in outcomes as well. Take the case of immu-
nization, where Himachal Pradesh stands out among its neighbors and also
at the national level. By 2005, almost three quarters of the children in Him-
34	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




achal Pradesh were fully vaccinated, compared to less than half of all Indian
children. Coverage for the Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG), a vaccine against
tuberculosis, and the first doses of diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) and
polio vaccines, moreover, exceeded 90 percent.
    Childhood mortality in Himachal Pradesh also recorded steady improve-
ments, particularly between 1971 and 2001, although it hit a plateau there-
after. While under-five mortality rates are the lowest among northern Indian
states, they are still worse than those in Kerala and Tamil Nadu. A closer look
at childhood mortality patterns suggests that high levels of neonatal mortality
drive Himachal Pradesh’s somewhat lackluster performance compared to Ker-
ala and Tamil Nadu. In fact, after the first month of birth until their first year,
children in Himachal Pradesh have a clear survival advantage, even compared
to Tamil Nadu (table 2.2).
    Self-reports of health condition and awareness of health issues are also
better among residents of Himachal Pradesh than they are among residents
of neighboring states. Nearly 62 percent of those interviewed in Himachal
Pradesh for the IHDS in 2004–5 said that their health condition was “good”
or “very good,” compared with 52 percent in Haryana and 48 percent each
in Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. Himachal Pradesh also has high levels of public
awareness of health issues. For example, knowledge and awareness of AIDS
(acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) among married women in Himachal
Pradesh is widespread; nearly 84 percent of ever-married women aged 15–49
reported that they were aware of AIDS, compared to a national average of 55
percent (IHDS 2004–5).
    Investments in health infrastructure and service delivery networks in the
early years of Himachal Pradesh’s statehood were instrumental in achieving
its positive health outcomes. These investments were effective in terms of out-
reach, despite the hilly terrain. Data from the NFHS 2004–5 indicate that a
majority of households use government health facilities when they are sick.
Nearly 83 percent of people in Himachal Pradesh use public facilities, com-
pared to only 34 percent in India as a whole. This is solid evidence of user
satisfaction with the public health system. The IHDS also shows that a large
proportion of people in Himachal Pradesh use public facilities, although the
proportion is not as large as reported in the NFHS. This discrepancy could
well be the result of how the question was asked in the two surveys. So, nearly
56 percent of the sample interviewed for IHDS in Himachal Pradesh in 2004–
5 preferred government health personnel over private practitioners, primarily
because about one-third of its villages had a primary health center, not just a
health sub-center (figure 2.11).
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 35




   Malnutrition levels are relatively low in Himachal Pradesh compared to
the national average, but more than one-third of the state’s children contin-
ue to be underweight or stunted. According the NFHS 2005–6, malnutrition
levels in Himachal Pradesh (measured along the three anthropometric indica-
tors of nutritional status) are more or less in line with the levels observed in
other northern states, although lower than the national average (table 2.3). In
fact, Himachal Pradesh has been among the best-performing states in reduc-
ing the proportion of underweight children between the two rounds of the
NFHS surveys (1999 and 2006), from 43.6 percent to 36.5 percent. Yet, more
than one-third of Himachal Pradesh’s children continue to be underweight or
stunted, that is, measure 2 standard deviations below the international norm
for weight-for-age and height-for-age, respectively. Moreover, in recent years,
some reports suggest that progress toward reducing malnutrition has been
sluggish. Data provided by the Ministry of Women and Child Development


Table 2.2. Childhood Mortality in Himachal Pradesh Lower Than
National Average and Neighboring States, But Neonatal Mortality
High

                 Neonatal        Post-neonatal             Infant              Child             Under-five
    State
                 mortality         mortality              mortality           mortality          mortality

 Himachal                 27.3                    8.9               36.1                  5.6               41.5
 Pradesh
 Bihar                    39.8                   21.9               61.7                24.7                84.8
 Haryana                  23.6                   18.1               41.7                11.1                52.3
 Karnataka                28.9                   14.3               43.2                12.1                54.7
 Kerala                   11.5                    3.8               15.3                  1.0               16.3
 Madhya                   44.9                   24.7               69.5                26.5                94.2
 Pradesh
 Punjab                   28.0                   13.7               41.7                10.8                52.0
 Rajasthan                43.9                   21.4               65.3                21.5                85.4
 Tamil Nadu               19.1                   11.2               30.4                  5.3               35.5
 Uttar                    47.6                   25.0               72.7                25.6                96.4
 Pradesh
 Uttarakhand              27.6                   14.3               41.9                15.5                56.8
 India                    39.0                  18.0                57.0                18.4                74.3

Source: NFHS-3 2005–6.
Note: Neonatal mortality—probability of dying in the first month of life; Post-neonatal mortality—probability
of dying after the first month of life, but before the first birthday; infant mortality—probability of dying before
the first birthday; child mortality—probability of dying between the first and fifth birthdays; and under-five
mortality—probability of dying before the fifth birthday.
36	                                                                                             SCALING THE HEIGHTS




for a report commissioned by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAG) suggest that nearly 34 percent of children in Himachal Pradesh under
age five were underweight in 2011, almost similar to the levels seen in 2005–6
(CAG 2013).13
   Himachal Pradesh has taken steps to reduce malnutrition, primarily
through its well-functioning Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS).
For instance, GoHP has been spending substantially more than the funds re-
leased by the central government toward the supplementary nutrition com-
ponent under the ICDS program (CAG 2013). Among the ICDS/anganwadi
centers sanctioned in Himachal Pradesh to provide supplementary nutrition
and preschool education to children, nearly all are operational, and absen-
teeism among workers is reportedly low. Further, Himachal Pradesh has a
well-functioning universal public distribution system (PDS) that provides not
only food grains, but also pulses and oil to both below poverty line (BPL)
and above poverty line (APL) families (Drèze and Sen 2011; Drèze and Khera
2012). Whether the subsidized food made available to families through the
PDS has had a beneficial impact on children’s nutrition is a matter of debate,14
but it is certain that a majority of households in Himachal Pradesh rely on
the PDS and use it to fulfill their food requirements, a finding confirmed both



Figure 2.11. Himachal Pradesh Ahead in Availability and Use of
Public Health Facilities
                                  60
                                                                     Himachal Pradesh
Percent Using Public Clinic for




                                  50              Jammu and
                                                  Kashmir
                                                           Northeast
    Short-Term Illnesses




                                  40                                                                      Kerala
                                                 Orissa                           Assam
                                  30       Utterakhand                       Tamil Nadu

                                                      Chhattisgarh
                                  20
                                                    Maharashtra
                                                   Andhra Pradesh
                                  10
                                                     Uttar Pradesh
                                   0               Bihar

                                       0                  20            40                60         80        100
                                                               Percent of Villages with PHC or CHC
Source: Desai et al. (2010), based on IHDS 2004–5 data.
Note: PHC: Primary Health Centre; CHC: Community Health Centre.
Table 2.3. Malnutrition in Himachal Pradesh Below National Average, But Still An Urgent Issue


                                   Height-for-age                               Weight-for-height                                       Weight-for-age

                                                      Mean                                                  Mean                                                  Mean
                         % below % below                          % below % below % above                               % below % below % above
  State/country                                      Z-score                                               Z-score                                               Z-score
                          -3 SD   -2 SD                            -3 SD   -2 SD   +2 SD                                 -3 SD   -2 SD   +2 SD
                                                      (SD)                                                  (SD)                                                  (SD)

 Himachal Pradesh              16.0          38.6          -1.5          5.5         19.3           1.1          -1.0         11.4         36.5           0.5          -1.6
 Bihar                         29.1          55.6          -2.1          8.3         27.1           0.3          -1.4         24.1         55.9           0.1          -2.2
 Haryana                       19.4          45.7          -1.8          5.0         19.1           1.4          -1.0         14.2         39.6           0.2          -1.7
 Karnataka                     20.5          43.7          -1.7          5.9         17.6           2.6          -1.0         12.8         37.6           0.5          -1.6
 Kerala                          6.5         24.5          -1.1          4.1         15.9           1.2          -0.9          4.7         22.9           0.4          -1.2
 Madhya Pradesh                26.3          50.0          -2.0         12.6         35.0           1.0          -1.6         27.3         60.0           0.1          -2.3
 Punjab                        17.3          36.7          -1.5          2.1           9.2          1.5          -0.5          8.0         24.9           0.5          -1.2
 Rajasthan                     22.7          43.7          -1.7          7.3         20.4           1.6          -1.1         15.3         39.9           0.4          -1.7
 Tamil Nadu                    10.9          30.9          -1.1          8.9         22.2           3.6          -1.0          6.4         29.8           1.9          -1.3
 Uttar Pradesh                 32.4          56.8          -2.2          5.1         14.8           1.2          -0.8         16.4         42.4           0.1          -1.8
 Uttarakhand                   23.1          44.4          -1.8          5.3         18.8           2.3          -0.9         15.7         38.0           0.3          -1.7
 India                         23.7          48.0          -1.9          6.4         19.8           1.5          -1.0         15.8         42.5           0.4          -1.8
 Bangladesh                    16.1          43.2          -1.8          2.9         17.4           0.9          -1.0         11.8         41.0           0.3          -1.7
 Nepal                         20.2          49.3          -1.9          2.6         12.6              -         -0.8         10.6         38.6              -         -1.7



Source: India NFHS-3 2005–6; Bangladesh Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2007; Nepal DHS 2006.
Note: Percentage of children under age five classified as malnourished according to three anthropometric indices of nutritional status: height-for-age, weight-for-height, and
                                                                                                                                                                                 Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 37




weight-for-age, by state and for India, for 2005–6. Percentage below -2 SD includes children who are below -3 SD from the International Reference Population median.
38	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




by this report’s fieldwork and independent studies (Drèze and Khera 2012).
However, there is room for improvement. The CAG evaluation of the ICDS
across states conducted in 2011 suggests that Himachal Pradesh spends sig-
nificantly less per beneficiary, per day, on supplementary nutrition than the
central government norms require: it spends Rs. 3.07 per beneficiary, per day
compared to the norm of Rs. 4.21. Moreover, not all beneficiaries eligible for
supplementary nutrition are covered (CAG 2013).15
    Women’s health and well-being in Himachal Pradesh have also shown sig-
nificant progress. The state has completed its fertility transition, and fertility
rates are well below replacement. In fact, Himachal Pradesh’s total fertility
rate (TFR), at 1.9 children per woman, looks exactly like that of France and is
lower than that of the United States (figure 2.12).16 Fertility decline is not just
an important health issue; it has broader social implications on women’s sta-
tus and gender equality. While there is little empirical evidence on what drove
the fertility decline in Himachal Pradesh, it is likely that a mix of a well-imple-
mented family planning program, high levels of female education, and a gen-
eral decline in demand for children was responsible. In fact, the overall status
of women, their participation in social movements, and their relatively higher
levels of labor force participation all contributed to this outcome. That said, it
is interesting that Punjab, with fertility rates that are just slightly higher than
those of Himachal Pradesh, does not have the same positive outcomes in terms
of female labor force participation, attainment of females in higher education,
or overall female-to-male ratios.
    Perhaps one of the most worrisome trends, and in many ways a puzzle in
Himachal Pradesh, is the stark absence of female children compared to male.
As discussed in this report, Himachal Pradesh has made significant progress
in reducing both fertility and infant mortality. Additionally, in a regime where
education, health, sanitation, and overall growth are all models for others to
emulate, the higher mortality of female children comes as a surprise and a
conundrum (box 2.2). Back in the late 1990s, Himachal Pradesh received in-
ternational kudos because its female-to-male ratios seemed to be approaching
parity since 1901, and demographers predicted that this progress would con-
tinue (Cohen 2000). But, in fact, the 2001 census showed an unexpected dip in
overall female-to-male ratios for Himachal Pradesh.17 Much more worrisome
has been the sharp decline in female-to-male ratios among children (figure
2.13). Indeed, from 1981 to 2011, the number of females to every 1,000 males
plummeted. Such a sharp decline implicates sex-selective abortions and gross
neglect of female children, although not female infanticide, in a fertility regime
that is characterized by a preference for small families and a preference for
sons (Jha et al. 2006).18 However, it is true that stated preferences for sons
                             Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 39




                             Figure 2.12. Fertility Rate in Himachal Pradesh Similar to that in
                             France and Lower than that in the United States
                       4.5


                       4.0


                       3.5
Total fertility rate




                       3.0


                       2.5


                       2.0
                             Replacement-level total fertility rate (2.1)
                       1.5


                       1.0


                       0.5


                        0
                                          Poland
                                       Slovakia
                                       Slovenia
                                      Lithuania
                                Czech Republic
                                       Bulgaria
                                       Hungary
                                            Latvia
                                              Italy
                                       Romania
                                         Greece
                                      Germany
                                            Spain
                                            Malta
                                       Portugal
                                          Austria
                                         Cyprus
                                    Switzerland
                                         Estonia
                                        Canada
                                   Luxembourg
                                   Netherlands
                                        Sweden
                               United Kingdom
                                              Goa
                               Andhra Pradesh
                                      Denmark
                                         Finland
                                    Tamil Nadu
                                       Australia
                                        Norway
                                          Ireland
                                           Kerala
                                          France
                             Himachal Pradesh
                                          Punjab
                                           Sikkim
                                         Iceland
                                  United States
                                     Karnataka
                                   Maharashtra
                                             Delhi
                                          Tripura
                                   West Bengal
                                           Orissa
                             Jammu & Kashmir
                                           Assam
                                         Gujarat
                                    Uttaranchal
                                   Chhattisgarh
                                             India
                                       Haryana
                                       Manipur
                                       Mizoram
                             Arunachal Pradesh
                               Madhya Pradesh
                                      Rajasthan
                                     Jharkhand
                                      Nagaland
                                    Meghalaya
                                 Uttar Pradesh
                                             Bihar
                             Source: Adapted from World Bank (2011), based on several data sources (Australia: Australian Bureau of Statis-
                             tics; Canada: Statistics Canada; European countries: Eurostat (data for 2008); India and states: NFHS; selected
                             countries: Demographic and Health Surveys.
                             Note: Data refer to 2005 or the closest available year.




                             seem to have declined from 1992 to 2005, when the first and third rounds of
                             the NFHS were conducted (John, Kaur, Palriwala, Raju and Sagar 2008). This
                             change in attitude seems to have gone hand-in-hand with a slight improve-
                             ment in the number of female children to every 1,000 male children between
                             the 2001 and the 2011 censuses, but GoHP will need to keep a close watch to
                             ensure this trend continues to improve.
                                 The needs of an aging population will be an important driver of social pol-
                             icy in Himachal Pradesh in the next decade and beyond. Subaiya and Dhan-
                             anjay (2011) project that the median age in 2016 will be highest in Kerala and
                             Tamil Nadu (37 years), followed by Himachal Pradesh (35 years). Further-
                             more, while persons aged 60 and older constituted just 7.4 percent of Him-
                             achal Pradesh’s population in 1961, they will make up 14.7 percent in 2026
                             (figure 2.14). This will have implications for the labor market and economic
                             growth, as well as for the care of the elderly and their caregivers, who are most
                             likely to be women.
40	                                                                                                    SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Figure 2.13. Sharp Loss of Young Girls Compared to Boys,
1981–2001

                                   1000
Number of females per 1000 males




                                    980

                                    960

                                    940

                                    920

                                    900

                                    880

                                    860

                                    840
                                                 1981                   1991                   2001                 2011

                                                        Overall female-to-male ratio          Child female-to-male ratio


Source: Census of India, different years.




Figure 2.14. Share of Elderly Higher in Himachal Pradesh and
Rising Faster Than National Average, 1961–2026

                                   16

                                   14

                                   12

                                   10
Percent




                                    8

                                    6

                                    4

                                    2

                                    0
                                          1961   1971      1981      1991      2001    2006     2011      2016   2021      2026

                                                                  Himachal Pradesh            All India



Source: Based on Subaiya and Dhananjay (2011).
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 41




  Box 2.2 Claiming Space, One Step at a Time: Mixed Tale of
  Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Himachal
  Pradesh
  Himachal Pradesh has a strong track record supporting women’s em-
  powerment and gender equality, compared to its neighbors and to the
  rest of India. From access to health and education to participation in
  the labor market and in community decision making, being born in
  Himachal Pradesh brings distinct advantages for women and girls. But
  there is more to this story. In some areas women’s outcomes are actu-
  ally poor, and in others areas women are continuing to make progress,
  claiming more spaces, one step at a time.

  The positive development narrative in Himachal Pradesh holds true, for
  the most part, for women’s access to markets and services. Part of the
  explanation lies in cultural factors and part of it is a reflection of the
  state’s overall development and investments in public service delivery,
  which, among other groups, benefited women. For instance, availabil-
  ity of water and fuel sources in remote areas probably translated into
  reduced time for women and girls in fetching these resources, allowing
  more time on well-being enhancing activities. GoHP has also invested
  in a number of programs that target women, such as safety nets for
  widows and poor women. Further, GoHP offers financial incentives for
  girls to attend school and puts communities in charge of monitoring
  enrollment and retention of girls in schools. GoHP also focused on in-
  creasing toilet facilities, which is likely to have had a positive impact on
  girls’ school attendance (UNICEF 1994).

  In light of its longstanding policy and program efforts, it is hardly sur-
  prising that Himachal Pradesh looks “different” from the rest of India
  in many gendered outcomes. For example, it has one of the highest rural
  female labor force participation rates in India, with up to two-thirds
  of its rural female population (and up to 70 percent of its secondary
  school–educated rural female population) working or actively look-
  ing for work over the past three decades, as shown earlier. Himachal
  Pradesh’s fertility rate is very low, which has positive ramifications on
  the well-being of women and girls. Unlike other neighboring states, girls
  in Himachal Pradesh are not married off at very young ages. Only 12
  percent of women (aged 20–24) were married before the age of 18 in
                                                              (continued next page)
42	                                                          SCALING THE HEIGHTS




      2005–6, compared with 40 percent in Haryana and over 50 percent
      each in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and Madhya Pradesh.

      Although Himachal Pradesh’s progress in women’s access to markets
      and services has been impressive, especially considering its difficult to-
      pography, there are gaps in other areas. Perhaps the starkest divergence
      from the overall trend toward greater gender equality is the female-to-
      male ratio at birth. Despite improvements in recent years, sex-selective
      abortions in Himachal Pradesh are very much in evidence, especially in
      urban areas. New gender-based inequalities seem to be emerging in the
      labor market and in education, two areas in which Himachal Pradesh
      previously had made significant progress. For example, our analysis of
      the NSS data shows that the gender gap in labor force participation is
      twice as large in urban areas compared to rural areas. Women appear
      to face multiple disadvantages in urban areas, where they are mostly
      employed in jobs with lower status and wages (such as teaching, clerks,
      assistants, and servants), while their male counterparts dominate high-
      er-ranking public service positions.

      Still other trends contribute to a mixed picture. For example, wom-
      en in Himachal Pradesh have a long history of community activism,
      one example of which is their strong role in resisting commercialization
      of forests. This form of assertion in public spaces resonates with their
      agency in the private sphere, where the NFHS shows that 65 percent of
      married urban women and 50 percent of married rural women report
      participating in household decisions. Again, according to the NFHS,
      adolescent pregnancy is very low at 3–4 percent in Himachal Pradesh,
      compared to 15 percent in neighboring states. A strong body of eth-
      nographic work points to marriage patterns in Himachal Pradesh as
      playing a salutary role on women’s overall status (see, for instance, Sethi
      [2010], Snehi [2011] and Singh [2011]).

      Data on spousal violence against women in Himachal Pradesh presents
      a puzzling picture. The NFHS indicates that only 6–7 percent of ev-
      er-married women in Himachal Pradesh report experiencing spousal vi-
      olence. This is much lower than the neighboring states of Uttar Pradesh,
      Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh, where levels of spousal violence hover
      at around 40 percent. The prevailing discourse in Himachal Pradesh
      and the work of government agencies and nongovernmental organi-
                                                                 (continued next page)
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 43




   zations (NGOs) consider these numbers to be unrealistic and likely
   underreported. The Himachal Pradesh Human Development Report
   (GoHP 2002) suggests that the incidence of crimes against women is in
   fact quite high. The IHDS 2005–6 also reports a higher prevalence of
   spousal violence, where 29 percent of respondents believed that it was
   common to beat women under certain conditions, if for example, they
   went out without permission. Recently there have been a large number
   of press reports of rapes in Himachal Pradesh, where previously such
   reports were few. Whether these reports reflect increased awareness and
   reporting or higher incidence is difficult to say. What is evident is that
   going forward, proactive policy and programmatic interventions are
   needed to prevent domestic violence, improve women’s ownership of
   assets, and make a dent in the adverse child female-to-male ratios to
   move toward greater gender equality in Himachal Pradesh.

   Source: Authors’ compilation based on NFHS-3 (2005–6), IHDS (2005–6), NSS round 68, GoHP
   (2002), and UNICEF (1994).




2.5.	 Sanitation and infrastructure services
A discussion of Himachal Pradesh’s success in health and education is incom-
plete without a focus on its rapid progress in sanitation. Sanan (2010) points
out that, in 2003, Himachal Pradesh lagged behind other states in the area of
sanitation. Today, it is the first state in northern India that is close to being
“open defecation free” (ODF). Similarly, our calculations from the NSS in
2011–12 suggest that more than 70 percent of households in rural areas and
nearly all households in urban areas had access to an improved source of toilet
in 2012. This includes access from sources such as “flush/pour flush toilet to
piped sewer system/septic tank/pit latrine,” “ventilated improved pit latrine,”
“pit latrine with slab,” and “compositing toilet.” A dedicated survey on sanita-
tion facilities in Himachal Pradesh found that by 2011, 98 percent of schools
had toilets (Sanan, Chauhan, and Rana 2011). Different accounts suggest that
a community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach, combined with a num-
ber of champions and a move away from a subsidy-based approach, enabled
“sustainable sanitation” and cultural change where open defecation became
unacceptable (Hueso González 2013). Box 2.3 highlights some of the channels
through which these successes emerged.
44	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




    General improvements in rural infrastructure, and not just in sanitation,
have probably played a role in propelling Himachal Pradesh’s progress in hu-
man development, social inclusion, and overall well-being. Despite adverse
terrain and scattered settlements, nearly all households in Himachal Pradesh
covered by the NFHS had electricity in 2005–6. Data from the NSS of 2011–
12 suggest that virtually all households in rural areas of Himachal Pradesh
had access to an improved source of drinking water. A large body of literature
highlights the role that infrastructure services, such as safe drinking water and
electricity, play in improving health and education outcomes and in giving,
particularly women, more leisure time, which in turn has positive impacts on
their well-being. For example, during fieldwork conducted by the authors,
female respondents spoke about how the arrival of electricity and cooking gas
reduced long hours in the kitchen. The availability of drinking water in homes,
likewise, is believed to have decreased women’s work loads, who then do not
need to trudge long distances to bring water for their households. Similarly,
as pointed out earlier, the availability of toilets in schools is known to be pos-
itively correlated with girls’ school attendance (UNICEF 1994). While there
are no studies that look at the role of infrastructure in improving health and
education outcomes in Himachal Pradesh, the existence of social services and
the speed with which improvements took place indicates that they must have
impacted human development outcomes as well.



      Box 2.3 Himachal Pradesh: A Sudden Trail Blazer in Total
      Sanitation
      While Himachal Pradesh has a good record on human development
      indicators and access to public infrastructure and services, its perfor-
      mance in sanitation was quite dismal until a few years ago. According
      to the NFHS, only 40 percent of rural households in Himachal Pradesh
      had access to any toilet facility in 2005–6. In early 2005, the GoHP
      adopted a new approach to provide better rural sanitation. It moved
      away from providing subsidies to households to construct toilets to
      one that provided entire communities with incentives to build toilets.
      In other words, the state did away with subsidies for toilet construc-
      tion to below poverty line (BPL) households and instead treated toilet
      construction as a local community responsibility—a public good. The
      logic was that subsidies divided communities and defeated the purpose
      of collective action.
                                                              (continued next page)
Poverty and Social Inclusion during a Period of Economic Growth	 45




  The new community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach focused on
  igniting shock and shame among communities that practiced open def-
  ecation, so they would end the practice through collective action. It was
  led by the belief that when communities are shocked into realizing the
  impact of open defecation on their own and their neighbors’ health,
  they would also realize that the practices of individuals affect the com-
  munity as whole (Robinson 2006; Kar and Chambers 2008). Successful
  communities were given monetary awards for becoming open defeca-
  tion free (ODF), which could then be used to reimburse costs incurred
  by poor households to construct toilets. To ensure that the award was
  based on demonstration of sustained behavior change, it was disbursed
  in two tranches: the first at the initial stage of being declared ODF, and
  the balance on an evaluation after one year.

  Whether Himachal Pradesh’s success with the CLTS approach can be
  replicated at a national level is hard to say. O’Reilly and Louis (2014)
  argue that it represented a unique confluence of multiple elements:
  the environmental context, government policies and proximate so-
  cial relations, all of which served as key factors for influencing toilet
  adoption and sustainability. First, there was political will at the local
  government level. Meeting targets and winning the award was a mat-
  ter of pride. Local level officials and leaders were trained at the local,
  block, and district level in global and national discourses around the
  need for sanitation, all of which played a role in the campaign for to-
  tal sanitation in their communities. Second, exposure to more urban
  lifestyles through government jobs and migration, as well as prox-
  imity in small communities, created social pressure on households to
  build toilets. Third, government investments in other infrastructure
  services like water and the environmental context (with soil quality in
  Himachal Pradesh supporting pit toilets) also helped. Finally, and per-
  haps most importantly, local bodies constantly innovated to achieve
  their goal of securing an ODF status. For example, in instances when
  shock and shame did not work (where monitoring open defecation
  across scattered settlements was difficult), a handholding approach
  was adopted, to help individual households facing genuine obstacles
  to constructing toilets.

  Sources: Kar and Chambers 2008; O’Reilly and Louis 2014; Robinson 2006; Sanan 2010; Sanan,
  Chauhan and Rana 2011.
46	   SCALING THE HEIGHTS
	                                                                                          47




    3. Understanding “Why”: The Possible
                Drivers of Social Inclusion
        “We have a good society. We live peacefully. We don’t fight.”

        “People here are good to each other; they respect each other, stand
        by for one another, and go to each other’s marriages.”

        “Anyone who can eat two meals thinks (they are) rich.”

                                              As told to the authors in Kufri, Shimla District



    Previous chapters documented Himachal Pradesh’s successes in human and
    social development outcomes and argued that the state has both a strong track
    record of pushing reform as well as sound institutional foundations that por-
    tend well for its future. The discussion attempted to answer, at least partially,
    for each outcome, what may have brought about the change. This penultimate
    chapter takes a broad, macrosocial view of Himachal Pradesh’s progress and
    attempts to understand the underlying conditions that made it possible.


    3.1. Special status and fiscal space
    Himachal Pradesh’s track record of positive outcomes in social inclusion is
    often attributed to government investments in infrastructure, public employ-
    ment, and public services. Its status as a special category state allowed GoHP
    to expand infrastructure and service delivery through large-scale development
    programs (Sanan 2008). Central grants that accounted for nearly 25 percent
48	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




of the GoHP budget and 45 percent of its revenue expenditure in 2011–12
have undoubtedly played a major role in building a robust foundation for
growth and human development in Himachal Pradesh (CAG 2012a). In ad-
dition to receiving grants from the central government, state agencies also
receive direct credits on account of centrally sponsored schemes (CSS), such as
the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) and the MGNREGS.
    Yet these transfers do not explain why GoHP invested its resources re-
sponsibly and accountably, why such investments led to positive outcomes,
and how the state maintained intergroup equity in access to markets, services,
and political spaces. There are other states with special status which receive
large central grants, but their outcomes are not as good as those of Himachal
Pradesh. There are likely institutional foundations, which, in addition to the
fiscal flexibility enabled by the central government transfers, led to Himachal
Pradesh’s success in social inclusion.


3.2. Tradition of a strong, benevolent, accountable
state
Himachal Pradesh has historically been “ruled” by a set of largely benevolent,
feudal entities, primarily from the Rajput caste. Therefore, building on the
institutions from its history, Himachal Pradesh has a unique form of demo-
cratic governance, where hierarchies are intact, but citizens have both voice
and leverage (Verma 1995; Negi 1993). Local-level accountability is high, and
local institutions have played a strong role in the delivery of services by ini-
tiating and leading changes in behaviors and norms. In a “classical” view of
decentralization and local accountability, or to those unfamiliar with the con-
text, Himachal Pradesh may seem top-down and hierarchical. For instance,
it ranks lower than the national average in the Panchayat Devolution Index
(IIPA 2013). A culture of closeness and transparency has led to strong and
accountable local institutions, even when they may not make for devolution
of functions or raising resources from the local level.
    So, what seems to be a paradox is actually a unique form of democratic
decentralization that is specific to Himachal Pradesh’s context. This form of
governance is based on a clear, though unwritten, social contract, where cit-
izens repose trust in a state that has historically looked out for them. For in-
stance, citizens expect the state to provide a range of entitlements, from public
employment to basic services. In turn, citizens give unstinting loyalty to the
state—there are few protest movements, conflicts are resolved informally, even
Understanding “Why”: The Possible Drivers of Social Inclusion	                 49




as basic needs are taken care of by the state. Central government transfers
clearly made such entitlements possible.


3.3. Independence of the bureaucracy
Local-level accountability in Himachal Pradesh is underpinned by a strong
administrative tradition. Like Rajasthan, which also had a culture of benevo-
lent feudalism, the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officers and state civil
officers in Himachal Pradesh have had a degree of independence that allowed
them to innovate. This independence was perhaps more pronounced in Hi-
machal Pradesh because, given the topography and climate, districts and sub
districts could often get cut off from the state capital and had to innovate to
remain functional.
    The initiative and independence of the bureaucracy is evident in a num-
ber of areas. For instance, Mangla (2014) cites examples of officials in the
education department in Himachal Pradesh, who, jointly with civil society,
created programs for educating migrant children from poor states like Rajas-
than and Uttar Pradesh. He also notes that officials “are encouraged to draw
upon local knowledge and adapt policies according to local needs, which may
involve bending the rules” (Mangla 2014, 13). Second, officials at the block
level (below the district), are seen as assets because of their knowledge of local
realities and are given authority and support to make decisions. Finally, the
bureaucracy is encouraged to interact freely with the community to elicit ideas
regarding local issues and come up with solutions. Going forward, maintain-
ing this strong tradition of an independent and collaborative bureaucracy will
be a key ingredient for sustaining reforms.


3.4. High incidence of public sector jobs
The fact that almost a third of Himachal Pradesh’s jobs are in the public
sector has had mixed results for social inclusion and sustainability. First, it
has enabled the hiring of a large number of service providers, such as doc-
tors, nurses, teachers, and other local-level functionaries. In turn, this allowed
GoHP to expand service delivery. Yet, the mere supply of personnel is not
enough for good service delivery outcomes. Himachal Pradesh combined this
with a high degree of accountability, which it expected from such personnel, as
documented later in this section. Second, public sector employment has been
associated with high labor force participation rates and perhaps has enabled
50	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




a greater dent in poverty. Third, the large number of public sector jobs has led
to a sense of entitlement among citizens, leading them to perceive the state as
the employer of first resort, while simultaneously leading to enhanced trust
in, and loyalty to, the state. Concomitantly, high levels of public employment
have been associated with a mistrust of the private sector and the perception
that private sector jobs are unreliable. Finally, the high wage bill associated
with the large public sector has led to a situation where state provision of jobs
is no longer sustainable.


3.5. Difficult, hilly terrain results in unique context of
political and economic cohesion
Located in the northwest region of India, at altitudes ranging from 400 to
7,000 meters above sea level, most of Himachal Pradesh is inaccessible or
uninhabited. Hilly terrain, dense forests, and transportation costs constrain
opportunities for growth and cause hardship to its residents. This is especially
true in the high mountain region in the northern part of the state. Himachal
Pradesh also has a very low population density; residents live mostly in vil-
lages that are organized into small settlements of 25–30 households. Most of
these settlements tend to be dominated by a single caste, and the combination
of around 15 settlements forms a panchayat. The smallness of the rural settle-
ments and the difficult terrain create incentives for collaboration and reinforce
interdependence, helping to transcend caste divisions and strengthen kinship
networks across different groups. The setting also binds the citizens within a
common social and religious attachment to the Himalayas, and their flora,
fauna, and water sources. The Himalayas are central to the Himachali identity
and tie the citizens in a bond of social cohesion (Negi 1993).


3.6. Small size makes many things possible, but is also
a mixed blessing
Small size is a blessing in many respects; it makes states and countries more
manageable. Other Indian states with similar topography, and with smaller
populations and low population density (such as Tripura, Meghalaya, Ma-
nipur, and Nagaland), also produce good outcomes. On the other hand,
Uttarakhand, which has an environmental and social milieu very similar to
Himachal Pradesh’s, but with a larger population and area, performs much
worse than Himachal Pradesh. Its small size has certainly helped Himachal
Understanding “Why”: The Possible Drivers of Social Inclusion	                 51




Pradesh, particularly making it more manageable from an administrative and
supervision perspective. Its small size also means that politicians, administra-
tors, service providers, and citizens are in close physical proximity. It is well
known in Himachal Pradesh that local politicians are accessible and there
are close social ties between them and their constituents (Verma 1995; Parry
1979). This provides greater accountability and transparency, especially when
accompanied by the fact that inequalities in land and other assets are low. But
small size entails both costs and benefits. For instance, while it may be easier
for a small state to transform informal institutions into formal ones, person-
al contacts can become more important than political ideology or political
parties. In recent years, this “culture of informality” has created expectations
of patronage and favoritism in administrative and governance processes, par-
ticularly regarding access to government jobs, transfers, and appointments
(Sharma 1999).


3.7. Women’s participation and gender norms
The participation of women in development programs and their access to mar-
kets, services, and spaces is linked to a culture where female seclusion is not as
normative as it is in neighboring states. The NFHS-3 (IIPS 2010) notes that 65
percent of urban women in Himachal Pradesh and 56 percent of rural women
participate in household decisions. When combined with a strong tribal ethos
where women have greater decision-making roles within the family, it has
been easier for Himachal Pradesh to enlist women’s participation in programs
such as sanitation, immunization, and other health-related campaigns than
it has been for neighboring states. For instance, Drèze and Kingdon (2001)
found that existence of women’s groups at the village level had positive ef-
fects on educational attainment. Women in Himachal Pradesh also have a
strong tradition of protest movements against environmental degradation and
male alcoholism. In what is considered a reinvention of the Chipko movement
(where, during the 1980s, women in Uttarakhand hugged trees to symbolical-
ly save them from being cut), women in Himachal Pradesh are known to tie
“rakhis” or threads to trees as a mark of siblinghood and protection.


3.8. Caste and religion foster social cohesion
The structure and composition of caste and religion in Himachal Pradesh are
also unique compared to other states, although there is a great deal of het-
52	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




erogeneity within the state. While caste is as deeply entrenched in Himachal
Pradesh as it is in other states of northern India, some characteristics in Hi-
machal Pradesh foster greater social solidarity. Three aspects stand out: SCs,
STs, and the role of religion.
    First, the proportion of SCs in Himachal Pradesh is much higher than the
national average, and second only to Punjab. SCs comprise 25 percent of the
population and have about 56 different communities. However, unlike oth-
er states, SCs in Himachal Pradesh, for the most part, have land and have
benefitted from the rapid decline in poverty, as noted earlier. Their numerical
strength, access to land, and their inclusion in Himachal Pradesh’s social and
economic development have lowered the chances of caste-based assertion or
social conflict. Yet, at the community level, practices around caste are quite
pronounced and are tied up with religious norms that pervade both private
and public spaces. For instance, there are fairly strict rules on inter-marriage
and inter-dining in the rural areas of Himachal Pradesh. Social segregation
for religious occasions is an accepted norm. In a strange way, this solidifies
the status quo, sets clear rules of engagement between castes and functions as
a means of social control, where few transgress the status quo (Parry 1979).
    In a second unique feature, the proportion of STs in Himachal Pradesh
is lower than the national average. STs account for 5.7 percent of the state’s
population. But the nature of the ST communities is very distinct from other
areas of India (whether Schedule V or Schedule VI areas)19 and their relatively
high socioeconomic status makes them a strong social group. A majority of
the eight ST communities are concentrated in the upper districts of Kinnaur,
Lahaul Spiti, and parts of Chamba district (Parmar 1992). In Kinnaur, for
instance, STs are the dominant social group, both numerically and in terms of
their influence.
    Finally, Himachal Pradesh is unusually homogenous in its religious com-
position. About 95 percent of the local population is Hindu, whereas all other
religious groups—Muslims, Buddhists, Sikhs, Christians, and Jains—combine
for around 5 percent of the total population. This preponderance of Hindus
has made religious competition an unlikely political or social force. Religion
itself and religious norms continue to exercise strong social control. In fact,
many religious institutions have been accorded semiformal status and have
been integrated into the local governance structure (Berti 2009). Examples in-
clude “devta committees” (headed by the local deity, who is a person with di-
vine characteristics), “kardar sanghs” (the association of village gods’ admin-
istrators), “Dusshera committees” (which organize the festival of Dusshera
and finance all costs associated with it, including toward religious ceremonies,
cultural programs, residents’ and deities’ trips to the capital), and similar reli-
Understanding “Why”: The Possible Drivers of Social Inclusion	               53




gious groups that also have social and political roles (Berti 2009; Parmar and
Rana 2003).20


3.9. Social inclusion: long-time priority of the
government
Policies, as distinct from programs, in Himachal Pradesh, attest to the fact
that the government is conscious of potential caste divisions, and it wants to
ensure that equality and cohesion, not just poverty reduction, are priorities.
For example, land reforms were initiated soon after Himachal Pradesh became
a state, and SCs, who were overrepresented among the landless in other states,
were given land during this process of redistribution (discussed earlier in box
2.1). This had the effect of building trust among a very large social group
and cemented both inclusion and cohesion across the state. Similarly, GoHP
allocated special funds and implemented a range of rural programs for the
development of tribal groups, especially from the Fifth Five-Year Plan onward
(Parmar 1992). Today, similar policy tools are in effect in the context of the
state’s infrastructure-led growth model, of which hydropower investments are
a key component (box 3.1). Other, smaller schemes point to GoHP’s persever-
ance in trying to ensure that caste does not become a divisive force across the
state’s population. For instance, recently there were press reports that GoHP
would provide cash incentives for inter-caste marriages and that traffic police-
men were asked not to wear their (caste identifying) surnames on their badges.
54	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




      Box 3.1. Sharing the Benefits of Infrastructure-Led Growth:
      Himachal Pradesh’s Local Area Development Fund and Cash
      Transfer Scheme
      Among all recent reform initiatives undertaken by GoHP in the con-
      text of its infrastructure-led growth model, one of the most ambitious
      changes took place in the hydropower sector. Because of its five major
      river basins, Himachal Pradesh’s hydropower sector has significant po-
      tential for expansion. The 2006 Hydropower Policy, which supplement-
      ed the Electricity Act of 2003, introduced a policy framework that reg-
      ulates harnessing the state’s hydropower capacity through investments
      in small, medium, and large hydropower projects. The objective of the
      policy is to provide earmarked funds for welfare schemes and a regular
      stream of revenue for income generation in project-affected areas, as
      well as to ensure that hydropower-led growth across Himachal Pradesh
      brings benefits not only to investors, but also to local communities.

      The policy requires that hydropower developers set aside funds equiva-
      lent to 1.0–1.5 percent of project cost for investing in community-driv-
      en infrastructure projects in the project area during implementation.
      The funds can be accessed by communities through Local Area De-
      velopment Councils (LADCs), which are composed of representatives
      from relevant government departments, project developers, and proj-
      ect-affected areas.

      Based on lessons learned from the implementation of the 2006 Hydro-
      power Policy, the guidelines have been updated successively in 2009,
      2011, and 2013 to clarify the amount of funds to be received by each
      type of project as well as to promote local participation in LADCs and
      increase the transparency of decisions on the use of funds. Following
      best practices in global benefit sharing, the revised guidelines clarify
      what is considered a “project-affected zone” and provide an unambigu-
      ous formula for calculating the amount contributed to each Local Area
      Development Fund (LADF).a The guidelines also require the members
      of project-affected communities to agree on a list of preferred welfare
      schemes or infrastructure projects and to get them approved at public
      Gram Sabha meetings before the funds can be accessed. Simultaneously,
      numerous government agencies, district and panchayat authorities, and
      elected community representatives are mandated by GoHP to oversee
                                                              (continued next page)
Understanding “Why”: The Possible Drivers of Social Inclusion	                                              55




  the implementation of the policy and the workings of the LADCs, pro-
  viding checks and balances.b GoHP has also developed a comprehensive
  communication strategy to announce these changes and publicly com-
  mit to the implementation of its policies.

  In addition to strengthening collective benefits that accrue to commu-
  nities through LADFs, the revised benefit-sharing guidelines also ex-
  tend cash transfers to households living in project-affected areas. They
  require hydropower companies to transfer 1.0 percent of the power
  generated in hydropower plants to the public energy authority and
  mandate the latter to transfer the revenue generated from selling it to
  the LADF in each project-affected area. As per the latest guidelines an-
  nounced in 2013, half of these additional funds get distributed as an-
  nual cash transfers to every household that lived in the project-affected
  area during the lifetime of the project, while the other half is distributed
  to households in proportion to the amount of land acquired by the
  project in each Gram Panchayat. To ensure that these cash payments
  have the maximum impact for poverty reduction, both streams of cash
  payments follow a progressive distribution procedure, where 85 percent
  of the proceeds are distributed equally to every household included in
  each Gram Panchayat’s family registry records, but the remaining 15
  percent are distributed as additional benefits to households officially
  classified as below poverty line (BPL). Also, grievance redress mecha-
  nisms are in place to record and address any grievances arising from the
  management or distribution of the cash transfers.

  Source: World Bank 2012, 2014a; GoHP 2006, 2009, 2011, 2013b.
  a. The share of funds to be allocated to each affected project area is based on the extent of private
  land used for project components, including submergence of land, if any; the extent of land affected
  by underground components; the extent of land used for infrastructure; the stretch of the river stream
  that may be impacted; and the population of each community or panchayat.
  b. Under the revised guidelines, there are state-level committees headed by the Principal Secretary of
  Power to monitor the operation of the LADF and adherence to the guidelines and timelines for depos-
  iting the funds. The Directorate of Energy is the nodal agency at the state level to keep track of LADF
  activities and to manage the allocation of revenue generation from the 1.0 percent of free power to
  the concerned LADC. Further, there is a project-level LADC for each project, headed by the deputy
  commissioner, and consisting of district-level officers of concerned departments, elected members of
  affected panchayats, and the chairman and vice chairman of Zilla Parishad and Panchayat Samitis.
  The schemes under LADF are implemented by the Gram Panchayat, the government department or
  the project developer, with the final decision resting with the Gram Panchayat. LADC is responsible
  for: verifying contribution to LADF from project developers; overall management; control and admin-
  istration of LADF; monitoring, approval, and execution of the schemes; finalization of annual action
  plans; and review of progress of administrative and statutory clearances.
	                                                                                 57




                4. Looking Ahead: Sustaining
             Social Inclusion and Sustainable
            Development in Himachal Pradesh

    Himachal Pradesh’s transition toward an infrastructure-led growth model, ac-
    companied by myriad social and economic changes, is likely to have implica-
    tions for social inclusion and sustainability. However, Himachal Pradesh is not
    alone in its policy reform efforts or in its attempts to overcome challenges on
    the path to improving social inclusion. World Bank (2013) takes a global look
    at the issue and points out that some of the salient macro trends of the last de-
    cades—demographic, spatial, economic, and knowledge—have had profound
    ramifications for inclusion. Across the world, many macro-level changes have
    been faster and deeper in the last two decades than in the preceding four de-
    cades, and this may also hold true for Himachal Pradesh.
        Periods of change create new objective and subjective realities, as societies
    are reshaped by far-reaching transitions and transformations. For instance,
    changing age structures or new economic growth trajectories can lead to new
    forms of exclusion, but also create new opportunities for inclusion. Among
    other possibilities, new groups emerge, power relations often change, new val-
    ues and norms take root, and new rules of the game are forged. Major tran-
    sitions also have an effect on subjective realities, namely on people’s attitudes
    and perceptions. World Bank (2013) notes that “since people act on the basis
    of how they feel, these attitudes and perceptions matter for inclusion…feelings
    of being included and respected by others, or being heard by the state, are
    central to the opportunities people access, the way in which they take part in
58	                                                        SCALING THE HEIGHTS




society, and the way the state responds to them.” Periods of change often need
a new social contract.


4.1. Channels of change in Himachal Pradesh
In the coming years, Himachal Pradesh is likely to have a different develop-
ment context than it has had in the past. Niche agricultural sectors, like flo-
riculture and horticulture, have played a big role in the success of Himachal
Pradesh. The introduction of incentives to private industry has accelerated the
growth of nontraditional economic sectors and resulted in an unprecedented
growth for small and medium enterprises, especially in the lower districts such
as Solan.21 Even as all of these changes unfolded, Himachal Pradesh continued
to maintain its cohesive and inclusive society because of its egalitarian land
ownership (which allowed excluded groups such as SCs to receive benefits
from commercial farming) and good governance (which ensured equity in ac-
cessing markets, such as labor, and in services, such as health and education).
Future economic development in Himachal Pradesh is expected to come from
large investments in infrastructure, notably in the power sector, in addition to
tourism and agribusiness. GoHP is also investing in a range of rural develop-
ment schemes, including community-based watershed management projects,
to maintain growth in the primary sector. These changes could significantly
impact Himachal Pradesh’s development context.
    New issues of social inclusion and of social exclusion may emerge as a
result of Himachal Pradesh’s previous successes. For instance, as this chapter
later discusses, the state’s reduced fertility and better life expectancy will lead
to larger cohorts of older populations, and ensuring their inclusion in society
and the economy will be a major social policy issue for Himachal Pradesh.
Similarly, while the work of primary education seems nearly done, education
quality has become an increasingly worrisome issue (Sood 2003). The Annual
Status of Education Report (ASER) 2013, based on a survey conducted by
the ASER Centre, shows that while learning outcomes are better in Himach-
al Pradesh than in most states, nearly 40 percent of the state’s children in
classes VI–VIII cannot do simple arithmetic operations such as division. This
is worse than the levels seen in states such as Mizoram (28 percent; ASER
Centre 2014). Similarly, the official National Achievement Survey conducted
by the National Council of Education Research and Training (NCERT 2012)
suggests that the average reading comprehension score for class V students in
Himachal Pradesh is well below that of other states (241 out of 500 compared
to 278 for Tamil Nadu and 282 for Uttar Pradesh).22
	
LOOKING AHEAD: SUSTAINING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND SUSTAINABLE                    59
DEVELOPMENT IN HIMACHAL PRADESH



    Because of Himachal Pradesh’s new growth path, which is expected to
be driven by large infrastructure projects, with potential externalities on the
environment, governance and social relations, some of the state’s past gains
may be at risk of erosion. As shown in this report, Himachal Pradesh has his-
torically managed to maintain favorable and socially equitable outcomes for
its citizens, especially in comparison to its neighbors, mainly due to consistent
government efforts, the social and political organization of Himachal Pradesh,
and an accessible and responsive state government. Citizens’ aspirations in Hi-
machal Pradesh are not mediated by caste in the same way as they are in other
northern states. However, these foundations for good outcomes are likely to
be tested, since reforms inevitably create winners and losers or introduce new
ways of life that may disrupt the previous structures.
    World Bank (2013, 210) summarizes the challenge of social inclusion: “So-
cial inclusion is and will always be a work in progress, as some challenges of
inclusion are met even as others arise.”

   What are the likely channels of change in Himachal Pradesh, in concrete terms?

   Urban growth will inevitably impact Himachal Pradesh’s growth and de-
velopment in the coming years, whereas currently it is the least urbanized
of India’s states (Registrar General of India 2011b). Urban centers typically
afford greater economic opportunity and better educational prospects, but in
Himachal Pradesh, where urban areas are still developing, many social devel-
opment and human development outcomes seem worse. These include a rise
in poverty levels among SCs and STs and lower female-to-male ratios among
children. Second, the state has made excellent progress in the provision of
essential infrastructure and services in rural areas, such as water, sanitation,
education, and health. Unless urban growth is well planned, there are chances
that these gains will erode for urban residents.23 Finally, urban areas are also
home to migrants from other parts of the country as well as Nepal. While
there is no comprehensive survey on migrants in Himachal Pradesh, limited
evidence indicates that migrants are likely to have poorer outcomes. A sur-
vey conducted to assess the extent of rural sanitation coverage in Himachal
Pradesh found that open defecation was significantly higher among migrants
(usually agricultural labor), with a rate of 42 percent compared to 12 percent
for the average rural household.
   As Himachal Pradesh’s agricultural landscape becomes more productive
through agribusiness, it will be important to keep an eye on household food
security and children’s nutrition. Kumar and Prashar (2012) indicate that the
area under cultivation for cereals, grams, and other pulses has been declining
60	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




in Himachal Pradesh, with a shift toward high-value commercial crops such
as vegetables, fruits, and flowers. A change in cropping patterns could mean
that households cut back on food production for their own use, in turn ad-
versely affecting their families’ nutritional status. While Himachal Pradesh has
a strong PDS, neither the PDS nor the Integrated Child Development Services
can, by themselves, make a dent in malnutrition, which currently afflicts one-
third of the state’s children. In this regard, the state government can learn
from interventions that have worked elsewhere (box 4.1). Simultaneously, Hi-
machal Pradesh is increasingly facing “second generation problems” around
horticulture and floriculture, such as declining soil fertility, competition from
cheaper imports and produce grown in poly-houses, and mounting pressures
on existing infrastructure such as roads and market yards. Both agricultural
technology and outreach will play a role in monitoring and ensuring food se-
curity as Himachal Pradesh pushes forward on its agribusiness path.
    Balancing the needs of growth with social and environmental sustainability
will perhaps be the greatest challenge for Himachal Pradesh as it simulta-
neously goes through social transformation. Our qualitative fieldwork indi-
cates that people’s attitudes toward economic development are positive, but
their support for future development is conditional on the extent to which the
state’s social and environmental assets will be protected (box 4.2). Participants
in our focus group discussions displayed a strong sense of pride in their state
and its accomplishments, but almost every discussion led to a conversation on
the interplay between development and the environment.
    As pointed out earlier, the notion of environmental sustainability is closely
linked to the social, economic, cultural, and religious identity of Himachalis.
The Himalayas, which are more than just a mountain range, seem to bind Hi-
machalis by their shared vision of priorities for Himachal Pradesh. A review of
144 hydropower projects involving private sector participation in Himachal
Pradesh suggests that a significant number among them lag behind on com-
pensatory afforestation while also neglecting maintenance of aquatic ecosys-
tems and nearby ground aquifers. Furthermore, during site inspections, 22 of
the 34 projects were found to have fallen short of providing the prescribed 70
percent employment to the local residents (CAG 2012b). Realizing the chal-
lenges of balancing infrastructure-led growth with environmental and social
sustainability, GoHP has put in place a generous system for benefit sharing
(box 3.1). The success of the benefit-sharing scheme and the broader approach
to hydropower development, however, will depend on fair implementation,
the transparency with which new projects are commissioned, and the extent
to which local residents see a joint purpose in the development of new infra-
structure.
	
LOOKING AHEAD: SUSTAINING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND SUSTAINABLE                   61
DEVELOPMENT IN HIMACHAL PRADESH




  Box 4.1. Malnutrition among Young Children: Some Recent
  Lessons
  Malnutrition is a stubborn scourge in many countries, and it is one that
  defies easy solutions despite the many attempts. Take, for example, de-
  worming, which is being globally pushed through health posts or day-
  care centers. Deworming programs are increasingly gaining currency in
  India as a mechanism to reduce anemia among children. The govern-
  ment of India has also been providing nutritional supplements such as
  vitamin A, zinc, and iron to children enrolled in anganwadis.

  A second method that is increasingly popular is to train mothers to
  change behaviors. When combined with incentives for anganwadi
  workers, sharing knowledge around nutrition can have a powerful ef-
  fect on reducing malnutrition. An experiment in a slum in Chandigarh
  did both: in one treatment group, mothers received books containing
  recipes in the local language developed by a local nutritionist. In the
  second treatment group, anganwadi workers were given bonuses for
  children whose weight they were successfully able to increase. Both the
  information and the incentive treatment groups were combined in a
  third group; and all three were compared to a control group. Results
  showed that malnutrition reduced significantly for children in the com-
  bined group and the effect persisted even after the end of the experi-
  ment (Singh 2013).

  A third approach is based on incentives to mothers to track the nu-
  tritional status of their children. A pilot financed by the World Bank
  in Bangladesh, Shombhob (or “possible” in Bangla), provided monthly
  cash transfers to poor mothers if they attended monthly awareness ses-
  sions on nutrition and regularly monitored the growth of their children
  under three years. The cash transfers, made over 20 months, were ac-
  companied by robust communication and monitoring and evaluation
  activities, and made special efforts to ensure the participation of the
  poorest households. An evaluation of the pilot showed that the inter-
  vention had reduced the incidence of wasting among children who were
  10–22 months old at the start of the program by nearly 40 percent.
  Compared to a control group, participants also reported a significant
  rise in food expenses, especially on proteins (World Bank 2014b).

  Source: Singh (2013); World Bank (2014b).
62	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




    Himachal Pradesh has seen a rapid demographic transition, but is poised
to confront next generation demographic issues. Currently, its fertility rate,
which looks like that of France, combined with its low mortality rate, means
that the age structure of the state has undergone a change. Going forward, this
change is likely to become even more pronounced. The proportion of children
in the population will be smaller, and the proportion of those above the age
of 60 will be larger. This will have implications for the care of the elderly, es-
pecially given that Himachal Pradesh is traditional and the elderly usually live
jointly with their children and grandchildren. When combined with increasing
urbanization, living arrangements are likely to change even more. In a society
where women do most of the caregiving, the pressures of elderly parents may
well have implications for women’s access to economic opportunities. On the
fiscal side, social pensions for the elderly are likely to be a major burden, with
more people reaching eligibility. Regarding epidemiology and the burden of
disease, the state will have to deal with infectious diseases and childhood-re-
lated illnesses on the one hand, and, on the other, have to cope with geriatric
illness and non-communicable diseases. In parallel, neonatal mortality contin-
ues to be a challenge for Himachal Pradesh and will need concerted action if
the state’s overall childhood mortality rates are to improve.
    Currently, 19.3 percent of Himachal Pradesh’s population is between the
ages of 15 and 24 (GoHP 2013a). Their aspirations for employment are fo-
cused mainly on the public sector, which is unlikely to be the engine of future
employment for reasons of economic and fiscal sustainability. On the other
hand, while Himachal Pradesh has been very successful in primary and sec-
ondary education, its record in tertiary education has been less impressive,
except in the field of agricultural and veterinary sciences. With the growth of
infrastructure, industry and tourism, a different set of skills will be needed for
local youth if they are to partake in the bounty that growth will bring. Oth-
erwise, the private sector will be unable to absorb local labor into specialized
jobs, and will look outside Himachal Pradesh. GoHP is well aware of this and
has put in place a number of mechanisms to address any potential skills gap.
It may be worthwhile to explore whether companies that locate in Himachal
Pradesh could be encouraged to provide on-the-job training to local youth as
part of their corporate social responsibility.
    Ensuring that its large, educated youth cohort has adequate skills that
match existing job opportunities is an important policy issue. A recent assess-
ment by the National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC), in collabo-
ration with the consulting firm KPMG, suggests that while human resources
are needed in sectors like tourism, construction and hydropower, young peo-
ple in the state do not have the requisite skills to work in these sectors. For
	
LOOKING AHEAD: SUSTAINING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND SUSTAINABLE                       63
DEVELOPMENT IN HIMACHAL PRADESH




  Box 4.2. Balancing Growth with Environment: Discussions in
  Two Villages
  Qualitative fieldwork was conducted in two districts, Shimla and Solan,
  in preparation for the second, forthcoming phase of this study. The ex-
  cerpts below capture concerns as articulated in two villages of Shimla:
  Kanoornala, close to a major tourist center (Kufri), and Nirsu, a village
  close to the site of a hydropower project (Rampur).

  Participants were asked to cite the two most negative events in their com-
  munity over the last few years. Almost all of them in Kanoornala spoke
  about the shortage of water and unpredictable rain and snow. They used
  a simple allegory to discuss how weather patterns were changing: “Ear-
  lier Shimla (the capital city) received snow on the 25th December each
  year. Now, snow is unpredictable and also less,” said one respondent.
  People also spoke of drying rivers, despite Himachal Pradesh being a
  water-abundant state. These problems were felt more acutely in Nirsu,
  the village close to the hydropower project site. Respondents in the vil-
  lage spoke about a perpetual cloud of dust, and more people complained
  of chest infections, resulting in flu-like symptoms. They also noted that
  temperatures had risen and soil productivity had declined, which in turn
  would hurt the production of almonds in the village.

  Besides air and noise pollution, residents of Nirsu spoke about cracks
  in their homes as a result of blasts at the project site. They described the
  earth around their houses as being “shaky.” Roads were damaged and the
  village had become a dumping ground for sand from the project. Weigh-
  ing the pros and cons of the hydropower project, a man in Nirsu said:

      We have benefited from the project. People have got jobs. They are
      constructing houses to give on rent (to project staff). The demand
      for milk has increased so people have started rearing cows. They
      are also getting good prices for their vegetables. But local people
      are bearing the burden even as Himachal Pradesh gets fame (for
      being an energy rich state). Agriculture has deteriorated. We have
      only received a part of the compensation for cracks…Outsiders
      (people who do not belong to the state) don’t keep the area clean.
      (But) how can you expect others to love our community as their
      own (dusaron ka ilaka kyun pyaara hoga?)?

  Source: Authors’ focus group discussions.
64	                                                         SCALING THE HEIGHTS




some hydropower projects in Kinnaur, for instance, there is a shortage of auto
electricians. Similarly, licensed drivers for heavy vehicles are hard to find and
have to be brought in from the Mandi district or other states. The lack of a
workforce with the needed skills constrains the private companies that are
mandated to hire at least 70 percent of their workforce from among Himach-
al Pradesh’s residents. Some companies have tried to overcome their human
resource crunch by setting up their own Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs),
but these initiatives are few and far between. Overall, Himachal Pradesh fac-
es a significant shortfall in training infrastructure and the courses on offer,
especially for semiskilled work. In addition, a youth aspiration study carried
out for the same assessment suggests a clear mismatch between student as-
pirations and the job opportunities available in the state, with a significant
majority among those interviewed showing a preference for jobs in the public
sector (NSDC 2013).
    Addressing the skills challenge will be crucial as Himachal Pradesh moves
forward, both for fulfilling the employment aspirations of a large youth co-
hort and for inducing a shift away from public to private employment. Fur-
ther, GoHP may need to launch information and communication campaigns
to manage expectations around the diminishing likelihood of public employ-
ment. Both the government and the private sector will need to establish trust
and confidence in private sector jobs and private companies in general. Les-
sons from initiatives in other countries, such as the Adolescent Girls Employ-
ment Initiative in Nepal, can help (box 4.3).
    Progress in achieving gender equality has been one of Himachal Pradesh’s
important successes, but female-to-male ratios (adverse to girl children) re-
main a cause of concern, despite the fact that there have been improvements.
Adverse female-to-male ratios and a strong preference for sons point to a like-
ly “north Indian contagion” that Himachal Pradesh will need to guard against
in other areas as well. In this regard, experience from states like Maharashtra,
which succeeded in improving its female-to-male child ratios in districts such
as Kolhapur, from under 800 girls per 1,000 boys to over 900 in the decade
between the two censuses, can be useful. Gains in Maharashtra are attributed
mostly to a five-point health program targeting problem areas to “save the girl
child.” Salient elements of the program included: spreading awareness among
elected representatives and women already having a girl child; using different
platforms to spread the message; keeping track of pregnant women; and mak-
ing female-to-male ratios a priority topic on the agenda during meetings of
local organizations and agencies. Women also received, as an incentive, a kit
consisting of first clothes for the girl child, necessary medicines, and health tips
before discharge from the primary health care center.
	
LOOKING AHEAD: SUSTAINING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND SUSTAINABLE                     65
DEVELOPMENT IN HIMACHAL PRADESH




  Box 4.3. Training Girls in Nepal: The Adolescent Girls
  Employment Initiative
  The Adolescent Girls Employment Initiative (AGEI) in Nepal is part
  of the World Bank–supported Adolescent Girls Initiative (AGI), which
  is currently underway in eight low-income and post-conflict countries.
  The AGI originated from a commitment made by the Bank in 2008 to
  promote gender equality through sustainable increases in young wom-
  en’s labor force participation and earnings.

  The initiative built on the capacity and experience of the Employment
  Fund (EF) in Nepal, which had been working successfully with private
  training and employment (T&E) providers to offer opportunities for
  both young men and women. Payment to the T&E providers was out-
  come based and included additional incentives for training and placing
  socially and economically disadvantaged youth. The financing was struc-
  tured such that providers were paid 40 percent on training completion of
  all participants, another 25 percent of the agreed amount at verification
  of gainful employment at three months; and the remaining 35 percent
  when at least 80 percent of participants confirmed gainful employment
  at six months. Providers were additionally required to undertake a rapid
  market assessment to determine demand for skills in particular markets
  and were paid incentives over and above the agreed amount if they placed
  youth from disadvantaged communities (Dalits, Janajatis in Nepal) and
  poor families. The AGEI innovated on the structure set up by EF by ad-
  justing the incentive and payment scheme (higher incentives if providers
  trained young girls, especially from disadvantaged families); improving
  on the communication and outreach strategy so more parents send their
  girls for training; and adding cognitive and noncognitive skills training,
  especially for women (including sessions on decision making, violence,
  and reproductive health) (Rajabhandry 2013).

  As of 2013, AGEI had trained nearly 4,500 adolescent girls aged 16–24
  in over 80 trades, provided additional training in life skills, and had
  helped about 3,000 find gainful employment. An impact evaluation of
  the initiative comparing girls who did and did not receive training sug-
  gested that the former were more likely to be employed and earned
  more than the latter. Furthermore, they were also likely to exert greater
  control over their earnings (Ahmed, Chakravarty and Lundberg 2014).

  Source: Ahmed, Chakravarty, and Lundberg (2014); Rajabhandry (2013).
66	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




    Another potential area of concern is women’s employment. While women’s
labor force participation in Himachal Pradesh is higher than in other states, it
cannot be assumed that this pattern will sustain as the private sector becomes
a larger employer. In addition, it is not clear whether the responsibilities that
arise from women’s roles as caregivers will be addressed to enable them to un-
dertake more lucrative market work. These issues have yet to receive attention
or policy response, and hence, may emerge as challenges to progress in gender
equality in Himachal Pradesh.
    Social stratification in Himachal Pradesh is different from that in other
states in northern India and has worked well for social cohesion, but it is
important to realize that power dynamics may change in light of other trends.
Not only is the numerical strength of SCs and STs larger in Himachal Pradesh,
but their socioeconomic status is also higher than that of their counterparts
in neighboring states. In addition, policy measures have sought to integrate
them into the state’s social fabric, leading to greater stability and cohesion.
That said, caste-based norms are strong in Himachal Pradesh and have been
instrumental in ensuring that various castes maintain their traditional place in
terms of intermarriage, inter-dining, and other socio-religious practices. Going
forward, as reforms progress and changes take place in other areas, chances
are that caste-based norms will also change. Any potentially disruptive impact
these changes may have on social cohesion and group dynamics can be medi-
ated, to some extent, by public conversations around caste and its changing
role. Finally, political power and social stratification are intrinsically linked
in Himachal Pradesh. Reforms are likely to bring new players into the so-
ciopolitical milieu. These individuals and groups could be from a previously
non-dominant caste, a new middle class, migrants from other states, private
companies and their employees, or NGOs, to name a few possibilities. It is
important for GoHP as well as for leaders and citizens of Himachal Pradesh
to be prepared for such possibilities and their possible implications.
    Finally, change brings huge transformations in the expectations, aspira-
tions, and ambitions of citizens. Expectations and opportunities are dou-
ble-edged swords: people want new opportunities so they can make better
lives, but when reality does not live up to expectations, it can lead to frustra-
tion. The case of public employment in Himachal Pradesh, which has been
almost an entitlement for its citizens, is a good case in point. Going forward,
it is unlikely that the generous public employment trend will be sustainable,
so GoHP needs to inform citizens of this likely change and promote private
sector alternatives. Our qualitative work shows that Himachalis have high
aspirations for their state, but they are anxious about the effect that rapid
development will have on their values and culture. The biggest fear seems to
	
LOOKING AHEAD: SUSTAINING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND SUSTAINABLE                       67
DEVELOPMENT IN HIMACHAL PRADESH



be that rapid progress may lead to a loss of tradition and values like hones-
ty. While people trust their politicians, there are already murmurs of dissent,
particularly around large infrastructure projects. One of the major sources of
anxiety is the manner in which land is being bought and sold. It is possible
that the earlier sense of transparency and trust will be eroded by what locals
consider are opaque land deals among private persons and the government.
Citizens of Himachal Pradesh also expressed their desire for a better-regulated
tourism sector, since they seem to believe that unprofessional and untrained
tourist guides “bring Himachal a bad name.” A tribal man interviewed by the
authors in Nirsu succinctly summed up the hopes and fears of citizens during
a period of reform: “My only hope for Himachal is that the culture of trust is
kept alive.”
    Much of the churning in Himachal Pradesh that may accompany reforms
can be managed if the kernels of success remain intact or adapt to the state’s
new development context. These include, among others, transparency and ac-
countability at the local level; independence of the bureaucracy; incentives for
innovation; and good implementation. This report closes with a quote from
Inclusion Matters (World Bank 2013b, 151), which illustrates that many of
the policy issues faced by Himachal Pradesh are shared globally and notes that
Himachal Pradesh is well positioned to build on its previous successes and
continue moving forward:

    From an economic perspective, future policy will need to provide rap-
    id and effective responses to expanding numbers of youth and the
    elderly, while fulfilling the basic needs of an increasingly urbanized
    and unequal population, without leaving a large carbon footprint for
    the generations to come. From a political perspective, it will be es-
    sential to understand the changing attitudes, behaviors and demands
    of the youth and middle class, and to create new opportunities and
    mechanisms for greater participation in decision making. At the same
    time, responsive governance and careful targeting of public services
    to a new profile of (global) citizens will be essential. From a social
    perspective, future policies and institutions will need to promote the
    affiliation of different social groups with the evolving social, political
    and economic reality of increasingly diverse societies.
	                                                                                 69




        Appendix A: Illustrative Examples of
                             Recent Reforms

    While efforts to spur growth in the secondary and tertiary sectors date back to
    the early 1980s, GoHP implemented major policy reforms and other actions
    in the early 2000s to strengthen its economy. For example, the introduction
    of private sector incentives in the Industrial Policy of 2003 and 2004, which
    included tax exemptions on incomes and capital investments as well as trans-
    port subsidies for industrial enterprises, resulted in an increase in the number
    of small and medium enterprises across Himachal Pradesh. This increase oc-
    curred particularly in the low plains, such as Solan district, where proximity to
    neighboring states and low transportation costs led to an estimated 7,000 new
    industrial projects and 270,000 jobs between 2003 and 2011 (GoHP, undated
    a). Similarly, the Tourism Policy of 2000 and 2005 aimed to increase tourism’s
    contribution to Himachal Pradesh’s gross domestic product (GDP) from 8 to
    15 percent through tax exemptions, increased public investments in trans-
    portation, cultural heritage preservation, and new tourism activities (GoHP
    2005). In the rural sector, the Integrated Water Development Project was ex-
    tended into the mid-hills areas through the Mid-Himalayan Watershed De-
    velopment Project in 2005. This expanded the coverage of community-based
    microwatershed methods to an additional one-third of the state, accounting
    for more than half of Himachal Pradesh’s cultivated land (GoHP undated c).
        One of the most ambitious reform initiatives took place in the hydropower
    sector. Home to five major river basins, Himachal Pradesh is endowed with
    significant hydropower potential. The 2006 Hydropower Policy, which sup-
    plemented the Electricity Act of 2003 (regulating the production and distri-
    bution of electricity across Himachal Pradesh), established an overarching
70	                                                       SCALING THE HEIGHTS




framework for harnessing the state’s full hydropower capacity (21,000 MW)
through private investments in small-, medium-, and large-scale dams. From
a fiscal perspective, hydropower is expected to provide GoHP significant
amount of nontax revenue. The electricity generated is also considered an im-
portant input for industrial growth in Himachal Pradesh, as well as providing
power to its residents and enabling GoHP to expand its social programs.
    The regulatory framework for allotting hydropower projects incorporated
a series of cash and noncash initiatives to attract investors under a “build-op-
erate-transfer” arrangement for large hydropower projects (greater than 5
MW). Under this arrangement, GoHP would acquire and allocate land for
hydropower development and, in return, collect royalties and dividends from
the highest bidding developer for a period of 40 years. After this period, the
ownership of the plant would be transferred to GoHP. Although large projects
were open for international competition, the policy reserved small-scale hy-
dropower projects (less than 2 MW) for competition among local companies
and cooperatives. In addition, GoHP gave priority to local firms or partner-
ships for medium-scale projects (2–5 MW). The hydropower policy also in-
corporated provisions aimed at protecting local residents from the economic,
social, and environmental risks associated with hydropower development. The
provisions included a variety of local mechanisms for managing environmen-
tal and livelihood-related risks as well as the sharing of monetary and other
forms of developmental benefits with the local residents, collectively called
“benefit sharing” (box 3.1).
    The benefit-sharing schemes were implemented in the context of larger
policy reforms that were also supported by the World Bank during 2011-14.
For instance, the reforms toward a green growth model built on Himachal
Pradesh’s commitment in 2010 to shift toward a sustainable growth model
that incorporates climate change adaptation as well as its goal to become a
carbon neutral state by 2020. To that end, GoHP established a series of ini-
tiatives to institutionalize climate change adaptation, ranging from state-level
institutions to community-level efforts. For example, it constituted a state-lev-
el Governing Council and Executive Council on Climate Change, which over-
sees climate change–related work and prepared a climate change strategy and
action plan. Himachal Pradesh also established a program called Communi-
ty-Led Assessment, Awareness, Advocacy and Action Program (CLAP) for En-
vironment Protection and Sustainable Development, which seeks to mobilize
communities to prepare their own environmental development plans.
    GoHP also introduced a series of initiatives designed to enhance environ-
mental stewardship. These include the adoption of an environment master
plan to: promote a regional approach based on vulnerability assessments and
Appendix A: Illustrative Examples of Recent Reforms 	                       71




identification of ecologically fragile zones to guide development plans; estab-
lish the Centre for Climate Change and Disaster Management and a State
Resource Information Centre to serve as a repository for all databases on
the environment, natural resources, and climate change; introduce a program
to promote the use of compact fluorescent lamps for energy conservation;
introduce environmental studies into school curricula; ban polythene carry
bags and use of plastic waste, which has been implemented throughout the
state; establish the Himachal Pradesh Environment Fund as a voluntary fund
for environment protection, conservation, and restoration; implement the
mountain-ecosystem advocacy initiative to provide a platform for discussions
among Himalayan states; require mandatory rainwater harvesting in all newly
constructed buildings; and ban the use of coal and fossil fuels for space heat-
ing, which has increased need for electric heating, among others.
	                                                                                 73




                             Appendix B: Methodology

    Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) is an approach for assessing the
    poverty, distributional, and social impacts of policy reforms, with a focus on
    poor and vulnerable groups. If conducted before the reform process, PSIA can
    provide a sound empirical evidence to inform the design and sequencing of
    alternative policy options. If undertaken during or after the reform, it can help
    assess or monitor the actual impacts of the policy, suggest ways to mitigate
    adverse effects, and help decision makers understand the likely impacts of
    future reforms. Since PSIA generates evidence to inform policy dialogue and
    decision making, it can also be a useful tool for building local ownership and
    public support for reforms.
        The design of this PSIA was influenced by the complexity of the transition
    taking place across Himachal Pradesh, which posed a number of method-
    ological challenges. First, since the implementation of multiple policy reforms
    takes place over time, welfare and social impacts of this transition are likely
    to unfold continuously, making it difficult to capture them through a single
    study or to attribute observed changes to any particular policy. Second, the
    attribution challenge is complicated by possible mixed impacts stemming
    from the multi-sectoral nature of the change taking place across Himachal
    Pradesh, which is targeting rural development along with a major effort to
    transform and shift the economy toward secondary and tertiary sectors. Third,
    some of the sectors under reform are geographically dispersed and more likely
    to produce statewide impacts (such as productivity and employment effects
    of watershed and tourism reforms, respectively), whereas others are heavily
    concentrated in certain districts and blocks whose impacts will be felt at the
    community level (such as social and environmental impacts of hydropower
74	                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




development or economic impacts of benefit sharing). Finally, some of the
impacts of the reform program cannot be captured in a PSIA focused on Hi-
machal Pradesh, because their impacts will go well beyond, as in the case of
hydropower developments providing electricity to other parts of the country.
    In light of these considerations, the PSIA was designed as a multistage,
mixed-methods study to capture three main aspects of the state’s new devel-
opment trajectory: (1) a macrosocial analysis of the state’s previous accom-
plishments and the road ahead; (2) residents’ perceptions regarding Himach-
al Pradesh’s new development trajectory and ongoing changes taking place
across Himachal Pradesh; and (3) community- and household-level responses
to a selective group of reforms that are key to the transition of Himachal
Pradesh, namely, in the hydropower and watershed sectors.
    The first stage of the PSIA, presented in this report, documents Himachal
Pradesh’s development outcomes over time, based on analysis of the Nation-
al Sample Survey (NSS) and by drawing on other surveys and the relevant
literature. This analysis is complemented with qualitative accounts from the
authors’ field trips and discussions with approximately 300 key informants,
individually and in groups, in the Shimla and Solan districts. The key infor-
mants included government officials, academics, civil society and private sec-
tor representatives, as well as members of communities visited during the pilot
fieldwork for the second phase of the PSIA or during other field trips. The au-
thors also held discussions with a group of researchers who conducted back-
ground ethnographic work for this report, with the participation of 124 key
informants across the Mandi, Kinnaur, Bilaspur, Shimla, and Solan districts.
In addition, the authors participated in three workshops organized by GoHP
that included representatives from various governmental agencies.
    The key informants interviewed by the authors were affiliated with, among
others, the Directorate of Energy; Department of Forests, Environment, Sci-
ence, and Technology; Department of Rural Development and Panchayati
Raj; Department of Agriculture; Department of Planning; Aryabhatta Geo-In-
formatics and Space Application Centre; Agro Economic Research Centre,
Himachal Pradesh University; Indian Institute for Advanced Studies; Com-
munity-Led Assessment, Awareness, Advocacy, and Action Program (CLAP)
for Environment Protection and Sustainable Development; Himachal Pradesh
Power Corporation; SJVN Limited; Mid-Himalayan Watershed Development
Project; Rampur Forest Committee Management Project; and representatives
of local districts, blocks, and villages.
    The second stage of the PSIA will assess the welfare and social impacts of
benefit sharing and community-based watershed management at the house-
hold and community levels. Focusing specifically on districts affected by the
Appendix B: Methodology	                                                     75




changes in the hydropower and watershed sectors, a sample of 1,400 house-
holds will be analyzed to assess the change in household welfare and communi-
ty coping mechanisms. In addition, key informant and focus group interviews
will be analyzed in relation to any spillover effects resulting from hydropower
development and the establishment of improved community watershed man-
agement. The qualitative interviews and focus group discussions are expected
to elicit local residents’ experiences regarding the changes taking place across
Himachal Pradesh as well as spearhead a form of community monitoring.
	                                                                                77




                                                            References
    Agrawal, A., and A. Chhatre. 2007. “State Involvement and Forest Co-Gov-
       ernance: Evidence from the Indian Himalayas.” Studies in Comparative
       International Development 42 (1–2): 67–86.
    Agrawal, D. P. 2010. Land Reforms in States and Union Territories in India.
       Delhi: Concept Publishing Company Pvt. Ltd.
    Ahluwalia, M. S. 1998. Social, Cultural, and Economic History of Himachal
       Pradesh. Delhi: Indus Publishing.
    Ahmed, A., S. Chakravarty, and M. Lundberg. 2014. “Adolescent Girls Em-
       ployment Initiative (AGEI) in Nepal: Impact Evaluation Results.” Presen-
       tation made at the World Bank, March 27.
    ASER Centre. 2014. Annual Status of Education Report (Rural) 2013. New
       Delhi: ASER Centre.
    Batra, A. 2002. “A Case Study of Major Issues and Sustainable Solutions to
        Mountain Tourism in the Capital of Himachal Pradesh, Eternalindia.”
        Anatolia 13 (2): 213–20.
    Berti, D. 2009. “Divine Jurisdictions and Forms of Government in Himachal
        Pradesh (Northern India).” In Territory, Soil and Society in South Asia, ed.
        D. Berti and Gilles Tarabout, 311–39. New Delhi: Manohar.
    Bhasin, V. 1990. Habitat, Habitation and Health in the Himalayas: A Compar-
       ative Study of the People of Sikkim and the Gaddis of Himachal Pradesh.
       Delhi: KRE Publishers.
    Bhatnagar, S. 1981. “Politics of Land Reforms in India: A Case Study of Land
       Legislation in Himachal Pradesh.” Asian Survey 21 (4): 454–68.
78	                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Bingeman, K. 2001. “Women’s Participation in Forest Management Decisions
    in the Upper Kullu Valley, Himachal Pradesh, India.” Himalaya, the Jour-
    nal of the Association for Nepal and Himalayan Studies 21 (2): 10.
CAG (Comptroller and Auditor General of India). 2012a. Report No.-1 of
   2012, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Report of the Comptroller and
   Auditor General of India on State Finances (for the year ended March 31,
   2012). Shimla: GoHP.
———. 2012b. Report No.-2 of 2012, Government of Himachal Pradesh,
  Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Social, Gen-
  eral and Economic Sectors. Non-Public Sector Undertakings for the year
  ended March 31, 2012. Shimla: GoHP.
———. 2013. Report No.-22 of 2012-13-Union Government (Ministry of
  Women and Child Development), Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
  General of India on Performance Audit of Integrated Child Development
  Services (ICDS) Scheme. New Delhi: Government of India.
Chatterjee, D., and A. Das. 2013. “Space and Identity: A Study on the Tradi-
   tion and Change of the Gujars of Himachal Pradesh.” Antrocom Online
   Journal of Anthropology 9 (1).
Chhatre, A., and V. Saberwal. 2006. “Democracy, Development and (Re-) Vi-
   sions of Nature: Rural Conflicts in the Western Himalayas.” The Journal
   of Peasant Studies 33 (4): 678–706.
Cohen, A. 2000. “Excess Female Mortality in India: The Case of Himachal
   Pradesh.” American Journal of Public Health 90 (9): 1369.
Cole, V., and A. J. Sinclair. 2002. “Measuring the Ecological Footprint of a
    Himalayan Tourist Center.” Mountain Research and Development 22 (2):
    132–41.
Conzelmann, E. 2006. “A Royal Ritual of Mandi State.” European Bulletin of
   Himalayan Research 29 (30): 14–38.
Cranney, B. 2001. Local Environment and Lived Experience: The Mountain
   Women of Himachal Pradesh (Vol. 6). New Delhi: Sage Publications India
   Pvt. Ltd.
Desai, S. B., A. Dubey, B. L. Joshi, M. Sen, A. Shariff, and R. Vanneman. 2010.
   Human Development in India: Challenges for a Society in Transition.
   New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Drèze, J., and R. Khera. 2012. “Regional Patterns of Human and Child Depri-
   vation in India.” Economic and Political Weekly 57: 42–49.
References	                                                              79




Drèze, J., and G. G. Kingdon. 2001. “School Participation in Rural India.”
   Review of Development Economics 5 (1): 1–24.
Drèze, J., and A. Sen. 2011. “Putting Growth in Its Place.” Outlook, Novem-
   ber 14. Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://www.outlookindia.
   com/article/Putting-Growth-In-Its-Place/278843.
Dutta, P., R. Murgai, M. Ravallion, and D. Van de Walle. 2012. “Does India’s
   Employment Guarantee Scheme Guarantee Employment?” World Bank
   Policy Research Working Paper 6003, Washington, DC.
Economic Times, The. 2012. “Himachal Pradesh to Be the 1st State to Be-
   come Carbon-Neutral by 2020: Dhumal.” February 2, 2012. Last ac-
   cessed on December 14, 2014 at http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.
   com/2012-02-02/news/31017303_1_carbon-emission-panchayats-ghg.
Fischer, H. W., and A. Chhatre. 2013. “Environmental Citizenship, Gender,
    and the Emergence of a New Conservation Politics.” Geoforum 50: 10–19.
Gardner, J. S. 2002. “Natural Hazards Risk in the Kullu District, Himachal
   Pradesh, India.” Geographical Review 92 (2): 282–306.
Gardner, J. S., and A. J. Sinclair. 2003. “Evaluation of Capacity and Policy
   Development for Environmental Sustainability: A Case from Himachal
   Pradesh, India.” Canadian Journal of Development Studies/Revue cana-
   dienne d’études du développement 24 (1): 137–53.
Gaul, K. K. 2001. “On the Move: Shifting Strategies in Environmental Activ-
   ism in Chamba District of Himachal Pradesh.” Himalaya, the Journal of
   the Association for Nepal and Himalayan Studies 21 (2): 12.
Girard, A. M. 2014. “Stepping into Formal Politics: Women’s Engagement in
    Formal Political Processes in Irrigation in Rural India.” World Develop-
    ment 57: 1–18.
GoHP (government of Himachal Pradesh). Undated a. “Status of Industry:
   District-Wise Details of Industrial Units Registered in the Small, Medium
   & Large Scale Sector.” Department of Industries. Shimla: GoHP. Last ac-
   cessed on December 14, 2014 at http://admis.hp.nic.in/himachal/industry/
   indstatus.htm.
———. Undated b. “Acts: Land Reforms Legislations—Land Legislations.”
  Department of Revenue. Shimla: GoHP. Last accessed on December 14,
  2014 at http://himachal.nic.in/searchdetails.php?lang=&lid=750&s-
  key=abolition&dpt_id=13.
80	                                                  SCALING THE HEIGHTS




———. Undated c. “Pattern and Context of Rural Livelihoods in Himachal
  Pradesh.” Planning Department. Shimla: GoHP. Last accessed on Decem-
  ber 14, 2014 at http://hpplanning.nic.in/Rural%20Liveihood-HP.pdf.
———. 2002. Himachal Pradesh Human Development Report. Shimla: GoHP.
——— . 2005. “Tourism Policy 2005.” Department of Tourism and Civil Avi-
  ation. Shimla: GoHP. Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://tour-
  ism.gov.in/writereaddata/Uploaded/Misc/101120111143327.pdf .
———. 2006. “Hydropower Policy.” Department of MPP and Power. Shimla:
  GoHP.
———. 2009. “Revised Hydropower Policy.” Department of MPP and Power.
  Shimla: GoHP.
———. 2011. “Revised Guidelines for Management of Local Area Develop-
  ment Fund (LADF).” No: MPP-F (10)-24/2011. Shimla: GoHP.
———. 2013a. “Socio Economic Indicators of Himachal Pradesh, 2013.” De-
  partment of Economics and Statistics. Shimla: GoHP. Last accessed on
  December 14, 2014 at http://admis.hp.nic.in/himachal/economics/RE-
  PORTS/Socio2013_A1b.pdf.
———. 2013b. “Revised Guidelines for Management of Local Area Develop-
  ment Fund (LADF).” No: MPP-F (10)-24/2011-II. Shimla: GoHP.
———. 2014. “Economic Survey of Himachal Pradesh, 2013–2014.” De-
  partment of Economics and Statistics. Shimla: GoHP. Last accessed on
  December 14, 2014 at http://admis.hp.nic.in/himachal/economics/pdfs/
  ESEng2013-14_A1b.pdf.
Gupta, V., and K. Shah. 1999. “Tourism in the Himalayas: Seizing the Oppor-
   tunity.” In Gender and Tourism: Women’s Employment and Participation
   in Tourism Report for the United Nations Commission on Sustainable De-
   velopment, 7th Session, April 1999, New York, ed. M. Hemmati, 57–70.
   London: United Nations Environment and Development Committee of
   the United Kingdom.
Haq, M. 1995. Reflections on Human Development. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
   sity Press.
Himanshu, and A. Sen. 2013. “In-Kind Food Transfers-I.” Economic and Po-
   litical Weekly 48 (45–46): 46–54.
References	                                                                81




Hueso González, Andres. 2013. “Pathways to Sustainability in Communi-
   ty-Led Total Sanitation: Experiences from Madhya Pradesh and Himach-
   al Pradesh.” Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Polytechnic University of
   Valencia, Department of Economics and Social Sciences.
IIPA (Indian Institute of Public Administration). 2013. Strengthening of Pan-
    chayats in India: Comparing Devolution across States, Empirical Assess-
    ment, 2012–13. Sponsored by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. New Del-
    hi: IIPA.
IIPS (International Institute for Population Sciences). 2010. District Lev-
    el Household and Facility Survey (DLHS-3), 2007–08: India, Himachal
    Pradesh. Mumbai: IIPS.
Jha, P., R. Kumar, P. Vasa, N. Dhingra, D. Thiruchelvam, and R. Moineddin.
    2006. “Low Male-to-Female Sex Ratio of Children Born in India: Nation-
    al Survey of 1.1 Million Households.” The Lancet 367 (9506): 211–18.
John, M. E., R. Kaur, R. Palriwala, S. Raju, and A. Sagar. 2008. Planning Fam-
    ilies, Planning Gender: The Adverse Child Sex Ratio in Selected Districts
    of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, and Punjab.
    New Delhi: Action Aid and International Development Research Centre.
    Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http: //www.cwds.ac.in/Planning-
    Families PlanningGender.pdf.
Kar, K., and J. Chambers. 2008. Handbook on Community-Led Total Sanita-
    tion. London: Plan International UK.
Kumar, A., S. Kumar, D. K. Singh, and Shivjee. 2011. “Rural Employment Di-
   versification in India: Trends, Determinants and Implications on Poverty.”
   Agricultural Economics Research Review 24: 361–72.
Kumar, S., and D. Prashar. 2012. “An Analysis on Changing Trends of
   Foodgrains in Himachal Pradesh.” International Journal of Pharmacy &
   Life Sciences 3 (6) June: 1739–42.
Lozecznik, Vanessa. 2010. “The Role of Protests as Platforms for Action on
   Sustainability in the Kullu Valley, India.” Thesis submitted to the Faculty
   of Graduate Studies of the University of Manitoba.
Mandelbaum, D. G. 1970. Society in India. Two Volumes, Berkeley and Los
   Angeles: University of California Press.
Mangla, A. 2014. “Bureaucratic Norms and State Capacity: Implementing Pri-
   mary Education in India’s Himalayan Region.” Working Paper 14-099,
   Harvard Business School.
82	                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




NCERT (National Council of Educational Research and Training). 2012. Na-
  tional Achievement Survey Class V. New Delhi: NCERT.
Negi, S. S. 1993. Himachal Pradesh: The Land and People. Delhi: Indus Pub-
   lishing.
Newell, W. H. 1961. Himachal Pradesh: The Gaddi and Affiliated Castes in the
   Western Himalayas: Report on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
   Census of India, Delhi: Manager Publications.
NSDC (National Skill Development Corporation). 2013. District Wise Skill
   Gap Study for the State of Himachal Pradesh (2012–17, 2017–22), New
   Delhi: National Skill Development Corporation. Last accessed on Decem-
   ber 14, 2014 at http://www.nsdcindia.org/sites/default/files/files/hp-sg-re-
   port.pdf.
O’Reilly, K., and E. Louis. 2014. “The Toilet Tripod: Understanding Successful
   Sanitation in Rural India.” Health & Place 29: 43–51.
Parmar, H. S. 1992. Tribal Development in Himachal Pradesh: Policy, Pro-
   grammes, and Performance. New Delhi: Mittal Publications.
Parmar, H. S., and A. Rana. 2003. “Himachal Pradesh: Appropriating Images
   from Village Life.” Economic and Political Weekly August 2: 3236–39.
Parry, J. 1979. Caste and Kinship in Kangra. London: Routledge.
PROBE. 1999. Public Report on Basic Education in India. New Delhi: Oxford
   University Press.
Rajabhandry, J. 2013. “Making Employment Programs Work for Adolescent
    Girls: Adolescent Girls Employment Initiative (AGEI) Nepal.” Presenta-
    tion at the World Bank, March 27.
Registrar General of India. 2011a. “Census of India 2011: Provisional Pop-
   ulation Totals.” Paper 1. Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://
   www.censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-results/prov_data_products_himach-
   al.html.
———. 2011b. “Census of India. 2011: Provisional Population Totals.” Paper
  2, Volume 1. Rural-Urban Distribution. Last accessed on December 14,
  2014 at http://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-results/paper2-vol2/
  data_files/Meghalaya/CHAPTER_IV.pdf.
Robinson, A. 2006. “Community-Led Total Sanitation.” British Travel Health
   Association Journal 7: 18.
References	                                                                83




Saberwal, V. 1996. “The Politicization of Gaddi Access to Grazing Resources
    in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, 1960 to 1994.” Himalaya, the Journal of
    the Association for Nepal and Himalayan Studies 16 (1): 5.
———. 2003. “Development Lessons from the Himachal Pradesh Experi-
  ence.” India Today 13: 22.
———. 2004. “Delivering Basic Public Services in Himachal Pradesh: Is the
  Success Sustainable?” Economic and Political Weekly 39 (9): 975–78.
———. 2008. “Development Lessons from the Himachal Pradesh Experi-
  ence.” ASCI Journal of Management 37 (2): 109–121.
———. 2010. “CLTS: The Sanitation Story of the Millennium.” The India
  Chapter. Draft.
Sanan, D., P. Chauhan, and V. Rana. 2011. “Survey of Recent Sanitation
   Achievement in Himachal Pradesh: A Study by Institute of Develop-
   ment Studies.” Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://www.indi-
   awaterportal.org/articles/survey-recent-sanitation-achievement-himach-
   al-pradesh-study-institute-development-studies.
Sarkar, R. 2010. “Rural Accessibility and Development: Sustainability Con-
    cerns in an Ecologically Fragile Mountain Belt.” Economic & Political
    Weekly 45 (21): 63.
Sax, W. 2006. “Introduction: Divine Kingship in the Western Himalayas.” Eu-
    ropean Bulletin of Himalayan Research 29–30: 7–13.
Sethi, R. M. 2010. “Ethnography of Gender, Property and Reform in Himach-
    al Pradesh.” In Social Transformation in North-Western India During the
    20th Century, ed. C. Singh, 461-503. New Delhi: Manohar.
Sharma, H. R. 2011. “Crop Diversification in Himachal Pradesh: Patterns, De-
    terminants, and Challenges.” Paper presented at workshop, “Policy Op-
    tions and Investment Priorities for Accelerating Agricultural Productivity
    and Investment in India,” November 10–11, India International Centre,
    New Delhi.
Sharma, T. R. 1999. “Local Configurations and National Parties in Himachal
    Pradesh.” Economic and Political Weekly 34 (34/35): 2465–3471.
Sharma, U. 1980. Women, Work, and Property in North-West India. London:
    Tavistock Publications.
Sinclair, A. J. 2003. “Assessing the Impacts of Micro-Hydro Development in
    the Kullu District, Himachal Pradesh, India.” Mountain Research and De-
    velopment 23 (1): 11–13.
84	                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




Sinclair, A. J., and A. P. Diduck. 2000. “Public Involvement in Environmental
    Impact Assessment: A Case Study of Hydro Development in Kullu Dis-
    trict, Himachal Pradesh, India.” Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal
    18 (1): 63–75.
Singh, C. 2004. “Between Two Worlds: The Trader-Pastoralists of Kinnaur.”
    In Mobile and Marginalized Peoples. Perspectives from the Past, ed. Ru-
    dolph Heredia and Shereen Ratnagar. New Delhi: Manohar.
———. 2011. “Diverse Forms of Polyandry and Customary Rights of Inheri-
  tance and Landownership in the Western Himalayas.” In Recognizing Di-
  versity: Society and Culture in the Himalaya, ed. C. Singh, 98-121. New
  Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Singh, I. P., and M. K. Bhasin. 1983. “Anthropological Studies among Pang-
    walas and Gaddis of Himachal Pradesh, North India.” Anthropologischer
    Anzeiger 41 (2): 137–48.
Singh, P. 2013. “How Can India Tackle Child Malnutrition?” Live Mint,
    September 2. Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://www.live-
    mint.com/Opinion/ZZfy4EMWxjftmkHU8yMfhO/How-can-India-tack-
    le-child-malnutrition.html.
Snehi, Y. 2011. “Diversity as Counter-hegemony: Reet and Gender Relations
    in Himachal Pradesh.” In Recognizing Diversity: Society and Culture in
    the Himalaya, ed. C. Singh, 75-97. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Sood, A. 2003. “Himachal Pradesh: Critical Issues in Primary Education.”
   Economic and Political Weekly June: 2469–70.
SRS (Sample Registration System). 2011. “Maternal & Child Mortality and
   Total Fertility Rates.” New Delhi: Office of Registrar General, India. Last
   accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://censusindia.gov.in/vital_statis-
   tics/SRS_Bulletins/MMR_release_070711.pdf.
Subaiya, L., and W. B. Dhananjay. 2011. “Demographics of Population Aging
   in India.” BKPAI Working Paper No. 1. New Delhi: United Nations Pop-
   ulation Fund.
Tiwari, A. K. 2000. Infrastructure and Economic Development in Himachal
   Pradesh. Delhi: Indus Publishing.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1990. Human Develop-
  ment Report 1990. New York: Oxford University Press.
References	                                                               85




UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 1994. Evaluation of the use and
   maintenance of water supply and sanitation system in primary schools.
   Dhaka: Consulting Services and Associates.
Verma, V. 1995. The Emergence of Himachal Pradesh: A Survey of Constitu-
   tional Developments. Delhi: Indus Publishing.
Vidal, D. 1989. Le culte des divinités locales dans une région de l’Himachal
    Pradesh. Paris: ORSTOM.
Virmani, A., and C. Singh. 2013. “Malnutrition, Not Hunger, Ails India.” Live
    Mint and The Wall Street Journal, September 22. Last accessed on Decem-
    ber 14, 2014 at http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/3qMKRqinXT0Dlk-
    l39K5N3M/Malnutrition-not-hunger-ails-India.html.
World Bank. 2007. Himachal Pradesh: Accelerating Development and Sus-
   taining Success in a Hill State. Poverty Reduction and Economic Manage-
   ment, India Country Management Unit, South Asia Region, Report No:
   39810-IN, Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
———. 2011. Poverty and Social Exclusion in India. Washington, D.C.: World
  Bank.
———. 2012. India—Development Policy Loan to Support Inclusive Green
  Growth and Sustainable Development in Himachal Pradesh. Washing-
  ton, D.C.: World Bank. Last accessed on December 14, 2014 at http://
  documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/08/16708053/india-develop-
  ment-policy-loan-support-inclusive-green-growth-sustainable-develop-
  ment-himachal-pradesh.
———. 2013a. Country Partnership Strategy for India for the Period FY 2013–
  2017. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Last accessed on December 14,
  2014 at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/03/17582097/
  india-country-partnership-strategy-period-fy13-fy17.
———. 2013b. Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity.
  Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
———. 2014a. India—Second Development Policy Loan to Promote In-
  clusive Green Growth and Sustainable Development in Himach-
  al Pradesh Program. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Last accessed
  on December 14, 2014, at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
  en/2014/04/19538671/india-second-development-policy-loan-pro-
  mote-inclusive-green-growth-sustainable-development-himach-
  al-pradesh-program.
86	                                                SCALING THE HEIGHTS




———. 2014b. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit to the
  People’s Republic of Bangladesh for a Shombhob Cash Transfer Project.”
  Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
	                                                                                                    87




                                                                                      Notes
    1.	 Human development is defined as the process of enlarging people’s freedoms and opportuni-
        ties to improve their well-being (UNDP 1990; Haq 1995). Basic universal capabilities that are
        essential to human development are good health, access to knowledge, and a decent material
        standard of living. Accordingly, basic measures of human development are health, education,
        and income. Social development is defined as the process of transforming institutions to em-
        power people. The social development approach emphasizes the need to promote develop-
        ment that empowers people by creating more accountable institutions and more inclusive,
        cohesive, and resilient societies.
    2.	 The province of Himachal Pradesh came into being in 1948 when 30 erstwhile princely states
        integrated into a centrally administered territory. Although its territory grew several times in
        the 1950s and 1960s, the most significant change occurred in 1966, when the Hindi-speaking
        areas of Punjab merged with Himachal Pradesh. This not only doubled Himachal Pradesh’s
        territory and population, but also created a more diverse society and added areas with differ-
        ent levels of development. Himachal Pradesh officially gained statehood in 1971.
    3.	 After becoming a state in 1971, Himachal Pradesh received large grants from the central
        government that enabled successive state governments to make investments in social and
        economic infrastructure. “Special category” status is granted by the National Development
        Council (India) to states based on their physical and demographic characteristics, such as low
        resource base, hilly and difficult terrain, low population density, or strategic location. The
        special category states are eligible for financial assistance from the central government in the
        form of development grants, tax concessions, and debt relief schemes.
    4.	 Efforts to spur growth in Himachal Pradesh’s secondary and tertiary sectors date back to the
        early 1980s, when the central and state governments introduced a series of incentives for pri-
        vate sector growth in industry and tourism. These goals were pursued through several policy
        actions, including the Special Incentive Package of 2003, the New Industrial Policy of 2004,
        and the Tourism Policy of 2005 (see appendix A).
    5.	 The share of urban population in Himachal Pradesh increased from 7.6 percent in 1981 to 8.7
        percent in 1991, but has remained at 10 percent since 2001 (GoHP 2013a).
88	                                                                     SCALING THE HEIGHTS




6.	 A 1994 study conducted by the University of Manitoba and University of Delhi in the Kullu
    district involved collaborative research and action to promote environmental sustainability,
    engaging universities, government agencies, NGOs, unions, educational institutions, and local
    residents. A significant amount of the literature on environmental management in Himachal
    Pradesh is derived from this study (Gardner and Sinclair 2003).
7.	 The authors conducted interviews with approximately 300 key informants, individually and
    in groups, in the Shimla and Solan districts. The authors also held discussions with a group of
    researchers who conducted background ethnographic work for this report with the participa-
    tion of 124 key informants across the Mandi, Kinnaur, Bilaspur, Shimla, and Solan districts.
    In addition, the authors participated in three workshops organized by GoHP in Shimla, which
    included representatives from various governmental agencies. See appendix B for more details.
8.	 Many other groups, such as older persons, those with disabilities, widows or undocumented
    migrants, to name a few, are also at risk of exclusion (and efforts have been made for their
    inclusion as well), but this report does not focus on them.
9.	 The data on land ownership presented in figures 2.2 and 2.3 were trimmed at the top 0.2
    percent to exclude extremely large plots from the figures. This cutoff threshold was chosen
    instead of the top 1 or 2 percent because of the fact that landholdings in Himachal Pradesh
    are generally small (ranging from 0 to 11.5 hectares) and do not include many extreme values.
10.	The average landholding statistics discussed in the text are based on the entire distribution,
    including the large plots that are not shown in figures 2.2 and 2.3.
11.	Schedule V of the Indian Constitution identifies special privileges for areas where the majority
    of the population are STs. It underscores the area-based approach that Indian states follow in
    addressing tribal issues.
12.	Participation in MGNREGA in Himachal Pradesh was 33.4 percent in 2009–10, and the
    rationing rate was estimated at 20.2 percent for the same year. The states with better partic-
    ipation rates than Himachal Pradesh were Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
    and Rajasthan. The states with lower rationing than Himachal Pradesh rates were Rajasthan
    and Tamil Nadu. Himachal Pradesh had better indicators in terms of the participation of and
    the rationing among the poor compared to other states in India (Dutta, Murgai, Ravallion
    and de Walle 2012).
13.	Estimates from the ministry may not be strictly comparable to those derived from the NFHS.
    However, according to the ministry’s own data, nearly 38 percent of children in Himachal
    Pradesh were underweight in 2007, close enough to the estimate of 36.5 percent recorded in
    NFHS 2005–6.
14.	See, for instance, Himanshu and Sen (2013) and Virmani and Singh (2013) for two opposing
    views.
15.	Himachal Pradesh has some experience in monitoring nutrition outcomes. For example, in
    2007, GoHP launched a pilot to test hemoglobin levels among adolescent girls covered under
    the Kishori Shakti Yojna—a program to empower adolescent girls by improving their health
    and nutrition. The test results were shared with beneficiaries and communicated in a manner
    so they could take care of their diets to augment their hemoglobin levels, with a follow-up
    test every six months. Additionally, in the same year, GoHP launched the Kuposhan Nivar-
    an Abhiyan, an initiative to gauge the level of malnutrition among children in the state—it
    measured the weight of all children who were administered polio drops under the polio vac-
    cination drive. Evaluation of these pilots can provide future direction for policies to counter
    malnutrition.
Notes	                                                                                             89




16.	The 2009 estimates of the Sample Registration System show that the total fertility rate has
    held steady in HP at 1.9 children per woman (SRS 2011).
17.	There is some variation in female-to-male ratios across the 12 districts of Himachal Pradesh.
    According to the 2011 census, districts with the lowest female-to-male ratio are Solan and
    Kinnaur, at 884 and 818 females per 1,000 males, respectively. On the other hand, three dis-
    tricts have ratios above 1,000, namely Kangra, Mandi and Hamirpur, with ratios of 1,013,
    1,012, and 1,096 females per 1,000 males, respectively. Kangra and Mandi are also the most
    populous districts in Himachal Pradesh (Registrar General of India 2011a).
18.	Another study conducted by an NGO in Himachal Pradesh’s Kangra district found that if the
    first child in a household was female, there was considerable birth spacing between the first
    born and the second born than if the first child was male. A longer duration to the next child
    suggested the possibility of female feticide in between births to ensure that the second born
    was male.
19.	Schedule V of the Indian Constitution identifies special privileges for areas where the majority
    of the population are STs. Schedule VI is different - it applies special privileges to tribals who
    reside in the northeastern states of India, where tribal groups are the majority in states found-
    ed on tribal status. Both Schedule V and VI underscore the area-based approach that Indian
    states follow in addressing tribal issues.
20.	See the Himachal Pradesh State Development Report on use of devta committees as local
    governance institutions, and Berti (2009) for use and transformation of religious institutions
    in political leadership (http://hal.inria.fr/docs/00/61/38/54/PDF/CHAPTER_4_Kings_Gods_
    and.pdf).
21.	The Solan district accounted for 69 percent of industrial investments in Himachal Pradesh
    and 38 percent of nonagricultural jobs in 2011, making it the fastest growing industrial area
    in the state. Between 2003 and 2013, more than 7,200 new (small, medium, and large) indus-
    trial projects and 285,000 jobs were created in this district (GoHP undated a).
22.	Interestingly, while the MTAs and PTAs have pushed demand for schooling, communities
    have not used them to demand better quality education. This partly reflects parents’ prefer-
    ence to send their wards to English medium, private schools and partly their reluctance to take
    on teachers who are not only members of the local community (in most cases), but are also
    unionized and hold political clout.
23.	A CAG review of Himachal Pradesh’s Urban Development Department suggests that select-
    ing suitable encumbrance-free sites in towns to implement programs such as the Integrated
    Housing and Slum Development Programme is a major challenge and may lead to complete
    nonutilization or underutilization of budgetary funds (CAG 2012b).
Himachal Pradesh stands apart from many other Indian states with its
strong track record of social inclusion and sustainable development. It
has made remarkable progress in reducing poverty, delivering services
and maintaining low levels of caste, tribe and gender based dispari-
ties. It has taken concrete steps toward ‘green growth’ and is moving
towards carbon neutrality by 2020. Yet, little is known about why or
how this small Himalayan state has been such an exemplar. And will
these outcomes sustain in the context of the state’s current infrastruc-
ture-led growth?

Scaling the Heights: Social Inclusion and Sustainable Development in
Himachal Pradesh assesses Himachal Pradesh’s progress, tries to un-
derstand why it performed the way it did, and prognosticates on the
road ahead. In doing so, it serves as a powerful empirical demonstra-
tion for other states and countries that have begun their journey in the
same direction.
