긷
F。cus On ImPact
■FC Highlights f。r Eastern EuroPe
and Central Asia, FY 2014
C: ■Fcl ,RL。。AN。。ROUP


﻿FY14 OVE RVI EW    FINANCIAL MARKETS
lit
Rx
ENERGY
CLI MATE               AGRIBUSINESS
...........
WORKING WOMEN              ABOUT I FC
"Jk


﻿Wha Weca Didr in14 201F|
poverty~ivete an increas shared prseiyfhog
economicn                                          arl growth inclusion and sutanal
deelpmnt Inros E I uh d s
-~~~ 6 6. 6.                                                  .~.   ......
agrbuinss gene eqiad inncial
anrd ian theu aimcto cliate hange.
n6ery   bnd in 117 paroec  . osprite tru
beonnancia aret, icas able sutoimobilie  1I p   c      fO       rW        r
deelpm. 6In ECA IF futee thes obec         Nerl a       6    .6ir of our adisr agemetwr
tivs  itha  trog  oc s o  fonterregon,   ithinest en  in  fh igsa  yere na goe , F
agribusinenear gede equ4y 7n biiioninial
markts,whil alo imrovng ifratrucureamong all regions. This allows the ECA region to
coordinate, better than any other region, its
and  itiatin th impct f clmat chage. investment and advisory services for maximum
In fsca 204, IC ivesed  recrd ota ofimpact. As a result, more than 9 out of every io
neary $.7 illin i 11 proect. Dspit unta- advisory clients expressed satisfaction with
ble lnacialmarets IFCwasabl to  obiize IFC's work (92 percent) and expertise (95
$1.2 billion worth of investment from partner  percent).
institutions, including $560 million in guarantees
from fellow World Bank Group- member MIGA,    Orprflocins
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.
We invested $2.7 billion in the region's financial
sector, more than si billion in infrastructure and caefror65milnpol;
natural resources, and over $6oo million to help  deirdpo   ranwtrto1
fragile and conflict-affected areas and less   mlincsoes n
developed frontier regions of middle-income    prvddmethn$oblinn
countries.                                    MM    on nclna-er21
IFC also delivered an advisory program worth
nearly $40 million, with a focus on climate   tergo,ICsrl nEAi           oecuilta
change and supporting the poorest and most   ee.I    Y5   ewl otnet       xadacs
remote regions. Our 164 advisory agreements in  t iac   n lh    lmt   hnewt        ou
ECA represent 27 percent of the total, andonarbsesadifatucr,pomig
include 24 corporate governance projects in 14   sae  rseiyadcetn        eloprui
* supre over 600 jobs
cor te for p6o66e to 6                               mi     peope;t
* delivered. poe ad w  r t
* .provided -                          mor tha sl    ilo in
to' 66.inanc 0                          e an fih clmt*     hnewt      ou
onarbsiesad nrsrutr,prmtn
shared6 propeit and craigraloprui
conris                 te frpepe oesae o0ry
OJ


﻿L1..
w
O
z
z.-
LLI
Boosting ECA Capital
u.                          Markets
The financial and Eurozone crises and the recent troubles in
emerging economies have led to continued volatility in ECA,
underscoring the value of strong local capital markets, which
are the foundation for lasting growth. Developing such
markets is a cornerstone of our strategy in the region.
Since 2011, IFC has invested more than si billion in 16 capital
markets projects in ECA, providing critical support to the
region's banking and financial sectors. In some cases, IFC
helps companies access domestic investors with ground-
breaking deals. Most of IFC's fiscal 2014 program in Romania,
for example, was delivered in Romanian lei, including
support for a bond issue by the Romanian subsidiary of
UniCredit Bank. IFC also helps companies access funding
overseas, and served as an anchor investor in the $450
z                           million Eurobond issued by Mersin International Port,
Turkey's first single asset infrastructure Eurobond. IFC issued
the first foreign corporate bond in Armenia and invested
150 million in Raiffeisen Bank International equity, to
z                           support the bank's subsidiaries in Central and Eastern
Europe and promote regional recovery and growth.
L1.


﻿I                        -P
*                           I                    *
Uz-bek( poultry farmer Kattakul Kafttkulor
received a loan from IFC-client
Hamk(orbank( to expa d hb  sins
Improving Financial Markets,A
Access to Finance
In an effort to ride out continuing financial instability across the broader region, IFC commit-
ted more than $2.74 billion to Pnancial markets in Piscal 2014, more than 58 percent of our
total ECA investments. This included $535 million mobilized from our partners, with a focus
on strengthening capital markets and increasing regional trade and access to Pinance.
In Belarus alone, IFC committed $137 million to five banl<s as part of its Global Trade Finance
Program, which broadens access to Pnance and reduces risks for local banks, in addition to a
$7 million loan to boost financing for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Overall, across
the region, IFC invested more than $1.1 billion in support of micro, small, and medium-sized
businesses, to expand opportunities for entrepreneurs and create jobs. Several projects
involved stipulations for lending to women entrepreneurs, or to small businesses in remote
and under-developed regions.
IFC signed a record 49 advisory engagements with Pinancial institutions in ECA, including risl<
management for Banl<a Transylvania in Romania and agri-finance for Haml<orbanl<in Uzbel<i-
stan. We also built a foundation for long-term stability for IFC micropinance lending in
Central Asia by signing up the top MFls in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan for certiica-
tion by the Smart Campaign, a global initiative to incorporate strong client protection princi-
ples across the microfinance industry.


﻿Energy, Infrastructure, and Climate
Business
These days, energy and infrastructure are more important than ever before: universal, reliable access to
markets, goods, and services is essential for inclusive economic development across the region, and beyond.
In Piscal 2014, IFC invested more than $923 million in energy and infrastructure in ECA.
One of our most prominent FYi4 infrastructure transactions is the award-winning $450 million project to
build a new modern terminal at Zagreb International Airport in Croatia (see next page). In municipal
infrastructure, IFC provided a loan to Turkey's Izmir municipality to Pinance two new tramway lines,
which will save energy and ease daily commutes. And in Romania, loans to the Timisoara and Botosani
municipalities will Pinance vital improvements in the heating systems of these two cities.
IFC's public-private partnership transactions advisory team helped finalize the $i billion CASA-looo project,
one of the World Banl< Group's "transformational" projects, designed to allow the transmission of summer-
time hydropower surpluses from the poorest countries in ECA (K<yrgyzstan and Tajikistan) to energy-hungry
countries in South Asia (Afghanistan and Palistan).
IFC invested nearly $5oo million to address climate change, including a cio6 million debt facility to finance
the rehabilitation of four hydroelectric power plants in Albania. They will provide sustainable, cost-effective
energy to steel producer Kurum International. IFC is boosting residential energy savings with homeowner
loans in Armenia, and encouraging private sector investment in renewable energy and energy efpiciency in
Azerbaijan. Finally, IFC is providing advice to governments, banks, and businesses across the Balkans to
<expand renewable energy in the region, especially via small hydro power plants.
South-South Projects
In terms of South-South investments, IFC had a strong year in ECA, committing more
than $620 million to eight projects across the region, including $250 mobilized from
our partners.
1.1.1
IFC delivered a financing facility of up to $70 million to Turkey's Renaissance Group
2 (Ronesans Insaat), a construction conglomerate, to provide worl<ing capital and
support its regional subsidiaries. In addition, IFC loaned Turl<ey's Odleabanl< $50
million to increase financing to SMEs, which play a crucial role in job creation.
Lebanon's Banl< Audi is the parent company of Odleabanl<, which launched in
October 2012 and was recognized last year by International Finance
Magazine as Turkey's most innovative banl<.


﻿"The new 65,ooo-square- meter
terminal at Zagreb Internationa
Airport will more than double
the airport's annual passenger
capacity and spark meaningful
economic growth."
.. . .... .I ..  W  M                                         . .    I-
Construction has begun on the new
terminal for Zagreb international*
Airport, scheduled for completion
in 2017
Croatia's Award-Winning Airport
Built by a consortium supported by IFC, the new $450 million terminal at Zagreb International
Airport, in Croatia, is expected to sparl< economic growth. The 65,ooo-square-meter terminal,
targeted for completion in 2017, will more than double the airport's annual passenger capacity, from
two million to five million. it will also improve the country's infrastructure, bring in more foreign
investors and businesspeople, and boost tourism, a major driver of employment in Croatia.
"The expansion of the Zagreb airport will bring various positive effects to Croatia's tourist industry,
not only to Zagreb," said Mari Matesic, Director of the Croatian National Tourist Board. "Apart from
the increased revenues generated from tourism, we also expect to see an increase in city tours and
business visits before and after the main tourist season."
For the first time in Croatia, private P rms involved in a transport concession project have assumed
passenger volume risks, enabling the country to upgrade essential infrastructure without adding a
burden to state Pnances. This is a clear signal of a stronger, more mature private sector. In Febru-
ary, the deal was named Project Finance Magazine's European Airport Deal of the Year for 2013.


﻿......                                                                  .  ..  ..a
services illfiscal 2014-"
Investing in Ag ri business
and Food Production
Agribusiness represents the cornerstone of IFC's strategy in the ECA region. IFC invested more than $i
billion in manufacturing, agribusiness, and services in fiscal 2014. This included $4oo million in farming and
food production projects, highlighted by a $250 million pacl<age to MHP, Ukraine's leading poultry producer
- in a deal finalized amid challenging marl<et conditions (see below).
We loaned C25 million to MK Group, a leading Serbian food production conglomerate, to support expansion
and increase sustainability, and worl<ed with Uzbel<financial institutions to develop lending tools tailored to
the agricultural sector. IFC also launched a project to help K<yrgyz, Tajil<, and Uzbel< farmers access financing
and grow, and partnered with Ag Growth international to bring new grain storage technologies to Ukraine
to cut crop losses.
Finally, IFC worl<ed with governments across the region to introduce international food safety standards
and brought together more than 160 producers, officials, and specialists for a food safety forum in Minsl<.
IFC advisory programs helped strengthen agricultural supply chains and improve access to finance for
farmers and entrepreneurs.
Overcoming Adversity:
Investment in Ukraine
M Despite considerable domestic turmoil, IFC stepped up its investments in Ul<raine in fiscal 2014, committing
over $470 million and supporting the agribusiness sector in particular, a l<ey driver for the country's long-
term economic growth. IFC invested $311 million in Ulraine from its own account, and mobilized another
$160 million from other investors, at a time when Ulrainian companies' access to finance is limited. With
the increased investment, Ulraine ranls among IFC's top io global country commitments.
IFC committed over $24o million to agribusiness alone, to improve productivity, and expand sustainable
farming practices. in addition to helping modernize U<raine's agribusiness supply chains and expand access
to finance for small and medium-sized producers, IFC's advisory services helped devise and implement
poultry inspection reforms to meet EU standards, contributing to an 80 percent increase in Ul<raine poultry
exports in 2013, including by IFC-client MHP. Over time, IFC has invested more than $i billion in Ul<raine's
agribusiness sector, creating jobs, enhancing competitiveness and increasing exports.


﻿Georgia Mushroom Boom
After conquering its domestic marl<et, Georgian mushroom producer
Tetri Kudi is looling to export its under-appreciated wonder-food to
',,. neighboring countries.
Bacled by a 6.5 million loan from IFC - our first investment in mush-
rooms - Tetri Kudi is expanding capacity more than 20 percent and
expects to begin exporting to the large Russian marl<et soon.
"This partnership with IFC is helping us modernize our production
and become a legitimate exporter," said Ivane loseliani, Director of
Tetri Kudi. "We have already started exporting oyster mushrooms to
Armenia and are in negotiations to start exports to Russia."
-   ..   a . '.'.......6...'3 6..
A SMIln worker at a Tetri Kudi processing plant in Geor.
Worlers making treats at Amiri's confectionary
plant in Dushanbe, Tajil<istan
Candy Conquest
Supported by a $i.3 million IFC loan, LLC Amiri began operations at
its confectionery plant in Dushanbe, the Tajil<istan capital, in 2011.
just three years later, Amiri leads the domestic market with a
diverse product range of more than 40 sweets and chocolates.
"The IFC loan helped us purchase modern, high-tech equipment,
enabling us to produce caramels and chocolates and become
Tajikistan's leading sweets producer," said Saida Mirozorova,
Director of Amiri. "Now we're able to compete with imported
brands."


﻿z Opportunities for
.. Women
In Europe and Central Asia, less than one out of
every five businesses has a top female manager,
Oand women's representation in board rooms and
executive and ownership positions is lower than in
East Asia and Latin America. For every country like
Belarus, where the share of firms with women in
top management is among the world's highest,
there are two like Kosovo, which has almost no
firms with women in top management. Further,
women's overall employment in the region is low,
even though an IFC report found that higher levels
of gender diversity can increase innovation and
productivity, and boost the bottom line.
IFC committed to more than 15 gender-related
projects in ECA in fiscal 2014, to boost women's
employment and help promote the business case
for gender diversity in the workplace. We organ-
Oized half a dozen events and training programs
across the Balkans to increase the ranks of women
employees, entrepreneurs, executives, and board                               d
members. IFC made a E35 million loan to Garanti                               akei.
Bank Romania to finance SMEs, with U2 million     J  s
for on-lending to companies owned or managed
by women. Similar projects were implemented in
Turkey, Russia (see next page), the Kyrgyz Repub-
lic, and Tajikistan.
"IFC committed to more than
15 gender-related projects
in ECA in fiscal 2014, to help
promote the business case for
gender diversity in the
workplace."


﻿*~             ~       G
n Tur                                men Er
Good for business and good for dev
6              0z 0T
Panel discussion at an IFC-organized event
in Istanbul for Turkey's women entrepreneurs
CH IFIC MlFI
Fin  cCoCopato                                                  CIO rp
CopoaionopwtinAt1
VFC                  C                                                jFC
InRsiaadTuky Fnninoo
Women Entrepreneurs
Some two-thirds of women entrepreneurs in Aiming to similarly expand the women's banl<-
Russia are inadequately serviced by banl<s, ing segment in Russia, I FC provided Transcapital-
needing an average Of $42,000 in financing, banl< with a $50 million loan to expand access
according to a recent IFC study. All told, the  to finance for SMEs, with a quarter of the loan
credit gap faced by the country's women- earmarl<ed for women-owned and women-run
owned SMEs is a stunning s1i.5 billion. businesses. The Transcapitalbanl< loan is just the
frst step in IFC's efort to help build a commer-
In Turley, women-owned businesses repre-      cially viable women's banling segment in
sent 40 percent of SM Es, but only 15 percent  Russia.
have access to finance. Banl<s are failing to
cater to this marl<et segment, even though "The loan provided by our partners, IFC and the
women entrepreneurs represent an untapped   International Investment Bank, will strengthen
marl<et Of $4 billion, according to a World Banl< our efforts to provide banl<ing services tailored
study.                                      to the needs of female clientele," said Olga
Gryadlovaya, Transcapitalbanl<'s CEO and part-
Over the past three years, I FC has partnered  owner, who was recently named Russia's Most
with several Turl<ish banl<s, providing $60 Successful Woman Banker by the magazine
million for lending to women-run firms.     Bank Review.
Targeting this segment means new business
for banl<s, and helps increase access to capital
for women entrepreneurs.


﻿Regional Offices                                              Stay Connected
In /I FCeca
Istanbul Operations Center For EMVENA                         E3 @lFC-ECA
YOuHM/1FCvideocasts
Buyukdere Cad. No: 185, Kanyon Ofis Blogu Kat ig,            www.ife.org/SocialMedialIndex
Levent. 34394, Istanbul, Turkey
Tel: (90-212) 385-3000
Fax: (90-212) 385-3ool
Europe & Central Asia
Russian Federation
36, Bldg.i1 Bolshaya Molchanovl<a Street, MOSCOW 121069
Russian Federation
T: (7-495) 411-7555
F: (7-495) 411-7556                                                       International
ife.org                                                                    Finance Corporation
1FC    WORLDBANKGROUP


