GOOD PRACTICE NOTE
Improving Animal Welfare in
Livestock Operations
December 2014
CInternational
Finance Corporation
QD IFCWORLD BANKGROUP


﻿Design: Studiografik and The Word Express, Inc.


﻿Table of Contents
List of Acronyms                                                        iv
Acknowledgements                                                        v
Introduction                                                            1
Animal Welfare Standards                                                3
The Business Case for Improved Animal Welfare                           9
Good Management Practices in Animal Welfare                            13
IFC's Approach to Animal Welfare                                       21
Resources                                                              25


﻿List of Acronyms
AIP      IFC's Access to Information Policy
EBRD     European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ESAP     Environmental and Social Action Plan
EU       European Union
FAO      Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
IFC      International Finance Corporation
NGO      Non-Governmental Organization
OIE      World Organisation for Animal Health
PS       IFC Performance Standard
UK       United Kingdom
UN       United Nations
iv | Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿Acknowledgements
Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations is part of a series of Good Practice Notes from IFC's Environment,
Social and Governance (CRKESG) Division, and is a joint initiative with IFC's Manufacturing, Agribusiness and
Services (MAS) Department. This Note was prepared by Louis-Philippe Mousseau (lead), Robert John Hatton
(lead), Mark Constantine, Susan Botha, Amelia Hui Xin Goh (all IFC), and Caroline Plante (World Bank). This
Good Practice Note supersedes the 2006 Note on the same topic.
IFC commissioned International Animal Welfare Consultants Limited to prepare an initial draft of the Good
Practice Note in 2006 and to update the Note in 2014. The following organizations provided helpful comments
to this edition as part of the peer review and public comment process: Atradius Dutch State Business-Export
Credit Agency; Commonwealth Veterinary Association; Compassion in World Farming; Euler Hermes Deutschland
AG; FOUR PAWS International; German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ);
Humane Society of the United States; Humane Society International; International Dairy Federation; COFIDES;
International Society for Applied Ethology; Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs; Pan Africa Animal Welfare
Alliance; Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals; United States National Pork Board; World
Organisation for Animal Health; World Animal Protection (previously World Society for the Protection of Animals);
World Veterinary Association; Advisors to the World Bank Executive Directors for Germany, the United Kingdom,
The Netherlands, and the United States of America; and the United Kingdom Department for International
Development-World Bank Team.
We would like to thank the CRKESG Knowledge Management & Learning Team, including Fiorella Facello,
Dickson Tang, and Rashanikka Hayley Fowler, who supported the development of this Good Practice Note.
For more information about animal welfare in IFC's agribusiness investments, please contact:
Robert John Hatton
Chief Industry Specialist
International Finance Corporation (IFC)
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington DC 20433, USA
Email: rhatton@ifc.org
www.ifc.org/agribusiness
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations I v


﻿
﻿Introduction
In the past decade, animal welfare has been increasingly recognized in importance in commercial livestock operations.
Governments, academic institutions, and animal welfare professionals are addressing animal welfare at different
points in the agricultural supply chain, while consumers are demanding higher standards for food safety and
animal welfare. Meanwhile, regional and global initiatives to provide guidance on acceptable animal welfare
practices have emerged.
Businesses that address or enhance animal welfare are likely to win or retain a competitive advantage in the global
marketplace by:
* reducing costs due to improved human-animal relationships and other welfare benefits, which can lead to
increased productivity;1,2
* realizing growing market opportunities for food produced in animal welfare-credentialed systems; and/or
* becoming the producer of choice for retailers and consumers concerned with animal health and welfare, food
safety and quality, human health, and the environment.
IFC is committed to working with clients to reduce losses, increase productivity, and/or access new markets
through the application of sustainability principles, including animal welfare standards. This Good Practice Note
(GPN), which supersedes the 2006 edition, contributes to IFC's continued commitment to supporting clients in
a responsible and forward-looking approach to traditional livestock production (dairy, beef, broiler chickens,
layer chickens, pigs, and ducks) and aquaculture in intensive and extensive systems to, among other things, help
producers access and maintain entry to high quality and value market segments.3 This GPN describes a range
of animal welfare good practice and complements IFC's Performance Standards on Environmental and Social
Sustainability (2012), in particular animal husbandry requirements for IFC clients as reflected in Performance
Standard (PS) 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources.4 The Note
also describes IFC's approach to animal welfare, including details on IFC's approach to due diligence.
I Productivity is the "ability of an animal to grow, reproduce and produce outputs such as milk, wool, draught power and transport." ILCA (International
Livestock Centre for Africa). 19go. Livestock systems research manual. Working Paper i, Vol. i, Section i, Module 7-Animal Nutrition. ILCA, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. http://www.foo.org/wairdocs/ilri/x5469e/x5469eoa.htm.
2 Hemsworth PH and Coleman GJ. (2011). Human-Livestock Interactions: the Stockperson and the Productivity and Welfare of Farmed Animals, 2nd
Edition. CAB International, Oxon, U K. http://anatomiayplastinacion.wikispaces.com/ftie/view/Human-livestock.pdf
3 To date, IFC has not typically invested in extensive production systems, aside from supply chain considerations.
4 See http://www.ifc.org/performancestandards.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 1


﻿/76/
.I.-1g..m.n1   f
EC?sP'uiIi'I MI
JA I=År01   IIl k
44 à


﻿Animal Welfare Standards
Animal welfare means how an animal is coping with the conditions in which it lives. An an-
imal is in a good state of welfare if it is healthy, comfortable, well nourished, safe, able to
express innate behaviour, and if it is not suffering from unpleasant states such as pain, fear,
and distress. Good animal welfare requires disease prevention and veterinary treatment, ap-
propriate shelter, management and nutrition, humane handling and humane slaughter or
killing. Animal welfare refers to the state of the animal; the treatment that an animal receives
is covered by other terms such as animal care, animal husbandry, and humane treatment.
-As defined by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OlE)s
A number of international recommendations, principles, codes, and laws focus on animal welfare, and a growing
number of countries have enacted animal welfare legislation outlawing specific animal husbandry practices. Animal
welfare stakeholders agree that animal welfare standards must be based on sound science, research, and practical
experience. Measures of animal welfare include behavior and physiology, productivity, reproductive success, mortality
rates, and incidence of injury and disease. Attention to animals' housing, food, water, and health can improve their
welfare, their productivity, and profitability. Productivity should be
assessed in conjunction with other measures to ensure that animal
welfare is appropriately addressed and managed. Focusing only on
productivity-particularly in large-scale operations-can lead to poor  Animal welfare
animal welfare conditions. Box 1 highlights key developments in   stakeholders agree that
animal welfare standards, policy, and practice during the past decade.  standards of animal welfare
must be based on sound
"THE FIVE FREEDOMS" OF ANIMAL WELFARE                             science, research, and
Originally put forward by the United Kingdom (UK) Farm Animal     practical experience.
Welfare Council,6 principles referred to as The Five Freedoms (see
Box 2) underpin international dialogue on animal welfare and are
reflected in guidelines, recommendations, codes, and legislation
prepared by countries of Asia, Australasia, the European Union, and
North America, and by the OIE,7 to address animal welfare issues.
The Five Freedoms refer to idealized states of welfare rather than
standards. They emphasize that the welfare of an animal includes
its physical and mental state; that good animal welfare implies
both fitness and a sense of well-being; and that any animal kept by
humans must, at least, be protected from unnecessary suffering.
sOlE (2014). Terrestrial Animal Health Code, Chapter 7.1 - Introduction to the Recommendations for Animal Welfare, OlE, Paris. http://www.oie.int/
fileadminlHomelenglHealth_standards/tahc/2olo/chapitreaw _introduction.pdf
6 Now the Farm Animal Welfare Committee-see https://www.gov.uk/overnment/groups/farm-animal-welfare-committee-fawc.
7 The Five Freedoms are referred to in OlE's Guiding Principles for Animal Welfare-see http://www.oie.intlindex.php?id=76g&L=othtmfile=chapitre_ow
introduction. htm.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations 1 3


﻿Box 1. Developments in Animal Welfare Standards, Policy and Practice during the Past
Decadea
Policy and Regulation
There's a global movement underway to improve animal welfare standards. Countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America,
and the Middle East that previously offered little or no statutory protection for farm animals are developing generic
anti-cruelty/animal welfare legislation and some specific regulations. Countries including Australia, Canada,
members of the European Union, New Zealand, and the United States are refining their regulatory frameworks by
extending the standards that apply to particular farming systems or species. In both cases, intensive production
systems for pigs and poultry have received particular attention.
Scientific Thinking
Scientific thinking regarding farm animal welfare has changed in the past decade, mainly due to the recognition
that animals are sentient beings.b Previously, welfare was assessed using measures of biological functioning
related to health and to meat, milk, fiber, or egg outputs. Although such measures are still used, attention now
focuses on the following scientifically-supported understanding:
* Animal welfare states reflect what animals experience-i.e., their emotional or affective states-and these
experiences may be negative or positive.
* The acceptability of production systems is now judged not only by inputs such as their design but also by
animals' welfare-related responses to them.
* Validated measures of negative welfare states are focused on established physiological, clinical, and/or behavioral
responses of animals to adverse conditions, and these measures guide preventative and remedial actions.
* Some behavior-based indices of positive welfare states are well validated and in current use, and science-
based support is being sought for others.
* The negative-positive experiential balance reflects an animal's quality of life such that a net negative balance
represents a poor quality of life.
* Human-animal relationships can have marked effects on animal welfare. Good welfare-related knowledge,
skills, and attitudes towards animals by stockpersons enhance the welfare and productivity of livestock.
Standards and Assessment
The scope of animal welfare standards has expanded in recent years-due in part to new and increased use
of animal-based health and welfare assessment criteria.c In addition to looking at inputs related to husbandry
practices, resources, and facilities design, practitioners are now also focusing on health and welfare outcomes
for animals. This is based on the growing realization that the same welfare benefits for animals can be achieved
using a range of practical approaches that are best suited to country or region-specific conditions.
a Major source: Mellor, D.J. & Bayvel, A.C.D. (eds) (2014). "Animal welfare: Focusing on the future." Scientific and Technical Review Office
International des Epizooties Volume 33(1). http://www.nzva.org.nz/newsstory/animal-welfare-focusing-future?destination=node%2F4357.
bGreen, T.C. and Mellor, D.J. (2011). Extending ideas about animal welfare assessment to include 'quality of life' and related concepts.
New Zealand Veterinary Journal 59, 316-324. http://www.sciquest.org.nzlnode/73077.
c For example: the Welfare Quality (see http://www.welfarequality.net/everyone and http://www.welfarequalitynetwork.net/network) and
Animal Welfare Indicators (http://www.animal-welfare-indicators.net/site/) projects.
(continued on next page)
4 | Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿(continued)
Retail Marketing
Transnational and national commercial companies have adopted animal welfare policies and higher standards that
regulate their own livestock activities or those of their suppliers of livestock-derived products. In some countries
such standards may be higher and can be applied more quickly than those required by government regulations.
Veterinary Involvement
Globally, the veterinary profession has become more active in animal welfare. More veterinary undergraduate
curricula now include animal welfare content, and postgraduate specialist qualifications on animal welfare have
been established. Animal welfare has become an explicit focus of many veterinary policies and is highlighted in
many veterinary conferences. The veterinary profession will likely make an increasingly significant contribution
to animal welfare policy and practice worldwide.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 5


﻿Box 2. The Five Freedoms of Animal Welfare
1. Freedom from hunger and thirst, by ready access to fresh water and a diet to maintain full health and vigor.
2. Freedom from discomfort, by providing an appropriate environment including shelter and a comfortable resting area.
3. Freedom from pain, injury, and disease, by prevention or rapid diagnosis and treatment.
4. Freedom to express normal behavior, by providing sufficient space, proper facilities and company of the
animal's own kind.
5. Freedom from fear and distress, by ensuring conditions and treatment that avoid mental suffering.
The Five Freedoms are aligned with actions to improve animal welfare on farm, in transit, at market, and at a
place of slaughter. These actions provide a comprehensive framework to guide welfare assessment, and indicate
the steps for effective welfare management within the proper constraints of a responsible livestock industry.
OIE STANDARDS
As an intergovernmental organization, the OIE has a global mandate to improve animal health, animal welfare,
and veterinary public health. OIE standards have become the de facto international reference for animal welfare
in the trade of animals and their products in developed and developing markets. OIE standards act as a guide
for the development of assurance programs, and it is envisaged that they will be increasingly used as a basis for
bilateral agreements between OIE member countries.
All 180 member countries, ranging from the UK to China, Uganda, and Ukraine, adopted OIE's 14 global animal
welfare standards: 10 standards in the Terrestrial Code and 4 standards in the Aquaculture Code.' In 2012, the
OIE members adopted 11 General Principles for the Welfare of Animals in Livestock Production Systems (see
Box 3).' OIE standards may be particularly useful in countries and contexts with poorly developed animal welfare
frameworks.
EUROPEAN UNION STANDARDS
European Union law has recognized animal sentience since 1997,10 and this law forms the basis of many animal
welfare standards around the world. The European Convention for the Protection of Animals kept for Farming
Purposes outlines requirements with respect to housing, food, water, and care necessary to safeguard the welfare
of animals, particularly those kept in modern, intensive farming systems." European Union Directives set legally
binding minimum standards of welfare for farm animals, such as laying hens, pigs, and calves. Individual member
states can set higher standards within their own territories. EU Regulations cover animal transport and slaughter, and
are identical in all EU Member States. In January 2012, the European Commission adopted its EU Animal Welfare
Strategy 2012-2015.12 The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development's (EBRD) approach to animal welfare
I See http://www.oie.intlanimal-welfare/animal-welfare-key-themesl.
9 OlE (2014). - Introduction to the Recommendations for Animal Welfare. In: Terrestrial Animal Health Code. OlE, Paris, Article 7.1.1. Available at: http://
www.oie.intlfleadmin/HomeenglHealth_standards/tahcl2oolchapitre_aw_introduction.pdf.
0 Protocol on Improved Protection and Respect for the Welfare of Animals, Treaty of Amsterdam 1997; European Union. 2010. Article 13 in the Consolidated
Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Official Journal of the European Union, C83, 30.3.2010. http://eur-lex.europa.euJOHtmi.
do?uri=OJ:C:2070:o83:SOM:EN:HTML.
,, http://conventions.coe.int/Treatylen/Treaties/HtmlIo87.htm.
6 | Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿Box 3. OIE General Principles for the Welfare of Animals in Livestock Production
Systemsa
i. Genetic selection should always take into account the health and welfare of animals.
2. Animals chosen for introduction into new environments should be suited to the local climate and able to
adapt to local diseases, parasites and nutrition.
3. The physical environment, including the substrate (walking surface, resting surface, etc.), should be suited
to the species so as to minimize risk of injury and transmission of diseases or parasites to animals.
4. The physical environment should allow comfortable resting, safe and comfortable movement, including normal
postural changes, and the opportunity to perform types of natural behavior that animals are motivated to
perform.
5. Social grouping of animals should be managed to allow positive social behavior and minimize injury, distress
and chronic fear.
6. For housed animals, air quality, temperature and humidity should support good animal health and not be
aversive. Where extreme conditions occur, animals should not be prevented from using their natural methods
of thermo-regulation.
7. Animals should have access to sufficient feed and water, suited to the animals' age and needs, to maintain
normal health and productivity and to prevent prolonged hunger, thirst, malnutrition or dehydration.
8. Diseases and parasites should be prevented and controlled as much as possible through good management
practices. Animals with serious health problems should be isolated and treated promptly or killed humanely
if treatment is not feasible or recovery is unlikely.
9. Where painful procedures cannot be avoided, the resulting pain should be managed to the extent that
available methods allow.
io. The handling of animals should foster a positive relationship between humans and animals and should not
cause injury, panic, lasting fear or avoidable stress.
11. Owners and handlers should have sufficient skill and knowledge to ensure that animals are treated in
accordance with these principles.
Source: OlE Terrestrial Animal Health Code 2014, Article 7.1.4.
as reflected in its May 2014 Environmental and Social Policy requires EBRD's agribusiness clients to meet or exceed
European Union animal welfare laws.13
12 European Union Animal Welfare Strategy 2072-2015: http://ec.europa.eulfood/animallwelfarelindex_en.htm.
3 http://www.ebrd.org/cs/Satellite?c=Contentcid=1395238867768&d=Default&G pagename=EBRD%2FCovtent%2FDownloadDocument.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 7


﻿w... .
.... ..      . .... ....
.../1                1     7     /........
røi
r1                                                         EIE(


﻿The Business Case for Improved
Animal Welfare
DISEASE PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT
Disease is a good example of a joint threat to animal welfare and business sustainability. Disease causes avoidable
pain and distress. The OIE "estimates that morbidity and mortality due to animal diseases cause the loss of at
least 20% of livestock production globally. This represents at least 60 million tonnes of meat and 150 million
tonnes of milk with a value of approximately USD 300 billion per year."14 Major epidemics of contagious animal
diseases, including those transmissible to humans, can have particularly catastrophic far-reaching effects beyond
livestock operations, such as public health impacts, as well as national and global economic impacts, and have
triggered international demands to strengthen veterinary services to improve animal health globally. The humane
destruction of affected animals entails significant costs to businesses. Preventing and controlling disease makes a
major contribution to animal welfare and makes a difference to a business's survival.
MEAT QUALITY
According to the 2001 Guidelines for Humane Handling, Transport
and Slaughter of Livestock (FAO, Humane Society International),is Sometimes simple changes
animals that are healthy and well rested prior to slaughter are more        in how    animals are treated
likely to produce good quality meat. Animal stress before and during
slaughter "will have serious adverse effects on meat quality"16 and
on the market price of the meat. Another example of financial               on the bottom       line.
impacts of reduced meat quality is with respect to animal bruising
that may be result of unfavourable handling, transport, or slaughter
practices. According to the 2001 Guidelines, above, "meat that is
bruised is wasted as it is not suitable for use as food because: it is
not acceptable to the consumer; it cannot be used for processing
or manufacture; it decomposes and spoils rapidly, as the damaged
meat is an ideal medium for growth of contaminating bacteria; and
must be, for the above reasons, condemned at meat inspection.""
Sometimes simple changes in how animals are treated can have
dramatic effects on the bottom line. For example, in one example,
improved handling practices resulted in a more than 50% reduction
in carcass bruising compared to routine farm handling practices.","
4 http://www.rr-ofrico.oie.intlenlnewslindex.htmi.
15 http://www.foo.org/documents/card/en/c/466c5eoe-ao6d-5cdb-8476-43245054c3bf/.
16 See Chapter 2, http://www.fao.org/docrep/oo3/x6goge/x6909eo4.htmabi-A.%2oMeat%2oquality.
? Ibid.
8 Appleby MC and Huertas SM.(2011). International issues. In: Animal Welfare, second edition (MC Appleby, JA Mench, IAS Olsson & BO Hughes, eds),
CAB International, Wallingford, 304-316.
,9 Paranhos da Costa MJR, Huertas SM, Gallo C, and Dalla Costa OA. (2012). Strategies to promote farm animal welfare in Latin America and their effects
on carcass and meat quality traits. Meat Science 92, 221-226.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 9


﻿DEMAND FROM CONSUMERS, CIVIL SOCIETY
Affluence in many parts of the world has increased consumer choices     Scoring systems assess how well a
and heightened expectations about food production standards. Surveys    producer or supplier is achieving good
in Europe and North America found that the majority of consumers        animal health and welfare practices. One
care about animal welfare and report a willingness to pay significantly  such system is the 5-Step Animal Welfare
more for animal products they perceive to have come from farm           Rating Standards System developed by
animals raised humanely. Cage-free eggs, for example, enjoy a price     the Global Animal Partnership.a The
premium often more than twice that of cage eggs. Several emerging       5-Step system recognizes and rewards
market industries have benefited from this approach.20 Growing          producers for their welfare practices,
consumer demand, as well as mounting pressure from civil society,       promotes and facilitates continuous
organizations-including multinational livestock producer groups,       improvement, and informs consumers
food processing and distribution companies, supermarket groups,         about the production systems they
restaurant chains, and others-21 are improving animal welfare practices,  choose to support. To date, more than
including instituting cage-free egg procurement policies and eliminating  2,450 operations, raising more than 147
gestation stalls for pigs. Companies such as McDonald's Corporation,    million animals annually, have been
Marks & Spencer, Unilever, Nestle and Woolworths (South Africa)         audited and certified to their higher
have made recent improvements in these areas.                           welfare standards by independent,
Animal welfare criteria are now being reflected in farm assurance schemes
as a result of growing consumer demand for assurances about how animal-
derived food is produced. Public demand for reassurance about welfare    See http://www.gobalanimaIpartnership.
standards might eventually lead to the introduction of an "approval     org/the-5-step-program/.
to farm animals intensively" certification system that could require
farming competency to be demonstrated to independent assessors .22
SHAREHOLDER ACTIVISM RELATED TO ANIMAL WELFARE
According to its 2014 Special Report on Shareholder Activism by
Socially Responsible Investors, the U.S. organization ProxyMonitore                  n     a   prts o
reports that "one of the major story lines this proxy seasone                       i       ma          f
the increased role that social and policy issues have played among      the world has increased
shareholder proposals... Of the shareholder proposals introduced at     consumer choices and
the 219 Fortune 250 companies as of end of June 2014] to have held      heig htened    expectations
annual meetings to date, 48% involved social or policy concerns."2 about food production
According to Humane Society International, in December 2013, "a         standards.
shareholder proposal seeking investor support for Cracker Barrel's
shift away from gestation crates became the first animal-welfare
related proposal to pass at a major American company, garnering 96%
of the shareholder vote."224 At Kraft Foods, a shareholder proposal
2Source: Developing Animal Welfare: the Opportunities for Trade in High Welfare Products
from Developing Countries. RSPCA m Eurogroup for Animal Welfare, http://www.rspco.org.
uklimageLocatorlLocateAsset?asset=documentkssetd = 232 71979476km ode= prd.
2http://www.hLimanesociety.org/issues/con jinement-farm/timelines/timetine-farm-animal-
protection.htmt.
22Cronin, G.M., Rault, J-L. and Glatz, P.C. (2014). Lessons learnt from past experience with
intensive livestock production systems. Scientific and Technical Review, Office International
des Epizooties 33,139a-151. http://www.oie.intSdocegedID1366e.PDF.
f3 http:cwww.proxymonitor.org/Forms/2ol4tinding4.aospx.
Shttp://www.humonesociety.org/issues/conftnement  orm/timeines/timeline form-onimorl
protection, htmi.o                                                             iI
10 I Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿sponsored by the Humane Society looked for Kraft to improve animal
welfare standards in its pork supply chain. Management supported  Emerging market producers
the resolution as did 76% of voting shareholders.25               can position themselves
DEVELOPED VS. DEVELOPING COUNTRIES                                to capitalize on increased
Developed countries tend to have more financial resources and     market premiums
infrastructure than developing countries to support improvements  for animal welfare-
in animal welfare, including improvements to housing, feeding     credentialed products in
systems, and transportation; addressing problems such as drought,  developed countries where
cold, and predators; and strengthening animal welfare research    consumer demand and
programs. Developed countries are likely to have a greater number  legal requirements related
of veterinarians and animal production specialists, more developed  to animal welfare may be
industries for vaccine and animal health supplies, and enhanced   present.
education and industry awareness regarding animal welfare.
Although developing countries often face significant challenges with
regard to resources, knowledge, research, and awareness around
animal welfare, they can benefit from the experiences and advanced
technology of developed countries. Emerging market producers can
position themselves to capitalize on increased market premiums
for animal welfare-credentialed products in developed countries
where consumer demand and legal requirements related to animal
welfare may be present. As awareness about animal welfare issues
increases globally, livestock producers in developing countries may
be able to benefit from demand in their home markets.
tSee ProxyMonitor'S 2014 Prox Season Midterm Report, 11 Summary of Results, http://www.proxymonitor.org/Forms/pmr-o8.aspx and http:ir.kraftfoodsroup.
comlseciling. cfm?seoing1 t c 545158apiz on i m pK=n 545158.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations 


﻿튑


﻿Good Management Practices in
Animal Welfare
Positive features of livestock production systems should include the potential for better animal nutrition, feed
conversion efficiency, health management and environmental control, control over reproduction, genetic selection
of better performing animals, and consistency of product quality and delivery to the market place. Taken together,
these attributes usually also decrease production costs, generate regular cash flow, and offer a reasonable return on
investment. Pig and poultry systems are emphasized here, but intensive dairy, beef, and lamb production systems
are also common. Significant welfare risks may, however, arise in all of these systems.
Such welfare risks can be associated with limitations on space in individual stalls restricting the movement of
animals, high stocking densities in groups increasing the potential for disease transmission and injurious contact
with others, barren/unchanging environments leading to behavioral
problems, feeding diets that do not satisfy hunger, injurious husbandry
procedures that cause pain, and breeding for production traits that
heighten anatomical or metabolic disorders. In addition, inadequate
inputs from knowledgeable and skilled stockpersons may increase     Careful selection of stock
welfare risks. (See section on Stockmanship.)                       handlers, and/or educating
However, these welfare risks may be addressed and mitigated by      existing staff to improve
actions including increasing the space allowance for each animal   their attitudes and stock
(e.g., individual to group housing, decreasing group stocking density);  handling, can improve
providing environmental enrichment (e.g., straw for pigs to manipulate,  livestock productivity.
nest boxes for hens) to stimulate positive emotional states; adding bulk
to high energy diets to help satisfy appetite; minimizing the pain from
invasive husbandry procedures (e.g., avoiding such procedures; using
low-pain methods or analgesics); re-aligning pro duction- orientated
genetic selection to include welfare traits (e.g., less aggressive or
fearful animals or birds); and increasing the monitoring of individual
animals by well-informed stockpersons using direct and/or electronic
observation to aid in the early detection and alleviation of health
and welfare problems.
The following provides additional details on the good management
practices, including genetics and breed selection, animal husbandry,
and housing systems .26                                          i    i
,'Cronin, G.M., Rault,J-L. and Glatz, P.C. (2014). Lessons learnt from past experience with intensive livestock production systems. Scientific and Technical
Review, Office International des Epizooties 33,139-151. http://www.oie.intldoclgedID7366i.PDF.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations 1 13


﻿Genetics and Breed Selection
* Breeds should be selected for good skeletal and cardiovascular
health, low aggression, and suitability for both the environment/
climate and the system in which they are bred.       Historically in broiler chickens, genetic selection and
* Breeding objectives should be assessed not only by production  manipulation for fast growth has led to high rates
characteristics, but also by rates of injury, disease, and mortality  of leg disorders, acute and chronic pain, abnormal
in both breeding stock and offspring. It remains important to  gait, respiratory infections, acute death syndrome,
discourage breeding selection targets dominated by production  and other significant welfare issues, which translate
traits.                                              into costs and losses for producers.
* Animal breeds or strains chosen should be adapted to the
local climate, diseases, parasites, and nutrition.
Animal Health
* Animals must be maintained in good body condition and remedial action (veterinary attention, improved nutrition,
or husbandry) taken when in poor condition, or when there are signs of significant distress, ill-health, disease, or
injury.
* Animals should be periodically checked for the presence of parasites, and any corrective treatment deemed
necessary to prevent distress and suffering should be administered as soon as possible.
* Any sick or injured animals should be treated or cared for to alleviate pain and distress as soon as practically
possible, including being isolated or humanely destroyed if necessary.
* Animals should be confirmed dead before disposal, and any still alive should be euthanized immediately. Dead
animals should be removed promptly and disposed of appropriately.
* Veterinary care should be available at all times and medications and treatments given in accordance with advice
and instructions. Good record keeping will assist with managing health and disease problems. A preventative health
program should be established in consultation with a veterinarian. External audits on animal health are encouraged.
Husbandry Practices
* Animals should be handled using low-stress methods, equipment, and facilities that facilitate calm animal movement.
* Alternatives should be used to routine management practices that cause pain (e.g., dehorning/disbudding, branding,
castration, tail-docking, beak trimming), or effective pain relief should be provided. Successful alternatives to painful
procedures include, for example, providing straw or other manipulable materials to fattening pigs to reduce tail
biting. Where painful procedures cannot be avoided, they should be carried out by a competent and trained operator.
Stockmanship
* There should be a sufficient number of trained and well-
motivated personnel proficient in good stockmanship to
maintain animal health and welfare, and ensure that the
physical, health, and behavioral needs of animals are met.
Stock personnel should not be cruel and should at all times
endeavorto avoid causing pain, suffering, or distress to animals. wefre aliesck  potivy Pe  th
* Stock personnel should be skilled at handling, preventing, and  approie  atitds  and positve nrtet
treating illnesses and diseases, and caring for affected animals, asive,hbeaio toard s  s  elct
including minimizing aggression. Knowledge of the normal
behavior and function of stock is essential and individuals
should be able to recognize early signs of ill-health, injury,
disease, or distress requiring prompt remedial action.
14 w Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿Stockmanship (continued)
* Staff should be properly trained in humane destruction methods and when to apply them, and should be supplied
with the required equipment.
* Animals in intensive systems should be inspected at least daily, or more regularly under circumstances that could
affect welfare (e.g., dietary changes, disease outbreaks).
* On-farm surveillance needs particular attention. Its adequacy should be assessed by reviewing the frequency and
duration of the checks performed, as well as the level of attention given to individual animals.
* Ongoing professional training programs should be available to stock personnel, and the development of such
programs should be encouraged so that a culture of caring and responsible planning and management is developed.
* Stock managers and handlers should have access to a disaster response and recovery plan (e.g., failure of feed or
water supply, electricity supply, structural damage, fire or flood). Box 4 explains the benefits of good stockmanship.
Quality Assurance Programs
* Many countries and their producers utilize quality assurance programs to ensure that optimal levels of animal
husbandry are maintaineda, b,c
* Quality assurance programs should provide training for the owner, operator, and all staff and require written
protocols for production practices, including those directed at animal well-being.
* Assurance programs should dictate continual review of existing systems and practices, especially as new science
and technology become available and economically viable.
* Many quality assurance programs apply auditing or assessment procedures, the features of which will depend on
the livestock operation, program, and region.
Feed and Water
* Animals should receive a daily diet adequate in composition and quantity, and containing appropriate nutrients
to maintain good health, meet their physiological requirements, and avoid metabolic and nutritional disorders.
Feed should be palatable and free of contaminants, molds, and toxins.
* Food and water requirements vary with feed composition, physiological state, stage of growth, size and body
condition, pregnancy, lactation, exercise and activity, and climate. Access to feed should be at intervals appropriate
to the physiological needs of the animals, and at least once daily. Animals should have an adequate daily supply
of water that is palatable and not harmful to their health.
* Food and water, including automated feeding and watering systems, should be provided in such a way that all
animals have an opportunity to feed or drink without undue competition (including intimidation, bullying, and
aggression) likely to cause injury or distress. Feeding and watering systems should be designed, constructed,
placed, and maintained to prevent contamination or spoiling, and to minimize spillage.
* Animals on highly concentrated diets may also require access to bulky or high fiber feed to satisfy hunger. Medicated
or enriched food and water should only be used on professional advice.
* Reserves of food and water should be maintained to allow for interruption to supply.
Australian Pig Quality Assurance (APIQ) Program: http://www.apiq.com.aul.
b Canadian Pork Quality Assurance Program (CQA): http://www.cqa-aqc.ca/documents/producer-manualAFEngi.pdf
c US Pork Quality Assurance (PQA): http://www.pork.org/certification/77/pqaplus.aspx#.UvLm_kKSwpt.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 15


﻿Housing Systems
* Animal accommodation should be designed, constructed, and maintained
to allow all animals space to stand, stretch, turn around, sit, and/or lie
down comfortably at the same time.
* Accommodation should allow all animals to directly interact with herd or
flock mates, unless isolated for veterinary or nursing reasons.
* Stocking densities should be low enough to prevent excessive temperatures
and humidity; competition, stress, aggression between animals, and abnormal
behavior; and to enable good litter management.                 Scientific research shows that certain
* Each operation should have strategies to prevent overheating and excessive  housing systems have inherent major
cooling. Animals should be protected from abrupt temperature fluctuations  disadvantages for animal welfare and
and cold drafts.                                                do not have the potential to provide
* All animals should have access to a clean and dry place within the confinement  satisfactory outcomes, for example,
area. Floor litter must be kept free of excessive moisture and be loose and  systems of extreme confinement of
friable in the case of broiler chickens.                        animals or barren environments.
* All surfaces and flooring should be non-slip, without sharp projections or
edges likely to cause injury, and provide for the animal to bear weight on  There is an international trend from
the entire sole of the foot.                                    sow stall use towards group housing
* Housing should be constructed of fire-resistant materials, and electrical systems, with or without limited stall
and fuel installations planned and fitted to minimize fire risk. Firefighting  use, in the four-week period after
equipment and smoke detectors should be installed with sufficient exits  mating. The use of alternatives to
to enable evacuation of the building in an emergency. There should be  farrowing crates is, however, the
sufficient drainage to protect animals from flooding.           subject of research to develop a system
* All automated systems supplying food and water, removing waste, and  that delivers benefits to the sow but
controlling temperature, lighting, and ventilation should be checked and  does not increase piglet mortality and
maintained regularly, and backup systems should be available in case of  is cost effective. Several alternative
failure.                                                        systems-including sow pens and
* Natural or artificial light (of an intensity of at least 20 lux) should be available  group housing-have been adopted
in all buildings for a minimum of eight hours daily, and there should be a  and are being used successfully, and
period of darkness sufficient to allow proper rest.             efforts are being made to reduce group
* Air quality should be maintained by minimizing transmission of airborne  housing costs.
infectious agents and preventing the buildup of noxious or harmful waste
gases, and minimize dust particles.
* Effluent and waste should not be allowed to build up to the extent that
accumulation leads to discomfort and compromised welfare.
* Animals should be protected from predators, vermin, and excessive noise.
* Animals with access to, or living outdoors should have access to shade
and shelter.
16 d Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿Transport
* Facilities for loading, transporting, and unloading  RESOURCES
should be designed, constructed, and maintained
to permit proper handling of animals and minimize  Welfare   tr ansportuWtiew Zelndode of
risk of injury.
* Catching, handling, and loading should be  http://www.biosecurity.govt.nzlonimal-welfarelcodesltransport-
carried out quietly and confidently by trained  within-nz
and competent personnel, and animals should  Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines
not be inverted when handled.              - Land Transport of Livestock. Animal Health Australia,
* Electric goads or prods should not be used when  Canberra, 2012. http://www.onimaIwelfarestandards.net.aul
catching, loading, unloading, or moving pigs. Pigs  Ples120102ILand-transport-of-Ilvestock-Standards-and-
should be moved with a flat "pig board" rather  Guidelines-Version-i.-I-27-September-2072.pdf
than with a stick.
* Provision should be made for care of animals during  Code of Practice for the Care and Handling
the journey and at the destination. Particular care of Farm Animals: Transportation. Canadian Agri-Food
should be taken with fatigued, old, young, infirm, Research Council, Ottawa, 2001.
pregnant, and/or nursing animals.          http://www.nfacc.calcodes-of-practiceltransport
* Animals should be neither too loosely nor too
tightly loaded so as to reduce the risk of excessive  European Convention for the Protection of Animals
movement or overcrowding resulting in injury.  during International Transport (Revised). Council of
* During transport animals should be protected  Europe.
from extremes of heat and cold and provided  http://conventions.coe.inttreatyCommunQueVouezVous.
with adequate ventilation.                 osP?CL=ENGkCM=o9,NT=793
* The distance animals are transported, and the
time taken, should be minimized. Where animals  EU specific animal welfare rules on transport:
are transported over long distances, appropriate  http://ec.europa.eulfoodlanimallwelforeltransportindex_en.htm
provision should be made for feeding and watering.
* Animals should be fit to travel without unreasonable  Gude   f  t Huan  andligransort and
or unnecessary pain or distress. Non-ambulatory
and other unfit animals must be promptly and  of the United Nations and Humane Society International.
humanely euthanized on-site.               http://www.fdo.org/docrep/oo3/X69o9e/X69o9eo8.htm
* Casualty animals should not be transported. OIEstandardsfortransportofanimalsbyland,air,and
However, should an animal become a casualty  sea
during ajourney, then it should receive immediate  http://www.oie.intlanimal-welfarelonimal-welfare-key-themesl
veterinary attention or be euthanized without
delay.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations 1l1


﻿Slaughter
* Prior to slaughter, proper handling techniques, and  RESOURCES
lighting, space, and ventilation should be used to
keep the animals calm.
* Holding facilities should protect animals from  Welfare. Ministry for Primary Industries, Wellington, New
adverse weather, have adequate and uniform  Zealand, 2010. http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz1animal-welfarel
lighting, sufficient space to allow animals to stand  codes1commercial-slaughter
up and lie down, be well ventilated and drained, European Convention for the Protection of Animals for
and be free from smooth floor surfaces and sharp  Slaughter. Council of Europe.
protrusions.                               http:/conventions.coe.intTreatylenITreatieslHtmlO2.htM
* Animals should be slaughtered as close as possible
to the farm of origin to minimize the rigors of  EU specific animal welfare rules on slaughter and
transport.                                 killing: http://ec.europo.eulfoodlanimaIlwelfarelsioughterl
* Animals should be slaughtered as soon as possible index_en.htm
after arriving at the slaughter facility. In cases
where animals are kept for long periods prior to  Guidelines for the Humane Handling, Transport and
slaughter, feed and water must be provided.  Slaughter of Livestock. Food and Agriculture Organization
* All animals must be handled, restrained, rendered  of the United Nations and Humane Society International.
unconscious until death, and slaughtered in the least  http://www.foo.org/docrep/oo3/X69oge/X69ogeoo.HTM
distressing and most pain-free manner possible
by trained and competent staff.            Model Code of Practice for the Welfare of Animals:
* Contingency plans should be made for animal Livestock at Slaughtering Establishments.
slaughter or accommodation in the event of the  CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, 2001.
slaughter facility being unable to continue through  http//www.publish.csiro.Oulnid/22/Sidll.htm
unforeseen disruption or plant failure.    OESadr        nSagtro        nml
OnlE Standar o mmagheri ialluhe)s oeo
http//ww, oie intindex.php?id=6g&L=o.htmle=ch-pitre/
owslaughtercitm
US Code of Federal Regulations, Title . Chapter , Part
313, Humane Slaughter of Livestock,
http://www.g po.gov/fdss/ranule/CFR-2 -title-V/0s2CFR-
2011 -tit e -V02-prt3l3content-detail.htm
18 M Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿Aquaculture
* In addition to the relevant good practices above, farmed fish and  RESOURCES
other aquatic animals have specific requirements and demands
that can affect their welfare.
* The water supply should be of sufficient flow, quality, and quantity
to ensure the well-being of the species being farmed. The physical Global Aquaculture Alliance.
environment should be designed, sited, and maintained so as to  http://www.goaIIiance.org/cmsAdmin/uploods/
promote animal health and welfare.                      bap-ftshcrustf-413.pdf
* All aquatic animals should receive adequate quantities of feed, Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP)
using the correct nutritional composition for the species farmed, Mussel Farm Standards. Global
and for their physiological state, especially the stage of growth. Aquaculture Alliance. http://www.gaaliwnce.
Food should be presented in a form and distributed in a manner  orglcmsAdminluploodslbap-musself-813.pdf
that ensures that all acquatic animals have sufficient access to
the feed supplied.                                       Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP)
* The stocking density for fish and other aquatic animals should  Salmon Farm Standards. Global
be adjusted to the specific requirements of the species so as to  Aquaculture Alliance. http://www.gaallionce.
minimize crowding and stress, aggression, injuries, and ill health. orglcmsAdminluploodsIBAP-SalmonF-6nS.pdf
This should take account of the average size of the animal, their
health and behavioral needs, the environment, the availability of Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP)
oxygen, and the removal of waste that may cause stress or toxic  Shrimp Hatchery Standards. Global
effects if allowed to accumulate.                       Aquaculture Alliance.
* Any unnecessary distress to the animal should be avoided. Aquatic  http://www.gaalliance.org/cmsAdmin/uploads/
animals should be kept in good health and inspected frequently to  BAP-ShrimpH-672S.pdf
ensure that significant behavioral and physical changes would be
detected, and remedial action taken. Proper diagnosis should be  Code ofConductfor Responsible
made if the presence of disease is suspected. Handling of live fish  Fisheries. FAO Fisheries Department.
and other aquatic animals should be kept to a minimum to avoid  http://www.foo.org/docrep/oo5/v9878e/
stress and injury.                                       v9878eoo.HTM
* The movement and transport of live fish and other aquatic animals
should be done without unnecessary delay, with an adequate oxygen
supply, avoiding rapid changes in variables such as temperature  Aquaculture. Federation of European
and water quality, and in containers designed to eliminate injury. Aquaculture Producers (FEAP)
* Whenever possible, predators should be excluded from the areas  http://www.feap.infolDefoult.
where live fish and other aquatic animals are held. Parasites should asp?CAT2=o&-CAT=o&.CATo=o&SHORTCUT=6io
be controlled where they have the potential to compromise animal World Organisation for Animal
health and welfare.                                     Health (OlE) Aquatic Animal
* When aquatic animals are required to be fasted before slaughter to  Health Code (Section 7, Welfare of
induce a completely empty digestive system, the period of fasting  Farmed Fish) http://www.oie.intindex.
should only be for as long as is necessary. Fish and other aquatic  php?id=1719-L=og-htmie=titre_.7.htm
animals should be killed quickly and humanely.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations 119


﻿Box 4. The Benefits of Good Stockmanship
Careful selection of stock handlers, and/or educating existing staff to improve their attitudes and stock handling,
can improve livestock productivity.
* Handling pigs in an aversive manner, as little aS 2-5 minutes three times per week, markedly reduced growth
(by 11%) and reproductive performance (pregnancy rates by 62%) in some experimental studies.
* Fear of humans was associated with less efficient feed conversion amongst broiler chickens over 22 commercial
farms, and was probably influenced by the quality of stockmanship.
* Fear may also be a factor in limiting the production of layer hens. The responses of birds toward humans
accounted for 23-63% of the variation in peak hen-day production over 14 commercial farms.
* Interventions designed to improve the attitude and behavior of people interacting with stock led to an average
4-5% increase in milk yield, milk protein, and milk fat over 94 commercial dairy farms.
Source: Hemsworth PH and Coleman GJ. (2011). Human-Livestock Interactions: the Stockperson and the Productivity and Welfare of
Farmed Animals, 2nd Edition. CAB International, Oxon, UK.
20  Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿IFC's Approach to Animal Welfare
IFC's USD 800 million portfolio (as of June 2014) of investments in livestock and aquaculture projects and
production facilities consists primarily of investments in vertical integration of pig and poultry operations, with
some beef processing. IFC serves companies in countries with a competitive advantage in livestock production, as
well as those in countries in the process of developing, or about to develop, production systems. IFC's approach
to animal welfare therefore must balance economic, environmental, and social objectives, while being mindful of
clients' objectives and the market environment in which they operate. IFC's approach to animal welfare considers
the following:
* Sustainable economic development-IFC recognizes the important relationships between animal welfare,
livestock enterprise productivity, animal health, and food safety. IFC is committed to working with clients
to reduce losses, increase productivity, and/or access new markets through the application of sustainability
principles, including animal welfare standards. IFC values superior animal husbandry practices, recognizing
the importance of animal welfare in livestock industries in general and in particular with regard to intensively-
managed livestock. IFC took steps to strengthen its commitment to animal welfare in the 2012 edition of PS6:
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources. PS6 (2012) requires IFC
clients who are engaged in the primary production of living natural resources, including animal husbandry, to
implement sustainable management of such primary production to one or more relevant and credible standards
as demonstrated by independent verification or certification.27,28
* Cultural differences-While animal welfare standards are based firmly on scientific knowledge and practical
experience, IFC is mindful of the animal welfare-related cultural practices of certain individuals and groups.
Such practices should be accommodated during the implementation of animal welfare standards and balanced
with a realistic assessment of market requirements and social expectations. Changes to husbandry practices need
to consider local communities' knowledge, experience, and beliefs, as well as the demands of the international
food supply chain.
* Recognizing good practice-The basic needs of animals, as reflected by validated scientific understanding, form
the basis of internationally-recognized welfare standards and principles of good practice. IFC aims to promote
improvements in animal welfare and encourage innovation by demonstrating business case scenarios for change
that are both practicable and achievable, and that focus on animal welfare outcomes (i.e., acceptable states of
health and welfare in animals).
DURING THE INVESTMENT PROJECT CYCLE: AT APPRAISAL
Before investing in a livestock operation or enterprise, as part of its due diligence, an IFC Industry Specialist assesses how
the client addresses or commits to address animal welfare, using OIE standards as a guide. IFC supports in particular
the Guiding Principles for Animal Welfare, the Scientific Basis for Recommendations and the General Principles
27 Specifically, PS6 states, "Clients who are engaged in the primary production of living natural resources, including ... animal husbandry ... will be required to implement
sustainable management practices ofsuch primary production to one or more relevant and credible standards as demonstrated by independent verification or certification."
21 A credible certification system would be one which is independent, cost-effective, based on objective and measurable performance standards and
developed through consultation with relevant stakeholders, such as local people and communities, indigenous peoples, and civil society organizations
representing consumer, producer and conservation interests. Such a system has fair, transparent and independent decision-making procedures that
avoid conflict of interest.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 21


﻿for Livestock Production Systems, as detailed in the Chapter 7.1 of the OIE Terrestrial and Aquatic Animal Health
Codes. Where IFC clients are looking to enter European markets, IFC works with such clients to achieve European
Union standards over the course of the investment project. The IFC Environmental Specialist also plays a key role in
appraising projects for broader environmental and social issues, beyond animal welfare, including applicability of
PS6 requirements, as it relates to certification of animal husbandry management practices.
IFC has and will continue to decline projects where the system is incompatible with acceptable, science-based animal
welfare standards, and where the client is not committed to working with IFC and other agencies to improve its
operations where such improvement is considered necessary for the sustainability of the client's business. Where
the client is committed to working with IFC and other agencies in these ways, IFC may detail specific benchmarks
to be met over the life of the project, which may be reflected in the Environment and Social Action Plan (ESAP)
and disclosed in accordance with IFC's Access to Information Policy (2012).21
DURING THE INVESTMENT PROJECT CYCLE: AT SUPERVISION
IFC supervises its investment projects, engaging with clients throughout the life of the project to ensure the
client remains committed and has the capacity to successfully achieve IFC's Performance Standards. For primary
production in animal husbandry projects, an IFC industry specialist and/or an Environmental or Social Specialist
will participate in the supervision to monitor progress status against certification of animal husbandry practices.
If appropriate, the status of animal welfare improvements will be reflected in annual updates of the ESAP and
disclosed in accordance with IFC's Access to Information Policy. In addition, an annual sub-sector portfolio
review will be undertaken for IFC's livestock investments to identify good practice to encourage application of
lessons learned.
IFC has and will
continue to decline
projects where the
system is incompatible
with acceptable,
science-based animal
welfare standards, and
where the client is not
committed to working
with IFC and other
agencies to improve
its operations where
such improvement is
considered necessary
for the sustainability of
the client's business.
29 www.ifc.org/aip.
22 | Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿Box 5. Working with clients to encourage good practice
An important part of IFC's role is to transfer not just capital but sector knowledge and technical guidance to
clients. As part of its commitment to sustainability, IFC engages with existing and prospective investment clients
on applied or recommended animal welfare standards. IFC is committed to encouraging animal welfare good
practice by:
* promoting the business case for changes that enhance animal welfare in private-sector livestock operations;
* informing stakeholders about available animal welfare standards and guidelines, including OlE and other
relevant standards;
* drawing clients' attention to obligatory animal welfare standards developed by their national governments
and by trading blocs, such as the European Union;
* highlighting to clients that food distribution companies and retailers develop their own standards and continue
to upgrade them, taking note of OIE standards where available;
* ensuring that animal welfare risks are addressed in all production systems whether they be intensive or
extensive in character; and
* sharing resources to assist companies with animal welfare standards in their operations.
WORKING WITH PARTNER ORGANIZATIONS
In addressing animal welfare, IFC is guided by its interactions with  In addressing animal
key international organizations, including OIE, FAO, the World   welfare, IFC is guided by
Veterinary Association, the Commonwealth Veterinary Association,  its ongoing interactions
the International Society for Applied Ethology, international primary  with key international
industry organizations, and international animal welfare NGOs.
Some of these groups have already contributed to IFC's animal
welfare initiative.
IFC recognizes that animal welfare is not covered by specific World
Trade Organization agreements. IFC notes, however, the broad-based
support from all stakeholders for OIE's international leadership role
in standard setting, on behalf of its 180 members, since 2002. IFC
will continue to liaise with OIE to ensure that its lending approaches
are compatible with OIE standards.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations 23


﻿. .Q                                                                                                                   B . ån . . .   .....
.. .  .. .. .


﻿Resources
PUBLICATIONS
* Animals, Ethics and Trade - The Challenge of Animal Sentience, edited by Jacky Turner and Joyce D'Silva
(Earthscan, 2006). This book considers the wider context of international animal welfare developments and
includes a chapter on "Animal Welfare and Economic development: A Financial Institution Perspective" by
Oliver Ryan, IFC. http://103.9.88.89/app/2014-06-22/Animals%20Ethics%20and%20Trade_%20The%20
Challenge%20of%2OAnimal%20Sentience%20-%20Jacky%2OTurner%20(Ed) %20Joyce%20D 'Silva%20
(Ed) %20(2006).pdf
* Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) Implementation Handbook: Animal Production, IFC,
2014. http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc+sustainability/
learning+and+adapting/knowledge+products/publications/esms_implementation handbook animal-production
ORGANIZATIONS
* Compassion in World Farming has liaison status at the FAO and representation in the EU, China, the US and
South Africa: www.ciwf.org/resources
* Humane Society International has liaison status at the FAO and representation in the EU, North America,
Central and South America, Africa, and Asia: www.hsi.org/farmanimalresearch
* The Eurogroup for Animal Welfare is the Secretariat of the European Parliament group established to consider
animal welfare matters: http://eurogroupforanimals.org/
* The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has programmes in East Asia, central Africa and
East Europe and produced the Freedom Food welfare assurance and food labelling scheme: http://www.rspca.
org.uk/sciencegroup/farmanimals/standards
* United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization: The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) is engaged in international animal welfare capacity building, for example, by organizing conferences on
implementing good animal welfare practices"o, enhancing animal welfare and farmer income through improved
animal nutritioni and evaluating the welfare of working animals32. The organization has also established a
web-based information exchange, the FAO Gateway to Farm Animal Welfare". www.fao.org
* World Animal Net is the world's largest network of animal protection societies with consultative status at the
United Nations: www.worldanimal.net
* World Animal Protection, previously the World Society for the Protection of Animals, has been in operation
for over 50 years. An international charitable organization, it has regional hubs in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin
America and North America, and offices in 15 countries: www.worldanimalprotection.org/
* World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE): The OIE is the intergovernmental organization responsible
for improving animal health worldwide. It is recognized as a reference organization by the World Trade
30 http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/animalwelfare/io483eoo_7.pdf.
3, http://www.fao.org/docrep/o7I/i3i64e/i3i64eoo.pdf.
32 http://ec.europa.eu/foodlanimal/welfarelseminarsldocslexpert_call_en.pdf.
33 http://www.foo.org/ag/againfo/themes/animal-welfare/aw-abthegat/aw-whaistgate/en/.
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 25


﻿Organization (WTO) and in 2014 has 180 Member Countries. The OIE maintains permanent relations with
45 other international and regional organizations and has regional and sub-regional offices on every continent.
www.oe.imt
SPECIES-SPECIFIC RESOURCES
Broiler chickens and laying hens
* Animal Welfare (Layer Hens) Code of Welfare. Ministry for Primary Industries, Wellington, New Zealand,
2012. http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/animal-welfare/codes/layer-hens/index.htm
* Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Livestock: Meat Chickens and Breeding Chickens. DEFRA
Publications, London, 2002. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69372/
pb7275meat-chickens-020717.pdf
* EU-specific Animal Welfare Rules on Laying Hens and Broilers: http://ec.europa.eu/food/animal/welfare/farm/
index_en.htm
* Meat Chickens Animal Welfare (Meat Chickens) Code of Welfare. Ministry for Primary Industries, Wellington,
New Zealand, 2012. https://www.animallaw.info/administrative/new-zealand-anmal-welfare-code-meat-chickens
* Primary Industries Standing Committee Model Code of Practice for the Welfare of Animals: Domestic Poultry.
Fourth edition. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, 2002. http://www.publish.csiro.au/nid/22/pid/3451.htm
* Recommended Code of Practice for the Care and Handling of Farm Animals: Chickens, Turkeys and Breeders
from Hatchery to Processing Plant. Canadian Agri-Food Research Council, Ottawa, 2003. https://www.nfacc.
ca/codes-of-practice/chickens-turkeys-and-breeders
* Recommended Code of Practice for the Care and Handling of Pullets, Layers and Spent Fowl: Poultry Layers.
Canadian Agri-Food Research Council, Ottawa, 2003. https://www.nfacc.ca/codes-of-practice/poultry-layers
* US National Chicken Council Welfare Guidelines for Broiler Chickens http://www.nationalchickencouncil.org/
industry-issues/animal-welfare-for-broiler-chickens/
PIGS
* Animal Welfare (Pigs) Code of Welfare. Ministry for Primary Industries, Wellington, New Zealand, 2010. http://
www.biosecurity.govt.nz/animal-welfare/codes/pigs/index.htm
* Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Livestock: Pigs. DEFRA Publications, London, 2003. https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69369/pb7950-pig-code-030228.pdf
* EU-specific Animal Welfare Rules on Pigs: http://ec.europa.eu/food/animal/welfare/farm/pigs_en.htm
* Primary Industries Standing Committee Model Code of Practice for the Welfare of Animals: Pigs. Third edition.
CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, 2008. http://www.publish.csiro.au/nid/22/pid/5698.htm
* Recommended Code of Practice for the Care and Handling of Farm Animals: Pigs. Canadian Agri-Food Research
Council, Ottawa, 2014. https://www.nfacc.ca/codes-of-practice/pigs
26 | Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations


﻿

﻿Stay Connected
SCRIBD:
http://www.scribd.com/IFCSustainability
LINKEDIN:
http://www.linkedin.com/pub/ifc-sustainability/1 b/729/1 ba
CONTACT:
asksustainability@ifc.org
ACCESS THIS AND OTHER IFC SUSTAINABILITY PUBLICATIONS ONLINE AT:
http://www.ifc.org/sustainabilitypublications
Good Practice Note: Improving Animal Welfare in Livestock Operations | 29


﻿International
Finance Corporation
(M I IC  WORLD BANK GROUP
2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
www.ife.org/sustainability
asksustainabilitv@ife.ora
Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this publication
may be used freely without pnior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for commercial purposes.
Disclaimer
The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of the International Finance Corporation (lFC) or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
The purpose of the Good Practice Series is to share information about private sector approaches for addressing a range of environmental and social issues,
that IFC believes demonstrate one or elements of good practice in these areas. information about these approaches may be taken from publicly available
or other third party sources. IFC and/or its affiliates may have financial interests in or other commercial relationships with certain of the companies.
While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided on a strictly "as-is" basis, without assurance or representation
of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist
companies or projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-by-case basis with
due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.
For more information on IFC's commitment to sustainability, including links to the Sustainability Framework, visit www.ifc.org/sustainabilitvframework.
Date published: December 2014.


