                                                         93906



                                                 RES-Research
                               Resilience in Education Systems
                                                   Afghanistan

  The Resilience of Women in Higher
            Education in Afghanistan
              N° 1. Obstacles and Opportunities in Women’s
                                   Enrollment and Graduation
N° 2. The Human, Social and Institutional Resilience of Female
              Doctors and Postgraduate Residency Programs
                                                 RES-Research
                               Resilience in Education Systems
                                                   Afghanistan

  The Resilience of Women in Higher
            Education in Afghanistan
              N° 1. Obstacles and Opportunities in Women’s
                                   Enrollment and Graduation
N° 2. The Human, Social and Institutional Resilience of Female
              Doctors and Postgraduate Residency Programs
                           Study N° 1.
Obstacles and Opportunities in Women’s Enrollment and Graduation

                  Afifa Kosha, Spozhmay Oriya, Tahira Nabi,
                Sabera Halim, Sohaila Hofyani and Abida Liwal




                               Study N° 2.
         The Human, Social and Institutional Resilience of Female
              Doctors and Postgraduate Residency Programs

  Dr. Najibullah Safi, Dr. Mohamad Nadir Sahak, Dr. Bashir Noormal




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the Education Resilience Approaches
program team, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Photos: Cover photo and photo page 15 © Graham Crouch / World Bank. Photo page 21 © Sandra
Calligaro / Taimani Films / World Bank.
									                                                      		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014



 Contents
 About the RES-Research Studies Series						                                                    8
 Introduction: Improving Access and Retention of Afghan Women in 		                             9
 Higher Education	
 RES-Research training practical component							                                               9
 Study N° 1: 											                                                                       10
 Obstacles and Opportunities in Women’s Enrollment and Graduation 	
 I. Assets and opportunities for female students 						                                        11
 II. Obstacles women face in enrolling and graduating from university			                       11
 III. Institutional barriers to female participation in higher education			                    13
 IV. Conclusions										                                                                     14
 References 											                                                                        15
 Study N° 2: 											                                                                       16
 The Human, Social and Institutional Resilience of Female Doctors and 	
 Postgraduate Residency Programs 					
 I. Methodology										                                                                      16
 II. Context of adversity and desirable outcomes for female students in higher education 	     17
 and the field of medicine	
 III. Findings and analysis									                                                           18
 IV. Tentative recommendations for policy and practice					                                    20
 V. Conclusions and further research needs							                                              21
 References											                                                                         22
 Annexes 											                                                                           23
 Annex A. Study N° 1: Focus group guide for female higher eduation students		                  23
 Annex B. Study N° 1: Focus group guide for female secondary school students and 	             24
 summary of answers
 Annex C. Study N° 2: Interiew guide								                                                   26




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   7
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      About the RES-Research Studies Series
      Development practitioners in fragile, conflict and violence-affected contexts are demanding
      better support for research, evaluation and assessments: this can range from conducting an
      exploratory needs assessment for an emergency intervention, monitoring and evaluating
      ongoing project impact, or building the evidence base to design a reconstruction or post-conflict
      program. In contexts of overwhelming adversity it is crucial not only to get reliable and valid data
      but to also ensure that we are going about this data collection in the right way. Doing research
      “right” in these contexts requires asking the right questions, talking to the relevant participants
      and stakeholders, using the most pertinent methods, and paying particular attention to ethics
      and power differentials.

      To address these concerns, the ERA Program developed the Resilience in Education Settings
      (RES)-Research training module. The training is specifically targeted for researchers
                                              living in context of conflict, violence and other
        As with all SABER tools, the RES-     adversities. It brings together resilience theory and a
        Research training module is openly    transformative research paradigm. Resilience theory
        available for education practitioners seeks to understand the process by which individuals,
        within the World Bank, as well as     communities and organizations recover from crisis,
        other agencies. The module consists   continue to perform in the midst of adversities and
        of a research manual and handouts,    even radically change to prevent future risk exposure
        power point presentations and         and continue their development process (Reyes
        additional guidance materials.        2013). The transformative research paradigm provides
        If you are interested in using this   methodological guidance to conduct studies with
        tool please contact the ERA team      vulnerable populations, while recognizing both their
        for the appropriate resources:        exposure to overwhelming threats but also their assets
        educationresilience@worldbank.org     such as strengths, opportunities and available services
                                              (Mertens 2009).

      Through a nine-month training program, RES-Research builds on the capacities of academics
      and education practitioners in fragile, conflict and violence-affected contexts to undertake
      locally relevant and rigorous education resilience research. First piloted in Central America, the
      training program was improved and recently implemented in the South Asia region as part of a
      multi-donor trust fund for the Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) initiative
      supported by DfID-UKAID, DFAT-Australian AID and the World Bank.

      This report presents the ongoing application of research design and implementation skills gained
      by the Afghan participants in the RES-Research training module, delivered in November 2013, in
      Delhi, India, and in April 2014, in Kathmandu, Nepal. It provides valuable contributions to our
      on-going understanding of resilience in education settings in difficult contexts.




 8   	 EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                      		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Introduction: Improving Access and Retention
 of Afghan Women in Higher Education
 Female access to higher education in Afghanistan is has been and continues to be limited. At the
 basic education level, the country has made great advances since 2000; it increased access from
 900,000 students in 2000, almost all boys, to 6.7 million students in 2009, and girl’s enrollment
 increased from 5,000 under the Taliban to 2.4 million in the same time period (Afghanistan,
 Ministry of Education 2009-2010). Seventy-one percent are currently enrolled in primary and
 middle school (Grades 1-9) and 29 percent are enrolled in secondary education (Grades 10-12;
 Samady 2013). The post-secondary gains for girls have already increased, as 120,000 girls have
 graduated from secondary school, and 15,000 have enrolled in universities (George W. Bush
 Institute 2013).

 Every year, more than 100,000 secondary school graduates write the Kankor, the nationwide
 higher education entrance exam, but due to insufficient spaces and limited capacity, only about
 half of those students find a spot at the government universities and colleges (UN Women 2013).
 Of the total number of university students, in 2009 only 24.8 percent were female (CEDAW 2011).

 The issue is not only access, but also retention and graduation. Even when female students enter
 universities, they require relevant support for gender-specific risks to help them complete their
 higher education careers. We need to learn more about the barriers to entering higher education,
 as well as to graduating successfully. Equally important is the need to understand what are the
 strengths, opportunities and resources that can help young girls and women consider, access,
 and acquire a quality higher education degree to contribute to the on-going development of their
 families, society and the country.

 RES-Research training practical component
 As part of the practical component of the RES-Research training module, we present the results
 of some of the mixed-methods and transformative research skills developed and applied within
 this report.

 The participants from Afghanistan formed two research teams. One team, made up of four
 female university lecturers and two female members of the Ministry of Higher Education, applied
 their acquired research skills to the topic of “Obstacles and Opportunities in Women’s Enrollment
 and Graduation.” The other team, participants representing the WHO in Afghanistan, focused on
 “The Human, Social and Institutional Resilience of Female Doctors and Postgraduate Residency
 Programs”. This report presents the preliminary findings of these two studies.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   9
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      Study N° 1: Obstacles and Opportunities in
      Women’s Enrollment and Graduation
      This first pilot study intended to identify some of the obstacles and the assets (strengths,
      opportunities and resources) that are present for Afghan women in both entering and completing
      their higher education in Afghanistan. To accomplish this, we set forth to answer the following
      questions:
          •	 What are the obstacles in the family, society and material resources that prevent young
             girls to enter higher education?
          •	 What are the tensions that contribute to women dropping out and not completing their
             higher education programs?
          •	 What are the resources in the family, society and other resources that have helped those
             women who have entered and graduated from higher education in Afghanistan?

      We purposefully selected participants for the study sample. This included three groups of six
      or seven female high school students considering university entrance in three different schools;
      a group of seven third year university students attending Kabul University and another group
      of six students attending Kabul Polytechnic University, each representing different provinces
      (Kabul, Mazar, Bamiyan, Wardak, etc.), ethnic groups (Pashton, Tajec, Hazara, Ozbec) and mother
      languages (Pashto, Dari, and Uzbeki), and; interviews with two undergraduate students attending
      Kabul Education University, two graduate students at Kabul University and 2 female lecturers
      also at Kabul University. Third year university students were able to share experiences that took
      place prior to university, as well as provide insights into the obstacles and resources they have
      encountered in continuing their studies.

      In certain cases, the participants were students attending courses alongside some of the
      researchers. However, this relation only facilitated trust. Students had complete freedom to decide
      whether or not to participate in the study. As researchers we explained to all participants the
      concept of resilience and the purpose of the study, which was mainly to understand the problems
      girls face in enrolling in higher education and continuing their studies, but also to understand
      their assets and abilities to continuing their education. We stressed that the information provided
      by all participants would be used anonymously and only for research purposes.

      Coding played an important role in the analysis of the interviews and focus groups. It was
      primarily an interpretive activity and served to summarize as well as reduce the data. The coding
      process generated many different codes, categories and themes. To facilitate its analysis, we used
      a simple framework noting the different types of barriers and assets for female students in higher
      education: cultural, economic, family, security, etc.




 10   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             		                    RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 I. Assets and opportunities for female students
 The most important challenges for female students in higher education in Afghanistan were
 cultural, economic, family and social factors, as well as university related problems. However,
 participants also pointed to their family’s support and their own abilities (hard work, having
 goals in life, self-confidence, intrinsic motivation for learning) as factors that help them with their
 educational goals.
                                              Table 1
                     Opportunities for Female Higher Education in Afghanistan

              Individual               Family and community                     Education system
     •	   Self-confidence             •	   Emotional support (care,        •	   Free education
                                           love, encouragement)
     •	   Positive attitude                                                •	   Encouragement of
                                      •	   Financial support                    teachers
     •	   Personal effort
                                      •	   Cultural support                •	   Equal treatment of males
     •	   Having life goals
                                                                                and females
                                      •	   Role models within the
     •	   Knowing their own
                                           family                          •	   Dormitory facilities
          abilities
     •	   Sense of competition with
          others for success


 However, although some female Afghan students and professors in higher education have found
 positive support within themselves, their family and community, the costs of going to university
 are still high. These include cultural and economic barriers, as well as family, social and security
 problems. For many these present a very sombre picture and lead to a sense of hopelessness. We
 discuss these obstacles in the next section.

 II. Obstacles women face in enrolling and graduating from
 university
 In spite of their high motivation and the support they receive from some family members, women
 overwhelmingly face cultural, social, economic and security problems and barriers to enrollment
 and completion of higher education. This section presents the challenges reported by high school
 female students considering higher education enrollment, female students already in enrolled in
 university, and female faculty.




		                                                                  EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    11
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                            		

                                                Table 2
                       Risks/Obstacles for Female Higher Education in Afghanistan

               Identified by                      Identified by
                                                                              Identified by faculty
           high school students                university students

         Cultural barriers                 Cultural barriers                Cultural barriers
         •	 Pressure to get married        •	 Pressure to get married       •	 Girls’ early marriage
             and leave school                  and leave school             Family and economic
         •	 Discrimination against girls   •	 Relatives who prevent         problems
             in families                       girls from studying          •	 Illiteracy in the family
         Economic barriers                 Economic barriers                •	 Poverty and joblessness in
         •	 Lack of financial              •	 High cost of Kankor               the family
            resources, poverty                (higher education             Security and social problems
                                              entrance exam)
         Family problems                                                    •	 Insecurity in the country
                                              preparation classes
         •	 Decision-making power
                                           •	 Lack of financial
            held by men in the family
                                              resources
            (father and brother),
                                           •	 Need to work to support
            especially regarding girls’
                                              family
            education
                                           •	 Lack of part-time job
         Security and social problems         opportunities to support
         •	 Insecurity in the country         families while studying
         •	 Misconception of
                                           Family problems
            studying university
                                           •	 Families that prevent girls
            (benefits of studying
                                              from getting a part-time
            beyond working and
                                              job during school
            earning money are
                                           •	 Discrimination against
            not understood or
                                              girls in the family for
            appreciated).
                                              enrollment in Kankor
         Individual hopelessness              preparation classes
         •	 Hopelessness about their       •	 Family violence
             future (believe entrance
                                           Security and Social problems
             to university or getting a
                                           •	 Insecurity and civil war
             job is unlikely)
                                           •	 Kankor preparation
                                              classes dominated by
                                              males and offered by
                                              private schools so families
                                              do not permit their
                                              daughters to enroll
                                           •	 Insecure access routes for
                                              out-of-province female
                                              students who study in
                                              Kabul


      The family is a crucial source of support for female participation in higher education. Most
      participants noted the support of their families, who value education in general and specifically
      support their studies. However, this support was still based on the condition of their field of
      study, specifically those that Afghan society considers as most appropriate for women. Interview
      excerpts in the box below exemplify this. The first excerpt comes from an interview with a female


 12   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                		                     RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 university lecturer at Kabul University, and the second from a government worker in the Ministry
 of Higher Education.
                                                   Box 1
                              Two Life Stories of Educated Afghan Women

     Education is Valued in the Family but Career is Dictated by Gender
     I was born into an educated family. My father was a banker and my mother was a teacher. When I
     graduated from high school, my father just gave me one option: to become a teacher. He said I should
     become a teacher, that teaching is a holy job and my mother is also a teacher. However, my mom told
     him, “Let her choose her own interest and attend the faculty that interests her.” My father said, “No,
     she is a girl, she can’t decide and think about her future.”
     I wanted to become a doctor or a lawyer when I passed the Kankor. The questions were very good and
     easy for me. I aced the questions but I was really disappointed because I had just only one [career]
     choice, which was my family’s request, specifically my father’s.
     There were many reasons behind [opposing my career choice]. For example, doctors have to remain
     [in the hospital] during nights to treat people, or a girl can be [badly] judged for being a doctor in our
     country... I couldn’t reach for my life dreams and in the end I became a teacher. After attending the
     teacher training faculty my father worked with me and encouraged me a lot to get the highest grades
     [in my class] in order to become a university teacher. He was really supportive during my studies.
     Then, through hard work and getting the first position after graduation, the university hired me as an
     instructor. Now I am happy.

     Degree Completed but Prevented by Gender to Work in the Field
     When I graduated from the Faculty of Agriculture at Kabul University in the field of economics and
     planning, our work placements were in the central statistics and agriculture bank. [Though] my field
     of study was economics and planning …my father [who] was a lecturer in the Science faculty at Kabul
     University told me that I should prefer the field of teaching because teaching is better for females
     and has a high position in society. He said, “Otherwise it will be difficult for you to work outside as a
     governmental employee from 8am until 4pm every day.”
     So, though it was one of my dreams to serve as an agriculture economist at the central statistics bank
     or any agriculture bank, unfortunately I could not act according to my own desire and I accepted what
     my father advised me. I began teaching and working as a trainer in different organizations. Now my
     background is in the field of academics and education.



 III. Institutional barriers to female participation in higher
 education
 Female students already attending university as well as female faculty were able to comment
 on the institutional barriers, within universities and across the education system in general, that
 contribute to the low enrollment of women. These include relevant and accessible facilities, as
 well as cultural factors.




		                                                                     EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      13
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                              		

                                                   Table 3
                     Institutional Barriers to Female Higher Education in Afghanistan

             Identified by university students                           Identified by faculty

          Facilities                                          •	   Lack of university preparation courses for
          •	 Long distance from home / transportation              girls
          •	 Shortage of classrooms, chairs, electricity      •	   Weak school curriculum insufficient
              and other basic necessities of a standard            preparation for university or the university
              classroom                                            entrance exam; girls often not permitted
          •	 Shortage of washrooms for female                      to enroll in private preparation classes
              students
          •	 Shortage of dormitories in provinces,            •	   Lack of affirmative action related to girls’
              and emotional challenges due to                      enrollment in university
              homesickness, new environment and
              university course load where dormitories
              are available
          •	 Lack of English and computer courses on
              campus for female students
          Cultural Factors
          •	 Difficulties adjusting from rural culture to
              urban culture of university and cultural ties
          •	 Difficulties adjusting to new university
              environment
          •	 Lack of prayer rooms for girls
          •	 Ethnic and religious prejudice



      IV. Conclusions
      Based on our pilot study, some considerations for education policy and practice include ongoing
      support for free education with equal rights and opportunities for boys and girls, and women and
      men. Especially important for the education of female students are policies and programs that
      work with both family members as role models and with teachers to encourage female students.
      In the context of Afghanistan, relevant facilities for women, including dormitories, are very crucial
      for safety and security.

      We also need more mixed-methods studies, which use qualitative data to help prepare better
      quantitative questionnaires. Identifying different variables and including them in the questionnaires
      increases the cultural validity of the questions we ask. We also need to expand the scope of the
      study to a bigger target group to capture the broad cultural and regional diversity of Afghanistan.




 14   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 References
 Afghanistan, Ministry of Education, 1388 (2009-2010). School Attendance, unpublished 		
 	      spreadsheet; cited in “High Stakes: Girls’ Education in Afghanistan,” by Ashley Jackson, 	
 	      joint briefing paper, February 24, 2011.

 George W. Bush Institute. 2013. Invest in Women: A Report on Education in Afghanistan. George 	
 	     W. Bush Institute’s Women’s Initiative.

 Samady, S.R. 2013. Changing Profile of Education in Afghanistan. Former Chairman of Independent
 	     High Commission of Education for Afghanistan. http://eslus.com/articles/Ed-Afghanistan.	
 	     pdf

 UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). 2011. 		
 	     Consideration 	of reports submitted by States parties under article 18 of the Convention 	
 	     on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women: Combined initial and 	
 	     second periodic reports of States parties, Afghanistan, 21 December 2011. CEDAW/C/
 	     AFG/ 1-2. http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N11/646/82/PDF/N1164682.	
 	     pdf?OpenElement

 UN Women. 2013. “In Afghanistan Women and Girls Strive to Get an Education.” Impact Story. 	
 	    UN Women. http://www.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/	
 	    library/publications/2013/12/un%20women_generic-afgh_brief_us-web%20pdf.ashx

  




		                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   15
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      Study N° 2: The Human, Social and Institutional
      Resilience of Female Doctors and Postgraduate
      Residency Programs
      This pilot study sought to understand the reasons why female doctors want to enroll in postgraduate
      residency programs and the factors that support, influence or hinder their enrollment. The study
      used a resilience framework applied at the individual, social and institutional levels.

      It is widely recognized that every individual has the capacity to adapt and overcome risks and
      adversities (Ungar 2005). Therefore, we can define resilience as the capacity of individuals to
      endure stress and devastation, continue to perform in the midst of adversities and even radically
      change to prevent future risk exposure and continue their development process (Cornbluth
      2014; Reyes 2013). Resilience is not static and develops over a period of time. It comes from
      supportive relationships, religious and cultural beliefs and traditions, that help people cope with
      the inevitable knocks in life (Wykle, Faan and Gueldner 2011).

      Various factors contribute to the development of resilience. They include, but are not limited
      to: close relationships with family and friends, confidence in one’s own strengths and abilities,
      problem-solving skills, seeking help, coping with stress in healthy ways, and finding positive
      meaning in life despite difficult conditions and traumatic events (Meichenbaum 2007). Thus, for
      this study we sought to answer some initial questions categorizing resilience in human, social and
      institutional realms. These questions were:

          •	 Human resilience: What is the life experience of female doctors who want to enroll in
             postgraduate residency programs and of those who are already enrolled?

          •	 Social resilience: How do family factors, cultural norms and other social factors influence
             female doctors’ enrollment in postgraduate residency programs?

          •	 Institutional resilience: How is female enrollment in postgraduate residency programs
             affected by geographical distance and the type of female-friendly facilities in hospitals?

      I. Methodology
      We began to answer these questions by interviewing nine female medical doctors (enrolled
      and not enrolled in postgraduate residency programs) working in two maternity hospitals in
      Kabul. A second part of this study plan was to conduct a survey questionnaire with 34 additional
      participants; however, this report focuses only on the qualitative data collection, and reports on
      the findings related to risks. The second par includes a report on the assets. A transcript of each
      interview was prepared and analyzed for major categories or themes, and then compared with
      each other. A Local Advisory Committee (LAC) comprised of a representative from the research
      department of the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), a research focal point from each hospital,
      and a WHO technical officer for Reproductive Health, assisted in identifying and selecting the
      study participants. The support of female LAC members was a key factor for the success of this
      pilot study.

 16   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014

 The mixed-methods approach can help us to apprehend diversities and issues around the
 enrollment of female doctors in postgraduate residency programs in a short time. For the
 qualitative component, a selection of a diverse sample (female graduates, current students and
 prospective students), helped us understand the problems and motivating factors that affect
 their enrollment. In addition, sequential sampling (first qualitative followed by quantitative) was
 instrumental in identifying the key issues to be included in a future questionnaire. Discussion of
 the application of this questionnaire is not part of this pilot report, which only focuses on the
 qualitative phase of the study, and the findings related to risks. Moreover, the formation of a
 Local Advisory Committee was critical in identifying and accessing potential study participants.
 Furthermore, the extensive interaction among the researchers with diverse experience and
 backgrounds, in two RES-Research workshops and guidance provided by its facilitators supported
 us to better understand resilience research methodology and its application to different fields in
 education.

 II. Context of adversity and desirable outcomes for female
 students in higher education and the field of medicine
 Cultural norms, family values, religious concerns, physical access, individual/gender preferences
 and security concerns all affect the enrollment of female students in specialized medical education
 programs. Subsequently, these factors influence their deployment in health facilities. However,
 growing access opportunities resulted in steady progress in educating and deploying female
 health care providers in large cities such as Kabul, Nengarhar, Herat, Mazar and Kunduz over the
 last decade (George W. Bush Institute 2013; Baharustani 2012).

 A thorough assessment conducted by Human Resources for Health in 2011 indicates that 45,042
 health personnel are employed by the public health system in Afghanistan (MoPH 2011). Sixty
 percent are civil servants and 40 percent work with NGOs under contractual arrangements with
 the MoPH (MoPH 2011). There are 7.26 health care providers (medical doctors, nurses and
 midwives, both male and female) per 10,000 population in the country, which is still within the
 critical shortage zone according to the WHO’s benchmark of 23 health care professionals per
 10,000 population. Despite the considerable increase in the training of nurses and midwives
 scheduled for the next 5 years, the ratio of these health care providers to 10,000 population
 will only increase from 7.26 to 9.12 (MoPH 2011). Cultural diversity, family values, and religious
 concerns seriously affect the enrollment of female students in specialized medical education
 programs. The shortage of female nurses, female doctors particularly in provinces, male and
 female physical therapists and psychosocial counsellors, medical technologists, and bio-medical-
 engineers, is more critical and requires immediate corrective measures.

 There are 16.7 public health workers per 10,000 population in rural areas (including unqualified
 support staff), compared with 36 per 10,000 population in urban areas. Most qualified private
 health workers reside in urban areas and serve only 22.6 percent of the population. The southern
 part of the country suffers from a serious shortage of qualified health care providers followed
 by the western and north-eastern regions. The mal-distribution of health care providers leaves
 the peripheral health facilities and remote areas understaffed. The main reasons for the mal-
 distribution are poor working, living and social conditions, security concerns, lack of educational
 facilities for children and lack of transportation (MoPH 2011).

		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    17
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                          		


      The potential economic and social benefits of increasing the number of highly educated
      individuals within a population, and particularly females, are known and understood worldwide
      (Bloom, Canning and Chan 2006). Female workers make up only 28 percent of total public health
      care providers. All midwives and 36 percent of support staff are female, while only around 20
      percent of higher-educated health care providers (e.g. doctors, dentists and pharmacists) are
      female (MoPH 2011).

      III. Findings and analysis
      The study participants had graduated from medical university between 1989 and 2011 (most had
      graduated since 2002). The majority of the participants were still trying to enroll in a postgraduate
      residency program; others were already enrolled in the program, and few had completed the
      program. This section presents their life experiences reflecting the assets and obstacles to female
      enrollment and graduation from a postgraduate residency program.

      Human, social and institutional resilience in female doctors in postgraduate
      residency programs
      Interviewed participants shared with us their aspirations and social demands for women in post-
      graduate medical programs. This pointed to human, social and institutional resilience factors,
      shared succinctly below for both doctors aspiring to enter a residency program and those already
      enrolled.

      Experiences of women aspiring to enroll in a postgraduate residency program
      We identified many motivating factors of participants who want to be enrolled in a medical
      residency program. These include the opportunity to acquire new knowledge and skills, better
      job opportunities, popularity, elevated self-esteem, increased income in private practice and
      enhanced capacity to serve the people.

      However, participants who want to enrol in postgraduate residency programs have major
      concerns such as complicated bureaucratic procedures for enrollment, the difficult entry test, the
      unavailability of standard teaching materials for preparation, cumbersome preparation required
      for the entry test, a lack of job opportunities, insufficient time to study, and many issues related
      to family which create barriers to enrollment in a postgraduate residency program. Married
      female doctors are most affected as they are also housewives and responsible for house chores.
      Unmarried female doctors and new graduates have better chances of being enrolled in a residency
      program.

      Experiences of women already enrolled in a postgraduate residency program
      Community demand for female doctors (especially gynecologists and obstetricians) along with
      a personal desire to continue their professional development, encourages female doctors’
      enrollment in residency programs. Some of the female doctors doing residency, who participated
      in the study, are optimistic that acquiring more knowledge and experience will lead to good job
      opportunities, a better life and respect in society, in the future. Women who are enrolled in a
      postgraduate residency program seem to have been raised by highly educated families with
      positive attitudes towards girls’ education, good economic status, and the women’s husbands

 18   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 are in the same profession. The interview data suggests that these factors help female doctors’
 enrollment in the residency program, especially the community demand for highly qualified
 female doctors, liberal families, and the adherence to cultural and traditional norms. However,
 these supportive assets do not come without costs at the individual, family, cultural and other
 social levels. In addition, geographic proximity and the female friendliness of facilities constrain
 both access and completion of postgraduate residency programs.

 Obstacles in fostering human, social and institutional resilience of postgraduate
 female doctors
 In spite of the high motivation of female doctors to continue their postgraduate studies in
 Afghanistan, as well as the social demand for a high level of women professionals in the medical
 fields, presently there are various factors that hinder their resilience. These are discussed next
 within each type of resilience process: human, social and institutional.
 Human Resilience
 The life experiences of female doctors who are already enrolled in postgraduate residency
 programs indicate difficulties with working in hospitals, and particularly performing night duty.
 Female doctors have serious concerns about low salary, lack of proper facilities for their child
 patients in hospitals, inadequate family support, and uncertainty about job opportunities in urban
 areas after graduation. Married female doctors face even more problems, including the double
 burden associated with working and taking care of their children, husband and in-laws in joint
 families.

 Social Resilience
 Family factors, which influence female doctors’ enrollment in postgraduate residency programs,
 vary from family to family. Women residing in rural areas are more disadvantaged than women
 in urban areas, and married women are less likely to enroll compared to single women. Family
 commitments, including being a mother and a wife, negatively affect the enrollment of female
 doctors in residency programs. In addition, criticisms by extended family members for not
 devoting enough time to their children, husband and in-laws, denial of permission for night duty
 in conservative families, and lack of child care support are among the other factors that reduce
 female doctors’ enrollment.

 Cultural norms, such as negative attitudes towards women who work outside of house, criticism
 from extended families, religious misbeliefs, low literacy rates within the family and surrounding
 community, discrimination against women, relatives’ attitudes towards female doctors’ night
 duty and restrictions on travels outside of the country, all negatively influence female doctors’
 enrollment.

 Social factors that hinder female doctors’ enrollment vary from place to place. These include
 beliefs that a woman’s only role is as a mother and a housewife, negative attitudes towards female
 education (particularly away from home, either in other cities and outside the country), living in
 extended families, and the excessive role of the husband, mother-in-law, father-in-law and other
 relatives in decision-making. These factors are more dominant in rural areas as compared to urban
 areas.

		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     19
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		

      Institutional Resilience
      Geographical distance influences access to higher education for both males and females. However,
      its impact on girls’ and women’s education is much higher compared to that of boys and men.
      Their support to their family is reduced because of their time spent away from the home, during
      which time they cannot take care of their children and breastfeed. This eventually leads to fewer
      enrollments of women in residency programs. In addition, lack of transportation or inability to
      pay transport costs, insecurity, prescience of irresponsible and impolite people on the way to
      the hospital, and living in rural areas, also minimizes female doctors’ enrollment in postgraduate
      medical programs.

      The lack of female-friendly facilities in hospitals limits both access and completion of residency
      programs. These include kindergartens, hostels, libraries, access to internet, positive attitudes
      overall towards women, qualified female trainers, good interpersonal skills of trainers, separate
      female services such as office space and washrooms, facilities that ensure privacy, transport,
      shift work, manageable standard workloads, and proper accommodation for night duty. Study
      participants also noted that the provision of job opportunities for husbands when residency
      programs are in faraway hospitals improves women’s enrollment in postgraduate residency
      programs.

      IV. Tentative recommendations for policy and practice
      The study findings indicate that various factors at the individual, family, community, society and
      institutional level influence the enrollment of female doctors in postgraduate residency programs.
      A holistic approach to supporting the increased participation of women in these programs should
      respond to the obstacles and foster the assets identified. Higher education and health sector
      development policies should consider how:
          •	 Individual preferences and commitment, family support, and good socioeconomic status
             have a positive impact on the enrollment of female doctors in residency programs.
             However, their limited decision-making power and the involvement of extended family
             members in all family decisions reduces the probability of further education for female
             doctors.
          •	 Negative attitudes towards girl’s education in society, misbeliefs regarding the role of
             women, concerns about work outside the house (particularly in a different city or country)
             hinder the enrollment of female doctors in postgraduate residency programs. However,
             massive community demand for the deployment of female doctors encourages girls to
             pursue careers in the medical field. Long-term investment in women’s education, and the
             engagement of community and religious leaders to support the education of girls and
             women, will help make a gradual shift towards the equality of girls/women and boys/men
             in the family and society.
          •	 The following measures will encourage female doctors to pursue postgraduate residency
             programs: affirmative action for girls education, simpler residency enrollment procedures,
             opportunities for entry test preparation, more job opportunities for women, establishment/
             strengthening of female-friendly facilities in hospitals, provision of additional incentives
             for female doctors, provision of transport, proper accommodation, shift work, and
             deployment of female trainers.

 20   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 V. Conclusions and future research needs
 To continue to identify the action required for an increased participation of women in
 postgraduate residency programs, it is important to expand the limited scope of this pilot study.
 We recommend using focus groups that include medical doctors working in various provinces,
 alongside in-depth interviews with those who are responsible for managing the current residency
 programs in the Ministry of Public Health and higher education. The former will help us to further
 explore additional problems and opportunities faced by female medical doctors in the provinces.
 The latter will provide a different angle to our understanding of the important factors that could
 improve the enrollment of female doctors in postgraduate residency programs. Moreover,
 engaging a broader range of stakeholders will be helpful in order to study different sides of the
 problems and opportunities.




		                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    21
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      References
      Afghanistan, MoPH (Ministry of Public Health). 2011. Afghanistan National Health Workforce 	
      	      Plan 2012-16.
      Baharustani, R. 2012. “Comprehensive Study of Higher Education in Afghanistan.” Kabul: 			
      	     Afghanistan Investment Support Agency.
      Bloom, D., D. Canning, and K. Chan. 2006. Higher Education and Economic Development in 	
      	      Africa. 	Harvard University.
      Cornbluth, S. 2014. Building Self-Esteem in Children and Teens Who Are Adopted or Fostered. 	
      	      London: Jessica Kingsley.
      George W. Bush Institute. 2013. Invest in Afghan Women: A Report on Education In Afghanistan. 	
      	     George W. Bush Institute’s Women’s Initiative.
      Meichenbaum, D. 2007. Understanding Resilience in Children and Adults: Implications for 	
      	     prevention and interventions. Ontario: University of Waterloo.
      Mertens, D.M. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The 	
      	     Guildford Press.
      Reyes, J. 2013. What Matters Resilience Most for Education Resilience: A Framework Paper. 	
      	       Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better 		
      	       Education Results (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Ungar, M. 2005. Handbook for Work with Children and Youth: Pathways to Resilience Across 	
      	      Culture and Contexts. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publication
      Wykle, M.L., R.N. Faan, and S.H. Gueldner. 2011. Aging Well. Ontario: Jones & Bartlett Learning.




 22   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Annexes
 Annex A.
 Study N°1: Focus group guide for female higher eduation
 students
 Focus group purpose:
 The aim of this focus group is to gather information about challenges and assets of female
 graduate students in different regions of Kabul schools.
 Guiding questions:
     1.	 What are your feelings about your access to higher education?
     2.	 Which personal assets or abilities do you feel help you to continue your education?
     3.	 What challenges or problems did you face or are you facing in continuing your education?
     4.	 How did you cope with these problems?
     5.	 What kind of facilities do you have at university?
     6.	 How does your family support you to continue your education?




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   23
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                           		


      Annex B.
      Study N°1: Focus group guide for female secondary school
      students and summary of answers
      1. What is your plan for after graduation?
             I want to continue my studies and succeed in the Kankor exam in order to achieve
             my education goals because I’d like to become an engineer. However, I know I won’t
             have the chance to pass the Kankor exam.
             I just want to finish school. I don’t want to continue my classes and go to university
             because my family can’t pay for my education. Our economy is not good and
             studying is a great expense.
             I just want to be a literate person and stay at home because the security in our
             country is not good.
             I am a married woman. After graduation my husband will not allow me to go to
             university. He says that his parents need my help and service and also I should just
             raise my children, and that my support belongs to my husband.
             I want to work because our family’s economic situation is not good. My house is very
             far from the university. Studying at university means I would need transportation.
             I need money. I just want to find a job to help my family.
             I want to go to university. I have been preparing for the Kankor exam for six months
             to get the chance to go to university. My father encourages and supports me a lot.
             I want to attend the Economic faculty and then get my masters degree because all
             of my sisters and brothers are well educated.
             Since security is not good my parents don’t like me going to university where boys
             and girls are mixed. I don’t want to go to university next year. I will go to one of the
             teacher training colleges to become a teacher.
             I don’t want to go to university. I want to work in companies because even if I finish
             my classes there are no job opportunities.
             I don’t know because after graduating from university you can’t find an appropriate
             job, even if you have high grades. If you don’t have any connections or enough
             money to give as sweet (bribe) you can’t be hired by an institution.
             It is not clear what I will do. It depends on my father and if he wants me to study
             more.
             Whether my father has arranged an engagement for me or not, education is still
             not in my plans.


 24   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 2. Why do you want to continue your classes/studies (at the higher education level)?

        I am very talented and interested in higher education. It is my dream to continue
        my studies.
        In order to have a good income in the future and to have a good position in society.
        If we don’t study and don’t get the certificate or the document nobody will get a
        job, so for a better life we have to work. If we finish university then we will have
        lots of job opportunities.

 3. What is your expectation of the Government and the Ministry of Higher Education?

        Since there are many reasons girls can’t access higher education we want the
        government to provide more facilities and opportunities. For example, after the
        mid-term exam the schools should offer preparation courses or pre-courses so we
        are well-prepared for the Kankor exam .
        My family doesn’t allow me to attend other courses. If my school offered these
        courses I would be allowed to participate, because all boys go to high level courses
        but we [the girls] can’t go.
        The course fees are very high. My father has five children. He can’t pay for all of us
        to attend special courses.
        If the government decreased the transportation cost for students, and if the
        stationary [school materials] costs fall, we can go to university.
        The government should create a special institute and university for girls, and
        consider their job opportunities as well.




		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   25
AFGHANISTAN | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      Annex C.
      Study N° 2: Interview guide
          1.	 What year did you graduate from medical school?
          2.	 Are you working in a hospital? If yes, which department?
          3.	 Have you completed a residency program? Yes or no?
          4.	 What is the life experience of female doctors who want to enroll in postgraduate residency
              programs?
          5.	 What is the life experience of female doctors who are already enrolled in postgraduate
              residency programs?
          6.	 How do family factors influence female doctors’ enrollment in postgraduate residency
              programs?
          7.	 What cultural norms influence female doctors’ enrollment in postgraduate residency
              programs?
          8.	 Which social factors influence female doctors ‘enrollment in postgraduate residency
              programs?
          9.	 How does geographical distance limit female doctors’ enrollment in postgraduate
              residency programs?
          10.	What type of female-friendly facilities in hospitals affect female doctors’ enrollment in
              postgraduate residency programs?




       




 26   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									     		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014




		          EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   27
                     The World Bank
                    1818 H Street, NW
           Washington DC 20433 USA
www.worldbank.org/education/resilience
   educationresilience@worldbank.org
