93928 V1
    rev
DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS .................................................................................................................. 4
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ....................................................................................................................................... 5
PREFACE ............................................................................................................................................................. 6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................................................... 7
A. CONTEXT FOR CPFL IN PARAGUAY ......................................................................................................... 12
       A.1. Supply of Financial Services .......................................................................................................... 12
       A.2. Demand for Financial Services ...................................................................................................... 14
B. FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION IN PARAGUAY .............................................................. 15
       B.1. Overall Legal and Regulatory Framework for Consumer Protection .............................................. 15
       B.2. Institutional Arrangements ............................................................................................................. 20
       B.3. Transparency and Disclosure ........................................................................................................ 25
       B.4. Business Practices ......................................................................................................................... 30
       B.5. Complaints Handling and Dispute Resolution ................................................................................ 35
C. CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT AND FINANCIAL LITERACY .................................................................... 38
ANNEX 1. TOOLS USED WORLDWIDE FOR MARKET CONDUCT SUPERVISION ...................................... 43
ANNEX 2. EXAMPLES OF FACT SHEETS USED IN MEXICO AND PORTUGAL .......................................... 44
ANNEX 3. FINANCIAL CAPABILITY SURVEYS - THE EXAMPLE OF KENYA .............................................. 46



Table    1.   Summary of Core Recommendations .............................................................................................. 9
Table    2.   Overview of Formal Financial Intermediaries (offering savings and credit products) ......................... 13
Table    3.   Financial Usage of Paraguayan Adults (15+ years) ........................................................................ 14
Table    4.   Consumer Protection Provisions in Recent Legislation Enacted by BCP to Enhance Financial Inclusion16
Table    5.   Institutional Arrangements as Mandated by Law ........................................................................... 21



Box 1. Institutional Frameworks for Financial Consumer Protection Worldwide ............................................. 22
Box 2. Institutional Arrangements for Supervision of Consumer Protection / Market Conduct Rules in Financial
Supervisors ............................................................................................................................................. 25
Box 3. Enhancing Transparency - Selected Examples ................................................................................. 28
Box 4. Legal Provisions Covering Core Business Practices ........................................................................... 31
Box 5. Availability of Financial Dispute Resolution Systems Worldwide ......................................................... 36
Box 6. Examples of Ongoing Financial Education Programs in Paraguay ...................................................... 40



Figure 1. Legal Frameworks for Consumer Protection Globally .................................................................... 17
Figure 2. Institutional Arrangements Worldwide......................................................................................... 22
Figure 3. Fair Treatment Regulations Worldwide ........................................................................................ 32
Figure 4. Countries with External Dispute Resolutions Systems in Place ....................................................... 36
Figure 5. Compliance Verification Tools by Type of Unit (Stand-Alone vs. Merged Supervision)...................... 43
Figure 6. Supervisory Inspection Activities of the BCSD in Portugal ............................................................. 43
Figure 7. Mandatory Fact Sheet to be Included as Cover Page of Credit Contracts ........................................ 44
Figure 8. Excerpt on Provided Life Insurance from the Key Information Sheet Used for Mortgage Loans in
Portugal ................................................................................................................................................. 45
Figure 9. Overview of Questions Used for the FinAccess Survey in 2009 and 2011 ....................................... 47
ADEFI       Association of Finance Companies (Asociación de Entidades Financieras)
ANDE        National Electricity Administration (Administración Nacional de Electricidad)
ASOBAN      Association of Banks (Asociación de Bancos)
ASUCOP      Association of Users and Consumers of Paraguay (Asociación de Usuarios y Consumidores
            de Paraguay)
BCP         Banco Central del Paraguay
BCP-SIB     Banking Superintendency (Superintendencia de Bancos)
BCP-SIS     Insurance Superintendency (Superintendencia de Seguros)
BCSD        Banking Conduct Supervision Department (Portugal)
BNF         National Development Bank (Banco Nacional de Fomento)
CAMP        Centre of Arbitration and Mediation of Paraguay (Centro de Arbitraje y Mediación Paraguay)
CONACOM     National Competition Commission (Comisión Nacional de la Competencia)
CONATEL     National Telecommunications Commission (Comisión Nacional de Telecomunicaciones)
CONPACOOP   Cooperatives Cooperation of Paraguay (Confederación Paraguaya de Cooperativas)
CPFL        Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
DCF         Financial Consumer Ombudsman (Defensora al Cliente Financiero)
DGEEC       Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses (Dirección General de Estadística,
            Encuestas y Censos)
EMPE        E-Money Issuer (Entidad de Medio de Pago Electrónico)
ENIF        National Financial Inclusion Strategy (Estrategía Nacional de Inclusion Financera)
FGD         Deposit Guarantee Fund (Fondo de Garantía de Depósitos)
IAIS        International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IIF         Financial Inclusion Intendency (Intendencia de Inclusión Financiera)
INCOOP      National Institute for Cooperativism (Instituto de Cooperativismo)
INTN        National Institute of Standards and Technology (Instituto Nacional de Tecnología,
            Normalización y Metrología)
IOSCO       International Organization of Securities Commissions
MIC         Ministry of Industry and Commerce (Ministerio de Industria y Comercio)
NFIS        National Financial Inclusion Survey
NGO         Non-Governmental Organization
OECD        Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
PYG         Paraguayan Guarani
SBS         Superintendency of Banks of Peru
SEDECO      Secretariat for Consumer Protection (Secretaría de Defensa al Consumidor)
SEPRELAD    Secretariat for Prevention of Money Laundering (Secretaría de Prevención de Lavado de
            Dinero o Bienes)
SET         Tax Sub-Secretariat of the State (Subsecretaría de Estado de Tributación)
SIPAP       National Electronic Payment System of Paraguay (Sistema Nacional de Pagos Electrónicos
            del Paraguay)
TFC         Total Financial Cost
WB          World Bank
This Diagnostic Study was prepared by a team led by Douglas Pearce (Acting Practice Manager,
Financial Inclusion, GFMDR) and Ilka Funke (Financial Inclusion Specialist), and included Sarah
Fathallah (Financial Sector Analyst, GFMDR), Manuel Peraita (Insurance Sector Specialist), Jose Rutman
(Banking Sector Specialist) and Luis Trevino (Sr. Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR). Technical
guidance and input was provided by Dante Mossi (Resident Representative for Paraguay, LCCPY),
Javier Suarez (Lead Economist, GTCDR), Jane C. Hwang (Sr. Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR) and
on the legal framework by Mariana Paredes (Consultant, GFMDR). Maria Cristina Heisecke Paredes
(Consultant) provided both technical and administrative support, while Rosa Arestivo de Cuentas-Zavala
(Team Assistant, LCCPY) and Monzerrat Garcia (Consultant, GFMDR) also gave valuable administrative
support. Marianna Camino (Consultant, GFMDR) provided translation support.

Peer review comments were provided by Javier Suarez (Lead Economist, GTCDR), Jane C. Hwang (Sr.
Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), and Ros Grady (Sr. Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR).

The team would like to express its gratitude to the authorities and private stakeholders for the support and
collaboration it received during the preparation of the Review. Special thanks go to the management and
staff of the different financial supervisory authorities for their excellent cooperation and the warm welcome
extended, and to the management and staff of the Financial Inclusion Intendency (Central Bank of
Paraguay) for their valuable assistance and input provided during the review.

The Diagnostic was prepared with financial support of the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
(SECO), through the Global Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Trust Fund.




---

Currency and Equivalent Units
(As of January 2015)
Currency Unit = Paraguayan Guarani (PYG)
USD 1 = PYG 4,707.72

Government Fiscal Year
January 1 – December 31
This review of the Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Framework (CPFL) in Paraguay was
undertaken in response to a request for technical assistance in this area made by the Central Bank of
Paraguay (BCP). The objectives were: (i) to assess the existing consumer protection and financial literacy
framework by reviewing laws, regulations, and actual practices in Paraguay, and comparing it with
international good practice; and (ii) to provide recommendations on ways to improve the level of financial
consumer protection and financial literacy in the country.

The Diagnostic Review provides a detailed assessment of the institutional, legal and regulatory
framework for consumer protection in four segments of the financial sector: (i) banks and finance
companies, (ii) financial cooperatives, (iii) insurance companies, and, - in reflection of the important role
they play in Paraguay - (iv) non-bank agents and mobile payment providers. Its findings and
recommendations cover six thematic areas: (i) Institutional Arrangements, (ii) Legal and Regulatory
Framework, (iii) Transparency and Disclosure, (iv) Business Practices, (v) Complaints Handling and
Dispute Resolution, and as a stand-alone section (vi) Financial Education.

To prepare the review, a World Bank (WB) mission visited Asunción from May 26 to June 5, 2014.
Extensive consultations were held with stakeholders from the public and private sectors. This included
relevant departments of BCP (in particular the Financial Inclusion Intendency, the Banking
Superintendency – BCP-SIB, and the Insurance Superintendency – BCP-SIS), the National Institute for
Cooperatives (INCOOP), the Secretariat for Consumer Protection (SEDECO), other government entities
and public agencies, as well as private financial institutions, industry and consumer associations, and
professional bodies. The complete list of mission meetings is available in Annex II.

                                                                                                                1
The World Bank’s Good Practices for Consumer Protection were used as a benchmark for the review.
The Good Practices are based on findings of in-depth country level reviews of consumer protection and
financial literacy conducted by the World Bank since 2006, as well as international benchmarks, including
(i) principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO and IAIS, (ii) OECD recommendations in this area,
as well as (iii) laws, regulations and codes of business practices from the European Union, United States,
Australia, Canada, France, Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and South Africa. The World
Bank (WB) has already conducted similar reviews in more than thirty countries worldwide, including
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan,
Kosovo, Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru,
the Philippines, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, South Africa, Slovakia, Tajikistan, Tanzania,
                                             2
Ukraine, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

The CPFL Review includes a detailed assessment of each relevant financial segment consistent with the
Good Practices (Volume II), and a report summarizing the key findings for the assessment and prioritized
recommendations (Volume I).




1
  The Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012) are available at:
 http://bit.ly/GoodPracticesConsumerProtection
2
  Recent CPFL Diagnostic reviews are available at: http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/diagnostic-reviews
The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental for increasing
access and usage of financial services in a sustainable way. Financial literacy and an adequate
consumer protection framework are necessary precursors to building trust in the formal financial sector,
creating transparency on existing products and services, and thereby facilitating financial inclusion. Their
absence can contribute to over-indebtedness of clients, with negative impact on the financial sector and
the economy as highlighted by recent financial crisis. The Diagnostic Review of the Consumer Protection
and Financial Literacy Framework in Paraguay therefore provides an important input into the
development of the government’s National Financial Inclusion Strategy and for a sustainable financia l
sector development overall.

Over the years, important steps were taken to put in place and enhance Paraguay’s consumer
protection framework. A dedicated Consumer Protection Law is in place since 1998, and the
institutional arrangements for its implementation recently strengthened by creating a dedicated
Secretariat for Consumer Protection (SEDECO) with a separate budget. In addition, the financial
supervisory authorities BCP and INCOOP incorporated some consumer protection-related business and
market conduct provisions into their respective legal and regulatory frameworks. BCP for example
introduced consumer protection provisions in regulations on e-money issuers and non-bank agents, and
enhanced rules on transparency of prices and commissions, in particular for credit cards. A unit in charge
of financial inclusion was established within the Banking Superintendency (BCP-SIB), which handles
financial consumer complaints and develops financial education programs. The Insurance Supervisor
BCP-SIS also has a consumer protection unit with four staff formally mapped to it. INCOOP substantially
revised the regulatory framework for Savings and Loan cooperatives, incorporating in addition to changes
in the prudential regulations some transparency and business conduct rules. INCOOP has also recently
launched a credit registry into which the larger savings and loan cooperatives started reporting.

Despite this observed progress, the mission identified some inefficiencies and substantial gaps in
the consumer protection framework, which contribute to the noted opacity of available
information and non-transparent business practices. Some measures to enhance transparency and
disclosure have not been effective. The BCP-SIB identified for example 250 different fees and
commissions charged by banks and finance companies, covering a variety of concepts. Furthermore, the
method for calculating the effective interest rate does not include all fees and commissions, such as for
example life insurance premiums. This has facilitated a widespread bundling of insurance products with
credit products. Opaque practices like this make it difficult for the client to understand the full cost of a
product, compare prices between providers and protect him/herself from unfair business practices.
Provisions to protect clients from non-transparent bundling of products are insufficient. The use of unified
contracts, which include paragraphs pertaining to credit and debit cards, overdrafts, and other services is
widespread, with no cooling off periods included. This leads to clients signing up for services they have
not actively requested and additional costs that were not made transparent upfront. Together with
reported deficiencies in credit evaluations, there are already some concerns about the rapid increase in
credit card debt, with some employees having their entire payroll deducted for repaying loans. Rules to
define and prevent abusive debt collection practices are not incorporated into any of the laws, and there
are no requirements mandating systematic processes for complaints handling and reporting to be in
place.

Furthermore, as is, the legal and regulatory frameworks in place create an uneven ‘level playing
field’ between financial service providers and contribute to gaps in market transpar ency.
Regulations and standards applicable to financial cooperatives are not coherent with those of banks and
finance companies, although they perform similar core activities. This not only implies different costs for
compliance, but also leads to fragmented and incomparable information available for the client. The
narrow outreach of financial regulation and supervision has also facilitated the development of a number
of unsupervised financial service providers, which are only subject to the very broad provisions of the
Consumer Protection Law.

The institutional arrangements for supervision and enforcement of consumer protection related
provisions are not sufficiently clear, and are not effective to identify and sanction violations.
SEDECO’s current capacity to handle complaints and supervise the market appears limited, and given its
broad mandate will likely remain insufficient to cover financial service providers in more depth. On the
other hand, neither BCP as the supervisor of banks, finance and insurance companies, nor INCOOP as
the supervisor of S&L cooperatives have a clear mandate to introduce financial consumer protection
regulation in their respective sector frameworks and supervise adherence. The business and market
conduct rules, which they have introduced, mostly focus on safeguarding the viability of the financial
players and not on establishing fair and transparent business practices. The existing consumer protection
relevant provisions are also not systematically supervised. Unregulated financial service providers, such
as pawnshops and microcredit providers, are not supervised by any government entity. In the absence of
an ombudsman scheme or other affordable alternative dispute resolution mechanism, unresolved
disputes have to be brought before the courts, which is seldom done.

Finally, measures to foster the financial capabilities of the population are fragmented and given
the dearth of available supply and demand side data not adequately targeted. Demand side surveys
to measure the population’s financial capabilities and actual usage of financial products are not regularly
carried out. On the supply side, the available information is fragmented. Data shortages are particularly
notable for S&L cooperatives, as well as across institutions for individual products. The mentioned gaps in
available demand and supply side information makes it difficult to identify usage patterns and trends,
understand underlying factors and gaps in financial capabilities, and target financial education measures
accordingly. Existing financial education programs and measures are small and fragmented, and limited
coordination between individual government agencies, private and public stakeholders reduce their cost
effectiveness.

The mission identified a number of areas in which improvements need to be made to foster a
sustainable deepening of the financial sector. The full assessment of the core bottlenecks and
recommendations is spelled out in the main report. Detailed assessments and recommendations by
sector are covered in Volume II. The following table provides an overview over the core
recommendations:
                                                                              Time-   Responsible
Recommendation
                                                                              frame   Entities


Issue guidance material / circulars to clarify individual provisions of the           BCP/ INCOOP,
                                                                              ST-MT
consumer protection framework for financial products.                                 with SEDECO
Introduce regulations on (i) complaints handling procedures and reporting             SEDECO/BCP/
requirements, (ii) abusive debt collection practices, and (iii) bundling of   ST-MT
products.                                                                             INCOOP

Assess the individual financial sector frameworks for consistency with the            BCP/INCOOP
                                                                              MT-LT
Consumer Protection Law, and bridge gaps in coverage.                                 with SEDECO
Introduce a deposit insurance scheme – with the prerequisite of a
                                                                              MT-LT   INCOOP
sufficiently robust supervisory framework


Establish clear mandates and competencies of financial supervisory            ST-MT   SEDECO / BCP
agencies in the area of financial consumer protection                                 / INCOOP
Enhance coherence of financial consumer protection regulations across         MT-LT   BCP/INCOOP
products and markets through enhanced coordination and information                    with SEDECO,
sharing.                                                                              CONATEL, MIC
Strengthen the capacity of the supervisory agencies to effectively monitor            BCP/INCOOP
and enforce compliance with legal requirements:
- Formally introduce market conduct / consumer protection in on- and off-     ST
    site supervision, and develop manuals for the supervision
- Increase resources (staff, budget) allocated to financial consumer          MT-LT
    protection responsibilities, and train the relevant supervisory staff
SEDECO to develop system to monitor and enforce compliance of non-            MT-LT   SEDECO
supervised financial service providers.
Foster industry-wide standards for responsible finance through developing     MT-LT   Industry
guidance on minimum content and principles, and standardizing documents               associations


Establish consistent and considerably enhanced disclosure and                         BCP (to take the
transparency requirements, including:                                                 lead) with
- Develop and require a standard methodology for calculating and              ST      INCOOP and
    disclosing "total financial cost” (TFC)                                           SEDECO
- Mandate use of standard terms and definitions for commissions and           ST-MT
    fees for payment, savings, credit and insurance products.
Issue Circular (Normativa) or other form of guidance to set out content,      ST      BCP/INCOOP
wording, and format for Key Fact Statements for all financial products
Promote the development and use of user-friendly price transparency           ST-MT   BCP/ INCOOP,
websites and other measures to facilitate comparison, stimulate                       Associations,
transparency and enable better consumer choice.                                       Private Sector
Phase out current usury regime                                                MT      Gov./BCP
Mandate that clients are periodically provided with account statements        ST      BCP/INCOOP
Regularly update the registry on cooperatives, and eliminate                  ST-MT   INCOOP
inactive/dormant cooperatives.
                                                                                 Time-   Responsible
Recommendation
                                                                                 frame   Entities


Issue regulation to improve contract-related business practices, including (i)   ST      BCP, INCOOP
prohibiting the use of unified contracts, (ii) eliminate mandatory insurance
requirements, and (iii) mandate provision of contract prior to signing
Introduce guidelines on credit evaluations, including on payroll deductions      ST      BCP, INCOOP,
and for assessment of borrower repayment capacity                                        with SEDECO
Introduce cooling off periods, and establish right of clients to withdraw        MT-LT   BCP / INCOOP
without penalty fees in case of unilateral changes of conditions
Establish a framework for defining and prohibiting abusive debt collection       MT-LT   SEDECO with
practices and associated charges                                                         BCP /INCOOP
Develop standardized training requirements and programs for supervisors,         M-LT    Industry
staff and agents/non-bank intermediaries in the area of credit evaluation,               Associations,
product design and transparency of disclosure                                            BCP/INCOOP


Require financial service providers to have a formal system and procedure        ST      BCP, INCOOP,
for complaints and claims handling in place, and to compile regular                      SEDECO
reports/statistics for management and the relevant supervisor
SEDECO and supervisory agencies to establish internal                            ST      BCP, INCOOP,
systems/procedures for receiving and resolving complaints, analyzing                     SEDECO
complaints information, and making statistics available to the public
Improve the data correction processes for BCP’s credit registry and the          MT-LT   BCP, INCOOP/
private credit bureau, and assess procedures- once tested - for INCOOP                   credit bureau
Establish an alternative dispute resolution mechanism, such as a Financial       MT-LT   BCP/INCOOP/
Ombudsman, which can be used for low value disputes                                      stakeholders


Develop and regularly conduct a survey to gather information on the              ST-MT   BCP / DGEEC
population’s level of financial capabilities and usage of financial services,
and conduct focus groups or other qualitative research to validate findings
Improve supply-side statistics to consistently reflect all financial             ST-MT   BCP/ INCOOP/
intermediaries                                                                           DGEEC
Provide the BCP and INCOOP with an explicit mandate for financial                ST-MT   BCP/INCOOP
education, and accompany selected regulatory changes with
communication campaigns
Established a working group on Financial Education with a mandate to             MT-LT   BCP/INCOOP,
develop a well-sequenced and funded action plan.                                         stakeholders
Government to assess possible entry points for financial education               ST      Government

*ST: Short Term; MT: Medium Term; LT: Long Term
The government, with support of the World Bank, is currently in the process of defining a National
Financial Inclusion Strategy (ENIF). The Strategy aims to facilitate access and usage of formal financial
services by all income groups and across all geographic regions, and is an integral part of the
government’s efforts to reduce poverty and inequalities in the country. As part of this process, a Financial
                                                                                           3
Inclusion Committee was formally created by Decree No. 1971 at the end of July 2014, and a workshop
was conducted in July to identify measures, timelines and indicators of the National Financial Inclusion
                  4
Strategy (ENIF). Furthermore, BCP created in 2013 a dedicated Department for Financial Inclusion, and
facilitated the elaboration and implementation of a nationwide Financial Inclusion Survey financed by the
World Bank. This review of the Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Framework will serve as input
into the government’s Financial Inclusion Strategy.

The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental for increasing
access and usage of financial services in a sustainable way. Financial literacy and consumer
protection is a necessary precursor to building trust in the formal financial sector, creating awareness of
existing products and services, and encouraging financial inclusion. If it is not in place or inadequate,
consumers cannot (i) adequately exercise their rights as consumers; (ii) select the financial products that
suit them best, and (iii) sufficiently protect themselves from mis-selling, fraud, and other market abuses.
This can contribute to over-indebtedness of individual clients, with negative consequences for the
                                      5
financial sector and the economy. Adequate consumer protection is thus important to ensure that the
growth enhancing benefits of financial inclusion reach both the consumer and the economy as a whole,
and are not undermined on the longer term.

A sound consumer protection framework consists of adequate rules and regulations, effective
oversight structures, as well as complementary and well-targeted financial literacy initiatives. The
rules and regulations can be in the form of legal frameworks or Industry-wide Codes of Conduct, but
should be binding for the industry and thus enforceable. Effective oversight structures are needed to
ascertain that the applicable rules are actually implemented, at least in the formal financial sector. On the
demand side, the level of financial literacy and usage of financial services of the population should be
regularly measured to facilitate the design of well-targeted measures, fill identified gaps, and thus build a
solid basic level of financial literacy in the country. The following sections will first provide a brief overview
of the usage of financial services and the structure of the financial system. Section B discusses the
framework for financial consumer protection in the country, and Section C assesses the programs in
place to measure and enhance financial literacy of the population.




3
  The Committee members are to be from the Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank, the Ministry of Planning as well
as the National Institute for Cooperatives.
4
  A workshop to identify the core parameters of the National Financial Inclusion Strategy was housed by BCP in July
2014, with technical staff from the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Planning, BCP as well as INCOOP participating.
The workshop was facilitated by the World Bank team that supports the government in the elaboration of this
strategy, and presented its findings from an undertaken supply and demand side diagnostic.
5
  For example see OECD (2009), “Financial Literacy and Consumer Protection: Overlooked aspects of the crisis”,
OECD Recommendation on Good Practices; or CGAP (2010) “Growth and Vulnerabilities in Microfinance, Focus
Note 61/2010.
A broad range of formal financial institutions cater to retail clients; with financial cooperatives
accounting for the largest share of clients (see Table 2):
 There are 15 commercial banks, one deposit taking public bank and 12 finance companies, which
                                                                                               6
   together account for over 900,000 deposit accounts, and a similar number of loans. In terms of
   volume, they have a market share of 86 percent in deposits, and 84 percent in loans, and their loans
   and deposits account for around 39 and 42 percent of GDP respectively. The banking sector is
   fragmented. The public bank BNF mostly caters to civil servants, while many private banks focus only
   on the upper market segments, enterprise financing and salaried clients. Only 3 banks (former
   finance companies) and the 12 finance companies cater to microclients. Banks and finance
   companies are regulated and supervised by the Banking Superintendency within the BCP (BCP-SIB),
                                                       7
   and subject to the same rules and regulations. Their deposits are covered by a deposit insurance
   fund for up to 75 monthly minimum wages (currently equivalent to USD 32,000). The total loans,
   number of credit cards issued, and infrastructure (especially bank agents) have been steadily
   increasing in the latest years. The system has been showing high results (ROE of 30 percent at end
   of 2013).
 In addition, roughly 30 percent of the adult population is reckoned to be affiliated with one or several
   of the estimated 330 Savings and Loans Cooperatives operating in Paraguay. Their 1.4 million
   accounts currently represent 58 percent of total deposit accounts, but only 11 percent of total
   deposits, or 6 percent of GDP. In terms of credit, they account for 16 percent of total credit or 8
   percent of GDP. Savings and Loan Cooperatives are subject to a dedicated legal and regulatory
   framework, and are supervised by the National Institute for Cooperativism (INCOOP), a government
   agency in charge of regulating and supervising financial and non-financial cooperatives. Data on the
   sector is scarce, as INCOOP does not publish regular reports or statistics on the sector. There are 26
   Type ‘A’ S&L cooperatives with assets above USD 11 million; 52 S&L cooperatives type ‘B’ with
   assets between USD 1.2 and 11 million, and the remaining 250 S&L cooperatives being small with
   assets below USD 1.2 million. The sector is not yet covered by a deposit insurance scheme.
 The insurance market is small, with total premiums amounting to USD 343.2 million in 2012-13, but
   growing fast (15 percent in 2013 from the previous year). Automobile insurance represented in 2013
   almost 48 percent of all the insurance premiums, and life insurance, the second largest, 12 percent. Life
   insurance grew 23.8 percent over the last year. Most of the life insurance sold is channeled through
   group contracts, which accounted for 97.9 percent of the total life insurance premiums in 2012. There
   are seven companies licensed to sell individual life but only one offers these contracts. The sector is
   regulated and supervised by the Insurance Superintendency within BCP (BCP-SIS). Although insurers
   can sell directly to their clients, most of the insurances are distributed through agents (individuals) or
   brokers (firms). Agents and brokers have to be registered at the SIS, for which they need to obtain a
   specific University diploma, and must contract professional liability insurance. As of June 2014, there




6
  In addition, there are also two credit-only public financial entities: (i) the Fondo Ganadero with PYG 100 million in
assets and a focus on providing credit and technical assistance to small and medium sized livestock farmers, and (ii)
the Credito Agricola de Habilitacion which focuses on microloans and technical assistance to smallholders. They do
not take deposits, and are not fully under supervision of BCP, and are not covered under this assessment.
7
  Finance companies cannot open checking accounts and have lower nominal capital required.
    were 776 agents and 42 brokers registered at the SIS. Claim settlers are also requested by law to be
    registered at the SIS. There were 15 claim settlers as of June 2014.



                                                                                Credit
                     # of       # of       Deposits        #        Loans
                                                                                 Cards        Branches   Agents
                   entities   accounts     (PYG bn)    of loans    (PYG bn)
                                                                                issued
Banks                    16                                                      897,000           452      117
Finance                         993,411         60.9    920,700         56.1
                         12                                                       94,283           159      177
Companies
Financial
                        330   1.390,113          7.2    553,457          5.9           n.a.        490      n.a.
Cooperatives
Source: World Bank Supply Side Study (forthcoming), BCP Monthly Bulletin (July 2014)

In addition, a number of semi-formal entities, which are not regulated or supervised by a financial
regulatory authority, provide financial services to retail clients:
 Payment service providers: There are 5 dedicated payment service providers operating in
    Paraguay, which receive and process retail payments for public and private clients such as the
    National Electricity Administration (ANDE), the tax authority (SET), and private financial
    intermediaries. The largest one with a market share of 70 percent processed over 19 million retail
    transactions annually with a volume of USD 1 billion in 2013. It has over 1,500 service points in 145
    of the 224 municipalities in Paraguay.
 E-Money issuers: The two largest mobile phone companies, Tigo and Personal, offer e-money
    services to their clients. Tigo introduced e-wallets in 2008, and based on internal estimates now has
    over 1 million clients and over 2 million monthly transactions. Personal launched its e-money product
    “Billetera Personal” in 2010, and currently has slightly over 23,000 active users with close to 30,000
    monthly transactions. As will be discussed below, BCP recently issued Resolution 6 of 2014 (E-
    Money Resolution) to bring e-money issuers under its regulation and supervision. E-money issuers
    are also regulated by the National Commission of Telecommunications (CONATEL), and if using
    electronic signatures and/or contracts are subject to regulations enforced by the Ministry of Industry
    and Commerce (MIC).
 Microcredit-only institutions: An estimated 349 pawnshops, 2 NGO-MFIs as well as a number of
    other microcredit providers are catering to retail clients, but are not under any form of financial
    regulation and supervision. They are licensed on the municipal level they have registered at, and no
    consolidated data on their size and outreach is available. Observations during the mission, as well as
    results from the National Financial Inclusion Survey indicate, that they are widely used and likely
    cater to a large number of clients from the informal sector. The two larger non-profit MFIs provide e.g.
    microcredit and technical assistance to an estimated 73,000 clients.
 Finally, a number of companies offer “pre-paid” medical or funeral services, which are similar to
    insurance products. The Insurance Law in Paraguay defines insurance as a commercial transaction
    under which the insurer pays an indemnity in case a covered random event occurs. That regulation
    does not explicitly cover the case where an entity receives “pre-payments” and instead of paying any
    indemnity directly provides a service when a covered event occurs. According to figures from the Health
    Superintendency (Superintendencia de Salud), which supervises these health care providers, there are
    around 65 entities operating pre-paid medical schemes, covering about 500.000 beneficiaries. No
    formal data exists on pre-paid funeral services, but estimates suggest that over 100 entities offer these
    services countrywide. In many other jurisdictions they are considered insurers, and regulated and
    supervised, at least on their financial side, by the corresponding insurance supervisor.
Despite progress made in the last few years, actual access and usage of formal financial services
continues to be below potential in Paraguay. Based on results of the 2014 National Financial Inclusion
Survey (NFIS), as set out in Table 3, 55 percent of the interviewed adults use some form of formal
financial services. However, only 29 percent have an account at a financial institution, of which two thirds
with a Savings and Loan cooperative. Many adults still prefer to keep their savings at home, citing the
high costs of maintaining an account, lack of sufficient funds and evasive bureaucracy as hurdles. Only 8
percent of the formally employed receive their salary directly into an account, while the vast majority still
receives it in the form of cash. Borrowing has increased since 2011, with now 34 percent of the
population reporting having had a loan in the last year. However, around one third of the borrowers use
informal sources (including from family, moneylenders, etc.). The life insurance market is shallow, with
only 4 percent of the surveyed population reporting to have a life insurance. Most of them are likely linked
to a credit.



                                     National Financial Inclusion
                                                                                       Global Findex 2011
                                            Survey 2014
     Number of adults... (%)                                                                Latin      Lower middle
                                                            S&L
                                     Total     Banks                        Paraguay      American        income
                                                         Cooperatives
                                                                                          Countries      countries
... with an account at formal
                                          29       12               19           21.7           39.3           28.4
financial institution
... with a loan in the last year          34        8               13           29.5           25.4           36.7
... who saved in past year                39             14                      18.1            26            27.6
... using mobile phones to
                                        15.1      n.a.            n.a.            5.7            1.9            3.8
receive money
... who personally pay for
                                        14.5      n.a.            n.a.            5.9            6.8            5.1
health insurance
Source: National Financial Inclusion Survey, 2014 and Global Findex 2011.

There are some concerns regarding the level of debt incurred by some borrowers, in particular
through credit card debt. Meetings with stakeholders visited during the mission indicate that credit cards
and installment purchases are widespread amongst employees and people with a regular income.
Instead of overall assessing the affordability of debt over time, clients focus on speed of access to credit
and the affordability of the monthly installments. With poor budgeting skills and impulse spending
prevalent, this increasingly lead to high or excessive levels of debt, with some employees reportedly
                                                        8
having their entire payroll deducted for repaying loans. These findings are supported by the NFIS (2014),
which shows that 50 percent of the employed are struggling to meet their “basic” needs and 30 percent
occasionally lack money for food and other necessary items. Various stakeholders confirmed that clients
of all income levels neither assess commissions and fees charged by financial institutions, nor read the
frequently complex contracts. The findings indicate gaps in financial literacy and education.




8
 Based on feedback received during the mission, it is estimated that around 10 percent of the employees of the
Ministry of Finance have up to 100 percent of their salary withheld to repay existing debt.
The Diagnostic of the Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Framework in Paraguay only
covers the framework applicable to formal financial institutions supervised by either BCP or
         9
INCOOP. As shown above, this leaves a substantial share of the market for financial services out of the
assessment. However, where possible, the recommendations take into consideration that basic financial
consumer protection standards should also apply to semi-formal and informal market participants in order
to foster transparency across market participants and create a level playing field. Furthermore,
considering the recent issuance of the E-Money Resolution and its imminent entry into effect, a dedicated
assessment of the applicable CPFL framework for digital financial service providers (covering non-bank
agents and e-money issuers) was undertaken and is included in Volume II. Its findings are reflected
throughout the report.




The Consumer Protection Law and Civil Code set the legal basis for consumer protection in
Paraguay. The Consumer Protection Law covers any commercial transaction of goods and services
(including financial services) that are carried out by a legal or natural person. Art. 6 establishes the basic
rights and obligations of clients, including for example the right to (i) freely choose a service or good, (ii)
receive clear and correct information on the composition, quality, price and risk of the product/service,
and (iii) to be protected against inadequate publicity and marketing and abusive contracts. The Civil Code
establishes in Art. 475 a usury interest rate to be determined by the Central Bank, and includes basic
provisions on contracts, including the creditor’s rights in the area of enforcement of credits. These two
laws cover all financial and non-financial service providers, including unsupervised payment providers,
moneylenders, pawnshops, the credit bureau and, until formally supervised by BCP, e-money issuers.

In addition to this general framework, banks, finance and insurances companies, as well as S&L
cooperatives are also subject to market and business conduct provisions in their respective legal
and regulatory frameworks:
 The BCP introduced over the last few years a number of regulations for banks and finance
    companies, which aim to enhance comparability of prices and commissions, and improve general
    disclosure of information. A particular focus is currently on regulating credit cards, which have surged
    in number and reportedly contributed to problems of over-indebtedness amongst clients. The BCP-
    SIB also passed a number of laws and regulations to facilitate the uptake of financial services by
    hitherto unbanked clients, which include consumer protection relevant provisions (see Table 4).
    Resolution 1, Act 70, 2011 on the use of agents, and Resolution 6, Act 18, 2014 on E-money issuers
    contemplate for example issues such as business practices, transparency, provider liability, and
    complaints handling.




9
  Covering thus banks, finance companies, insurance providers supervised by SIS, as well as savings and loan
cooperatives.

                                                                                                                    10
     INCOOP recently revised the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the S&L Cooperatives. It
     strengthened the prudential oversight over the larger S&L cooperatives, introduced a requirement to
     have annual external audits from pre-qualified auditors, and to at least annually report basic financial
     information to the supervisor. It also established general disclosure and privacy rules, as well as
     business conduct rules. The latter covers for example minimum standards for determining interest
     rates, purchasing of fixed assets, and standards for internal governance. However, the provisions in
     many instances lack specificity such as timeframes and minimum content standards for disclosure,
     which creates room for implementation and makes supervision more difficult. A deposit insurance
     scheme is under development.
    For insurance companies, no clear legal framework for consumer protection could be identified. Some
     provisions are in place (i) to allow BCP-SIS to verify if premiums are insufficient, abusive or
     discriminatory, (ii) to mandate that the contracts are written in clear and understandable language,
     and are filed at the BCP-SIS, and (iii) that advertisements are not misleading. Overall, the focus of the
     regulation is on ensuring the financial viability of the insurer.




Laws and regulations               Contents                           Consumer protection provisions
Basic accounts            Reduces entry and               No minimum opening amount or balance.
(BCP Resolution 25, Act   maintenance costs and           Reduced transaction costs.
51, 2013)                 fees, both for the demand       Allows account movement consultations using ATMs,
                          and supply sides                 Internet, mobiles and other available mechanisms,
                                                           printed abstracts only upon request cost must be paid by
                                                           the client.
                                                          Contracts must include conditions for accessing accounts
                                                           transaction information must be included in the contract.
Agents                    Allows the use of agents for    Use only of electronic terminals with on-line connection to
(BCP Resolution 1, Act    the provision of financial       the financial institution’s platform.
70, 2011)                 services on behalf of banks     Not allowed to operate off-line.
                          and finance companies.          After each transaction a receipt must be produced by the
                                                           terminal.
                                                          Limits to type of transactions and amounts.
                                                          Not allowed to charge fees to the clients.
                                                          Visible signs containing full identification of the agent and
                                                           the financial institution, phone numbers of other
                                                           communication channels and address of nearest branch,
                                                           fees charged by the financial institution to the client, and
                                                           the opening hours.
E-Money                   Regulates the provision of      Defines e-money operations authorized.
(BCP Resolution 6, Act    e-money, non-bank               E-money cannot be intermediated and is not subject to
18, 2014)                 electronic transfers and         credit risk.
                          licensing of e-money            Technological platform to ensure transactions in real time
                          issuers.                         together with quality, security and continuity.
                                                          Protection of the float of e-wallets through a trust fund
                                                           with individualized beneficiaries.
                                                          Introduces guidelines on contract content, liability of
                                                           service provider, and disclosure.




10
  See for example resolution 11102/13 and 11481/14. Changes have been regularly incorporated into the compiled
regulatory framework, and the framework is publicly available on INCOOP’s website.
Covering consumer protection provisions in both general and specific laws is in line with
regulatory practice observed worldwide. As can be seen in Figure 1, there is an increasing trend to
frame consumer protection provisions through a dedicated consumer protection law (at times specialized
on financial services), and to specify and tailor the respective principles through incorporation into the
financial regulatory framework. Out of the 109 countries that contributed to the World Bank’s Global
Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy in both 2010 and 2013, almost all now include
some financial consumer protection related regulations in their financial legislation framework. Similar to
the situation in Paraguay, this is in addition to a general consumer protection law. For this approach to
work effectively, international experience suggests that the laws and regulations need to be closely
coordinated to prevent overlaps and ascertain coherence of regulations across products and providers.




 Regulations on financial consumer protection                                                          103
    within financial legislation framework                                                        96


                                                                                     70
             General consumer protection law
                                                                                     70


 Consumer protection law with a reference to
                                                                                58                     2013
   financial services or a separate financial
       consumer protection legislation                                     49
                                                                                                       2010

Source: World Bank Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (2013).

While no overlaps were determined, the existing consumer protection framework has remained
broad in nature. Additional guidance material and where necessary regulations need to be
developed to facilitate actual implementation and enforcement . As in most countries with a general
Consumer Protection Law, the Consumer Protection Law in Paraguay only provides the broad foundation
for consumer protection, and thus needs to be complemented with sector or product specific guidance
material or regulations to clarify how the established principles are to be interpreted for financial services
and to guide actual implementation and supervision. This is currently still missing. SEDECO (and formerly
the MIC) has so far nor issued any additional regulations for the Consumer Protection Law or developed
guidance material such as minimum standards for advertisements or sample contracts. This leaves
substantial room for interpretation what for example is implied by “providing the customer with clear and
correct information on the composition, quality, price and risk” when buying a financial products . While
some gaps are bridged by sector specific regulations issued by the respective financial regulators (see
also B.3), neither the BCP-SIB, nor the BCP-SIS or INCOOP have an explicit legal mandate to cover
financial consumer protection in their regulatory frameworks and thus have not covered consumer
protection issues in a systematic and coherent manner. Furthermore, no formal coordination mechanism
is currently in place to ascertain that sector specific regulations are aligned with the general principles of
the Consumer Protection Law (see also B.2).

In addition, a number of consumer protection-related gaps were identified in the legal and
regulatory frameworks. Provisions to protect clients from non-transparent bundling of products and
abusive debt collection practices are not incorporated into any of the laws, and there are no requirements
mandating systematic processes for complaints handling and reporting to be in place. Furthermore, in the
area of banking, some of the provisions to enhance transparency and business practices have also not
                                         11
been effective and need to be revised. Furthermore, the framework has evolved over the years, with
new regulations replacing or complementing old one, making it difficult for both the supervisor and the
financial institution to understand and comply with / enforce the applicable legal framework. As regards
S&L cooperatives, their regulatory framework focuses on enhancing the efficiency of management and
safeguarding financial soundness, and not on protecting the member from unfair business practices.
Many of the provisions are vague, requiring for example that a certain topic be “adequately” covered in a
manual or the client “to be informed”. This leaves ample room for interpretation to the Board or
management of a cooperative, while making it difficult for INCOOP to supervise and enforce. The
consumer protection framework applicable to insurance companies is still basic. These issues are
discussed in more depth under B.3-B.5 and for each sector in Volume II.

The observed fragmentation of consumer protection rules and regulations has contributed to an
uneven ‘playing field’ between financial service providers, and to opacity of available information.
The regulations and standards applicable to S&L cooperatives are for example not coherent with the ones
of banks and finance companies, although the entities perform similar core activities. This not only leads
to different costs for compliance, but also to fragmented and incomparable information available for the
client. The narrow outreach of financial sector specific regulation and supervision has also facilitated the
development of a number of unsupervised financial service providers, which are only subject to the very
broad provisions of the Consumer Protection law, and in the absence of any additional regulation and
entity with the capacity to enforce compliance have de facto remained unregulated. The mission learned
for example that some microfinance entities do not provide a formal contract to the client.

Finally, it should be noted that members of S&L cooperatives are not yet covered by a deposit
insurance scheme to protect their members against a potential loss of savings. Many countries in
the region and worldwide have already introduced such a scheme (e.g. Mexico, US, Canada,
Germany, and on a voluntary basis Guatemala). Efforts to introduce the legal framework and launch a
deposit insurance scheme have been ongoing since 2004, but so far have not produced results due to
delays in contracting advisory services for the design of the scheme, and internal sector discussions on
the adequate structure and approach. This leaves the currently estimated 1-1.2 million members of
financial cooperatives vulnerable.




      The supervisory agencies in collaboration with SEDECO should issue guidance material or
       circulars on individual provisions of the consumer protection framework to clarify their scope
       and content for financial products. As a guiding principle, similar operations should have similar
       regulations to avoid artificial distortions and let the market develop. A careful assessment should be
       undertaken to develop a prioritized action plan on provisions that should be supplemented with
       additional guidance / regulations, and to guide their form and institutional hinge:
       o The assessment should determine which provisions should be regulated or supplemented with
           guidance material or circulars under the general Consumer Protection Law, thus making
           adherence binding for all formal and (semi-) informal market participants. These standards should




11
     See e.g. Volume II, Good Practice B.3.
         then also be incorporated into the financial sector specific regulations to facilitate supervision and
         enforcement. The guidance material or circulars could be developed in broad collaboration with
         stakeholders from the industry and consumers to create ownership.
     o   Other provisions could be covered only in the dedicated financial frameworks. Requirements to
         provide clients with contracts, and setting minimum standards for contract information should for
         example be regulated under the Consumer Protection Law to also reach otherwise unregulated
         financial service providers, while form and timing of disclosure could be further clarified in the
         individual financial sector frameworks.
     o   Over time, considerations might be warranted to introduce a dedicated financial consumer
         protection law, which is applicable to all market participants and establishes tailored principles for
         financial consumer protection.

    SEDECO and / or the Supervisory agencies should introduce regulations on (i) complaints
     handling procedures and reporting requirements, (ii) abusive debt collection practices, and
     (iii) bundling of products. These issues are discussed in more depth under B.3 to B.5.

    The individual financial regulatory frameworks should be assessed for their consistency with
     the Consumer Protection Law and identified gaps bridged. In particular:
     o The BCP should consider introducing a Banking/Financial Sector Code, or other forms of
         compilation of relevant laws, regulations, and circulars. This would help establish, amongst
         others, a clear and coherent legal framework for consumer protection, making it easier for
         financial institutions to comply with the framework, for consumers to understand, and the Banking
         Supervisor to enforce. This would also be an opportunity to introduce missing regulations, and
                                                                          12
         assess the efficiency and consistency of some of the provisions.
     o A stronger emphasis on setting standards for the protection of members has to be introduced into
         the regulatory framework for S&L cooperatives. Timeframes, periodicity and form of disclosure of
         information need to be determined, and concrete minimum standards for internal processes and
         business conduct rules established. Ideally, consumer protection relevant laws and regulations
         should be compiled into a leaflet and/or made available on INCOOP’s website under a separate
         rubric to facilitate understanding and compliance, and create awareness of rights and obligations
         amongst members. CONPACOOP as the sector’s confederation could take the lead in
         developing these industry standards together with its members.
     o The Insurance Superintendency (BCP-SIS) should develop a more detailed and comprehensive
         framework for business conduct of insurers. This should amongst others include rules on
         complaint handling, “Know Your Client” processes, and mis -selling of products. The rules should
         apply to insurers, intermediaries (agents and brokers) and other professionals within the
         insurance sector.

    The adequate design and introduction of a deposit insurance scheme for at least the larger
     cooperatives (Type A) is a priority. When introducing the legal framework, attention should be
     placed that it is based on strong prudential regulations, and that the regulator or supervisor has the




12
   A similar effort has for example been done in Bolivia, and is currently underway in Kyrgyzstan. In Bolivia, the
supervisory agency ASFI provides a compendium of all applicable laws and regulations, which is regularly updated
and serves as a one-stop source of information on the legal framework. The National Bank of Kyrgyzstan currently
introducing a Banking Code, which is also expected to improve coherence in the applicable consumer protection
provisions.
     necessary capacity to adequately supervise the entities and enforce the laws. The supervisor should
     also be able to take the necessary measures to protect depositors in the case of insolvency.




A dedicated government agency is in charge of regulating the Consumer Protection law and
supervising its implementation, but final enforcement of remedial actions hinges on the courts.
The Consumer Protection Law (Law 1334/98, sanctioned in 1998) originally assigned implementation
responsibilities, fostering of awareness of rights and obligations of consumers, handling of complaints as
well as the taking of violations to court to a dedicated Department within the Ministry of Industry and
Commerce (MIC), and to municipalities participating on a voluntary basis. The implementation
arrangements were amended by Law 4974 (issued in 2013), which converts the department within MIC
into a new autonomous government body, the National Secretariat for the Defense of the Consumer
(SEDECO). SEDECO can impose fines for violations of the Consumer Protection law and support out of
                                                        13
court settlement and mediation services for disputes, but only the courts can formally settle disputes
and sanction violations more broadly. They depend on individuals, SEDECO, consumer protection
associations or other stakeholders for bringing individual or collective cases of violations to their attention.

BCP is in charge of prudential oversight over banks, finance and insurance companies, and soon
e-money issuers. While it does not have an explicit mandate to cover market conduct / consumer
protection in the financial sector, it has taken important steps in this direction. According to the
Organic Law of BCP, the objectives of BCP are to preserve price stability, and to promote the efficiency
                                      14
and stability of the financial system. This indirectly includes issuing of market conduct regulations, but
does not give BCP a mandate to cover consumer protection per se. Nevertheless, a BCP resolution in
2007 requested the Banking Superintendency (BCP-SIB) to verify compliance with the General
Consumer Protection Law, and in 2010 BCP formally introduced in its workplan the objective to help the
population understand economic and financial topics. In 2013, BCP also established a small unit for
financial consumer protection and financial education for banks and finance companies, which is part of
the Financial Inclusion Intendency (IIF) of the BCP-SIB. In the last 10 months, it has handled 48
                                                                                 15
complaints of clients of banks, finance companies and their non-bank agents. The availability of this
complaints facility is not widely known, which hampers its uptake. For insurance, a unit has been
established to handle complaints, develop and provide some financial education measures and support
the general oversight function of the BCP-SIS. As such, while BCP does not have a formal mandate, it is
most concerned in helping improve transparency and discipline in the market and has increasingly taken
an active role in financial consumer protection and education, but its capacity to actually supervise and
enforce consumer protection provisions remains limited.




13
   In September 2014, Decree 2199/14 was issued to regulate the SEDECO law. The Decree assigns powers to
sanction violations of the Consumer Protection Law by SEDECO, and also allows municipalities to play a role in
promoting consumer protection issues, bringing them to the attention of the SEDECO, and mitigating disputes out of
court.
14
   The actual supervision is however limited to those entities that are currently supervised by the Banking and
Insurance Superintendencies within BCP. This currently comprises Banks, Finance Companies and Insurance
Companies. In the near future, it is also expected that the e-money providers will enter the supervision of BCP.
15
   So far, these complaints are only formally presented written complaints, and do not include complaints received
through phone calls or other channels of communications.
Financial cooperatives are under the regulation and supervision of INCOOP . INCOOP has the
mandate to regulate and implement the General Law on Cooperatives, which sets the minimum corporate
governance standards and some market conduct rules for cooperatives. The law also gives INCOOP the
mandate to provide technical assistance to strengthen cooperatives and to promote the general
understanding and use of cooperative principles. This provides INCOOP with an indirect role in
safeguarding the interests of members of financial cooperatives, which it has however so far not formally
assumed. In addition, Art. 29e of the General Cooperative law assigns INCOOP with a higher-level
authority for receiving and resolving disputes that could not be resolved at the cooperative level.




                                      Market Conduct                                Prudential

                                              Supervision,                                Supervision,
                         Policy, Regulation                         Policy, Regulation
                                              Compliance                                  Compliance

Banks and Finance        SEDECO,              SEDECO,
                                                                    BCP-SIB               BCP-SIB
Companies                BCP-SIB*             BCP-SIB

Financial Cooperatives   SEDECO, INCOOP       SEDECO, INCOOP        INCOOP                INCOOP

Unsupervised Credit
                         SEDECO               SEDECO                -                     -
Providers

Insurance companies      BCP-SIS, SEDECO      BCP-SIS, SEDECO       BCP-SIS               BCP-SIS

Other insurance
                         Superintendencia     Superintendencia      Superintendencia      Superintendencia
providers not formally
                         de Salud, SEDECO     de Salud, SEDECO      de Salud              de Salud
supervised by SIS

                         BCP, SEDECO,         BCP, SEDECO,
EMPEs                                                               BCP                   BCP
                         CONATEL**            CONATEL**

*Mandate not yet clarified
**In cases where EMPEs are also telecommunications providers




The responsibilities and roles of the financial supervisors in the area of financial consumer
protection are not sufficiently established. The Consumer Protection Law only establishes general
principles that are to apply to all sectors of the economy. SEDECO cannot be expected to systematically
regulated and supervise adherence across all sectors, as it has limited technical and human resources.
This makes incorporation and tailoring of provisions into sector-specific legal frameworks, such as for the
financial sector, necessary. However, as discussed above, none of the financial supervisors has a formal
mandate for market conduct or consumer protection regulation and/or supervision. As a result, the focus
in the financial regulations and supervision has mostly been on some selected market conduct rules to
help safeguard the financial viability of financial intermediaries, rather than on protecting the client and
fostering transparency in the market.
The World Bank’s Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (2014) identified five
institutional arrangements in use worldwide:
          (1) Integrated Single Agency Model
          (2) Sectoral Agency Model
        (3) Dedicated Market Conduct Agency Model (Twin Peaks)
        (4) Specialized Financial Consumer Protection Agency Model
        (5) General Consumer Protection Agency Model

As can be seen in Figure 2, in the majority of countries the financial regulatory authority is involved in
supervising financial consumer protection. Using the existing capacity and expertise of the supervisor
can be an economically efficient and effective approach, if sufficient attention is paid on business
conduct / consumer protection during the oversight process. Of the remaining countries, 30 follow a dual
approach, providing both the agency in charge of the General Consumer Protection Law and the sector
specific regulator with a formal role in regulating and supervising financial consumer protection. This
approach can also be effective for oversight, but requires closer coordination to prevent overlaps and
contradictions in the frameworks. A dual approach has for example been taken in Brazil, where the
National Consumer Protection Secretary in combination with local consumer protection bureaus inform
clients of their general rights and obligations as consumer, and serve as a first point of contact for
dispute settlement. Actual supervision of applicable laws and regulations itself is carried out by the
respective financial regulatory authorities. The approach taken in Brazil appears particularly applicable to
the Paraguayan context.




Source: Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, 2014



The roles and division of labor for the regulation and supervision of e-money issuers merit further
clarification. Once formally licensed by BCP, e-money issuers will be regulated and supervised by BCP,
as well as subject to compliance with regulations and certifications set forth by the telecommunications
authority (CONATEL). They might also fall under the purview of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce
(MIC) with regard to their compliance with electronic signature and contract regulations. This has the
potential to create overlapping areas of regulation and supervision, which merit further clarification and
cooperation.

Actual enforcement of consumer protection provisions is hampered by limited human and
technical capacity in all agencies involved:
 SEDECO has limited technical and human resources. It currently employs 16 people, of which 6
    are lawyers. None have a thematic specialization (e.g. no financial sector specialist). Furthermore,
    standardized procedures and IT systems still need to be developed. The initially foreseen system of
    support for supervision and complaints handling via the participation of municipalities on a voluntary
    basis has not materialized.
 Market conduct supervision at the BCP-SIB is not yet standardized. The Financial Inclusion
    Intendency (IIF), which is part of the off-site supervision unit, does not have a formal arrangement
    with the 65-person on-site inspections unit of BCP to incorporate, on a standardized basis, market
    conduct supervision as part of the regular supervision. Although the on-site inspections unit does
    selectively supervise and report to the IIF non-prudential issues related to regulatory non-compliance,
    this only covers a small number of transparency-related topics and not systemically the wide range of
    consumer protection-related malpractices noticed during the mission. With only one person in charge
    of consumer protection issues, the IIF does also not have the capacity to join or independently
    conduct inspections to supervise market conduct.
 BCP-SIS also does not systematically supervise non-prudential regulations. Its main control
    activity is to make sure that the insurers’ solvency ratio is above the minimum required and that
    insurers are using contracts and premium rates that were previously filed and not objected by the
                                                                                    16
    SIS-BCP. Its consumer protection unit has four staff formally mapped to it, but it has a broader
    mandate to also support general on- and off-site supervision. Thus, overall capacity appears weak.
 INCOOP’s general capacity to enforce its regulatory framework is limited. It currently has 45
    supervisors to conduct on and off site supervision of an estimated 330 financial and 120 non-financial
    cooperatives in Paraguay. As a result, on-site supervision of the largest 27 financial cooperatives is
    on average only carried out every three years. Off-site supervision also focuses on the larger
    cooperatives, as reliable information on smaller entities is scarce and technical resources are limited.
    No dedicated unit is currently in charge of handling complaints received from members, or supervise
    adherence of basic consumer protection provisions.
 The judicial system has not been involved in a more systematic way in the resolution of
    disputes over financial products or services received.

A usury law is in place, which applies to all credit activities, but enforcement is uneven in the
absence of adequate institutional structures for supervision. According to provisions in the Civil
Code, BCP sets the usury rate for all credit activity, but its supervisory scope is limited to the banks and
finance companies. The provisions have been incorporated by INCOOP into the legal framework for
cooperatives, but actual supervision is limited. Unless the clients formally complain about the interest rate
to SEDECO or take the credit provider to court, no instruments are in place to supervise that
moneylenders and pawnshops adhere to the usury limits.




16
     As per Resolution 31/14, but during the mission only one person was de facto assigned to the unit
Industry and consumer associations are not yet playing an active role in financial consumer
protection. ADEFI, the representative association of finance companies, introduced in 2008 a claims
resolutions mechanism, which was however not widely used by clients. ADEFI also encourages its
members to adhere to responsible finance practices, but has not established a formal Code of Conduct
for its members. CONPACOOP (the Confederation of Cooperatives in Paraguay) and the Banking
Association are currently exploring options to include Consumer Protection and Financial Education in
their work program. A number of consumer associations exist, but they are fragmented and do not play a
relevant role in resolving disputes between financial service providers and their clients.




    It is important to clarify the mandates and competencies of the financial regulatory agencies
     in the area of financial consumer protection. Consideration should be given to revise the General
     Consumer Protection Law and formally establish as mandates and competencies of specialized
     supervisory agencies to regulate and supervise consumer protection related provisions for entities
                           17
     under their oversight. Clearer mandates would also have to be introduced in the laws of BCP and
     INCOOP, explicitly mandating them to cover consumer protection / market conduct in their respective
     legal frameworks. Market conduct and consumer protection rules established by sector specific
     agencies should have to be in line with the general principles established by the Consumer Protection
     Law. The ongoing update of the BCP Charter would already present an opportunity for this
     clarification.

    To foster coherence of the consumer protection framework and facilitate transparency across
     products and markets, modalities for information sharing and coordination should be
     established between SEDECO, BCP and INCOOP, as well as between BCP, CONATEL and MIC
     for e-money issuers. This could be done as before via inter-institutional Memorandum of
     Understandings, or formally established by regulation / Law. Two coordination mechanisms appear
     feasible:
         o Regulators and consumer protection / competition authorities could regularly consult to
              ensure the establishment, application and enforcement of consistent policies across
              institutional types and clarify supervisory roles. For e-money issuers, the involved authorities
              should determine which entity assumes the lead in consumer protection-related supervision.
         o SEDECO could regularly analyze the sector specific legal frameworks, and assesses their
              consistency between providers and compliance with the provisions of the Consumer
              Protection Law. It could then make recommendations as to changes needed to bring the
              sector-specific laws into compliance with the Consumer Protection Law.

    Market conduct supervision should be formally included into on- and off site supervision
     carried out by BCP and INCOOP. This would require the development of standardized approaches
     for supervision, provision of dedicated funding as well as capacity building of staff (see Annex 1 for an
     example of tools that can be used):
          o BCP should clarify the division of labor between the consumer protection units and the units
             in charge of on-and off site supervision. The staffing levels and available budget would have




17
  BCP should for example be formally declared as competent for monitoring and enforcing compliance with
consumer protection provisions for banks, finance companies, insurance companies, e-money issuers and non-bank
agents; and INCOOP for financial and other cooperatives.
            to be adjusted accordingly in both BCP-SIB and BCP-SIS, and manuals for the supervision of
            market conduct / consumer protection rules developed. For the supervision itself, in particular
            for non-bank agents, cost effective tools for supervision should be introduced.
        o   INCOOP should determine which unit is formally in charge for developing and supervising
            market conduct / consumer protection rules, and for complaints handling. Over time,
            considerations should be given to establishing a dedicated unit for this. Given the size of the
            sector, considerations should also be given to introducing mystery shopping to verify
            compliance with consumer protection standards, and other cost effective tools for
            supervision. The capacity of INCOOP to supervise the S&L cooperatives needs to be
            strengthened as a priority (in terms of number of staff, their capacity, and available support
            systems).




Supervisory agencies worldwide have taken a variety of organizational approaches for covering
prudential and market conduct supervision. These range from units that cover both prudential as well as
market conduct supervision to independent units for supervision of market conduct on a stand-alone
basis. Based on results from the Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, units
dedicated to supervising market conduct / consumer protection are more prone to using cost effective
off-site compliance tools such as mystery shopping, keeping complaint statistics and monitoring
advertisement to supplement on-site supervision. They are thus likely more effective in enforcing
consumer protection rules than units that cover both prudential and non-prudential regulations together.
In line with this finding, over half of the financial regulators, which cover consumer protection as part of
their supervision, now do this through dedicated units, separate from prudential supervision.

Source: Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, 2014


   As regards financial markets, SEDECO should focus its scarce supervisory capacity on
    unregulated financial service providers such as pawnshops and microcredit providers. This
    could include mystery shopping activities, bringing noted violations to court and regularly publicizing
    information on noted infringements.

   Industry Associations could foster the development of a common framework and standards
    for responsible finance. This could for example be done through the development of sector-wide
    Codes of Conduct, which are to be monitored and enforced on a self-regulatory basis. Guidance
    material could be developed to set standards for business conduct and transparency, which are in
    line or complement applicable laws and regulations and clarify for example minimum content and
    principles, and develop standardized documents such as model contracts.




The BCP has introduced a number of regulations to enhance the disclosure and transparency of
information. It issued in 2001 a transparency regulation, setting the methodology for calculating annual
effective interest rates, and making explicit which commissions have to be included as part of the interest
rate. The BCP has also issued a number of provisions to enhance transparency in credit cards. The 2007
Regulation on credit cards sets out provisions related to contracts and monthly statements. Furthermore,
a new regulation in January 2014 requires that statements include warnings on the impact of late
payment and the calculation of the time and total cost if only the minimum is paid. A joint analysis
between the SIB and the SIS of life insurance premiums linked with credits concluded with a resolution of
the SIS (SS 45/13) setting a limit for the level of commission charged for the generation and management
for the life insurances of up to the 30 percent of the premium. For EMPEs, the minimum contents and
guidelines for transparency and disclosure are set in the Resolution 6, Act 18, 2014, including the
requirement to indicate applicable costs and commissions, the express indication that the e-money float
does not accrue interest and is not covered by BCP’s deposit insurance scheme, as well as the
modalities related to the issuance of account statements, either in print or electronically.

For S&L cooperatives, the revised legal framework enhances transparency in reporting, but in the
absence of additional regulations is not clear on the form and timing of disclosure. The regulatory
framework now mandates entities to have audited financial statements, provides minimum rules for
advertisement, and mandates that savings and credit terms and conditions (including nominal and
effective interest rates for passive and active transactions and charges for overdue loans) are made
available to members. However, there is no clear requirement in which form and timing this information
has to be provided. This limits the relevance of the provisions and undermines transparency. Some of the
visited branches and consulted websites did not provide this information, and there is no indication that
the information is systematically provided to the client when signing up for a new product.




Overall, the introduced measures are not effective in making the total cost of financial products
transparent and easily comparable across providers. Banks and finance companies have to disclose
the interest rate and fees in their branches and at their website, but the pricing information is frequently
shown in small letters and/or reaches 7 pages. Based on an internal study of BCP in March 2014, which
tool a sample of 19 entities based on the information published in their websites ( tarifario), there were
more than 250 different denominations of fees and commissions, some of which correspond to the same
                                                                                                    18
concept but are named differently and/or comprise double fees for the same transaction. The fees
comprise a significant variety of concepts and their calculation depends on several variables (number of
times the service has been used, average daily balances of deposits). For cooperatives, there is no
formal requirement to publicly disclose the costs and commissions of their products, and limited to no
pricing information is publicly available as a result. This makes it difficult for the consumer to calculate and
compare prices for financial services, and shop around.

The usury rate on credit has contributed to opacity in commissions. The usury interest rate for
credits is limited to 30 percent above the average rate for domestic and foreign currency loans
respectively. The current method used by banks and finance companies for calculation of the effective
interest rate does however not reflect the total cost of credit, since it does not include all commissions,
such as life insurance premium among others. This has led entities to include commissions, rather than



18
   One example of charging twice for the same service are: (a) the commission for the acquisition of checks and an
additional commission related with the number of checks issued; (b) commission for a loan who has entered into
arrears and commission for the management of recovery of the same loan. Furthermore, administrative charges,
charges for the preparation of a financial statement and account maintenance charges are all different denominations
for essentially the same commission.
interest rate, on credits, and greatly contributed to the above noted opacity of commissions. The usury
rate also applies for cooperatives, but no rule for the calculation of interest rates has been established by
INCOOP and supervision of actual adherence appears limited.

One-page key fact statements that summarize the core contract conditions and terms are not
mandated by any supervisor, and have not been developed by the industry. EMPEs are for example
required by the E-Money Resolution to provide “a summary of the minimum conditions mentioned [in the
contract], in legible and understandable terms”, but a format or template for this summary has not been
provided. The BCP-SIB does review the contracts to verify that no abusive conditions are included, but
does not systematically check for transparency and ease of understanding of the provided information nor
has formally defined what abusive practices are. For insurance contracts, the BCP-SIS has the formal
                                                                                                  19
right to establish the minimum content of insurance contracts, but has not yet made use of this. For
cooperatives, some information requirements are in place for credit products, but for other products the
regulatory framework only specifies that members should be “informed” of the costs and charges, without
details on form and time.

Regulatory gaps were also identified in the area of account statements, although they are in
practice provided on a regular basis. S&L cooperatives are not formally required to provide their clients
with regular account statements for their current, deposit or loan accounts, including for credit cards.
Banks and finance companies are only required to provide regular statements for credit cards. For
insurers, this is not yet relevant, as practically no insurance investment products or products with a cash
value are sold in Paraguay. E-Money issuers are required to provide monthly statements of account to
their customers, but it is not required that statements should be free of charge. In the actual practice,
clients seem to be however provided with regular account statements, or can receive them upon request.

Finally, available information on registered and supervised entities is deficient for S&L
cooperatives, and gaps exist for providers of insurance services. Cooperatives are required to
register with INCOOP, but procedures for closing of a cooperative are cumbersome and cooperatives
prefer going dormant instead. The Registry, managed by INCOOP, is also not regularly updated, with the
latest publicly available information dating from 2011. Thus, of the 1405 cooperatives listed in the registry,
                                                20
only 450 are estimated to be still active. Furthermore, information on the financial health of cooperatives
is limited. INCOOP does not regularly publish information on the sector or the larger entities, and
disclosure requirements for financial statements have until recently been deficient. This makes it difficult
for the new and existing members to assess the health of the entity, and shield themselves from
fraudulent ones. In the insurance sector, BCP-SIS maintains on its website a list of licensed insurers and
agents/brokers, but entities are not formally required to disclose whether or not they are regulated. Unless
the client is aware of this website, he/she cannot reliably establish if the entity is subject to supervision of
its financial viability or not (like i.e. in the case of pre-paid medical plans).




19
   Regulation No. 43/15 also waives the obligation to disclose the agent’s commission if it is equal or below 30
percent of the premium – which is the maximum allowed premium permitted. In practice, the commission is thus not
disclosed, and the information provided in the contracts limited.
20
   This includes both S&L cooperatives, as well as producer cooperatives.
It is paramount that SEDECO and the financial supervisors BCP and INCOOP establish consistent
and considerably enhanced disclosure and transparency requirements:

    A requirement for the calculation and disclo sure of "total financial costs” (TFC) should be
     introduced.
         o In a first step, BCP should develop and introduce a methodology for the calculation of total
            financial costs, which it issues through a Circular ( Normativa) or other mechanism. The
            methodology should be developed in coordination with SEDECO, INCOOP, and in
            consultation with private sector stakeholders. The methodology should then also be
            introduced by SEDECO and INCOOP, thereby making it mandatory for all market
            participants. Example for the calculation of total costs can be found in the Peruvian and
                                 21
            Mexican legislation.
         o For the actual implementation, a phased approach could be considered, involving for
            example (i) a requirement for financial service providers to supply clients with annual ‘total
            charges/costs’ statements, and (ii) TFC to be first published for leading products in the
            market, in a generic form.

    Standard terms and definitions for commissions and fees for payment, savings, credit and
     insurance products should be developed and their use mandated (see Box 3).
         o As this mostly applies to banks and finance companies, BCP should take the lead in
            developing a proposal on standard terms and definitions to be used. Consideration could be
            given to broadly consult with the stakeholders from the industry and consumers for this.
         o The standardized terms should then be coordinated with SEDECO and INCOOP, formally
            introduced for all market participants and their actual usage facilitated through guidance and
            monitoring.
         o BCP, INCOOP and SEDECO should accompany the introduction of the standardized terms
            and conditions with a broad publicity campaign to foster awareness and knowledge of the
            terms by clients.




Peru: Prior to initiating the reform, a survey of providers showed that over 4,000 different terms existed
to describe various financial terms. With the purpose to foster transparency and to facilitate comparison
by the financial users, the Superintendency of Banks of Peru (SBS) issued Circular B 2205-2012. The
regulation defines the names and concepts that all financial institutions should use for the commissions
and fees they charge on different products, including credit cards, consumption/mortgage loans,
saving/checking accounts, and time deposits. This reduced the number of terms to 50 and brought
consistency in disclosure. If a financial entity wants to charge a commission that does not fall under any
of the categories of commissions and fees defined in said resolution, the financial entities can present a
formal request to the SBS to obtain authorization for using this commission/fee. If approved, the SBS
updates the list to incorporate the new commission/fee.




21
  See Resolution SBS No 1765-2005, Art. 17 in Peru, and the definition of total cost provided on the Banco de
Mexico website (http://www.banxico.org.mx/ayuda/temas-mas-consultados/tac--total-annual-cost-.html)
European Union: To enable consumers to better compare financial products from various providers
(including cross-border), a Directive with comprehensive disclosure requirements was issued. Among
them is a standardized disclosure form (Standard European Consumer Credit Information), the
disclosure of the Annual Percentage Rates representing the full cost of credit and computed using a
harmonized methodology across all EU member states. The Directive provides for the right of the
consumer to withdraw from the credit agreement without giving any reason within a period of 14 days
after the conclusion of the contract. The consumer also has the possibility to repay the credit early at any
time, while the creditor can ask for a fair and objectively justified compensation. All member states have
now implemented the Directive through issuance of appropriate national legislation.
In France, the General Secretariat of the Financial Sector Advisory Committees took the initiative to
develop a glossary of financial terms. The committee comprises the Treasury, the supervisory agencies,
financial institutions and private sector stakeholders such as consumer associations. The supervisory
agency regularly carries out mystery shopping with the aim to better understand actual practices in the
industry, and to guide the dialogue with the stakeholders.

Sources: Peru CPFL Diagnostic and own research, Report on the Global Survey for Consumer
Protection and Financial Literacy (2014), OECD Annex to the updated report on the G20 High-Level
Principles on Financial Consumer protection.


   BCP and INCOOP should issue Circulars or other form of guidance to mandate the use of one-
    page Key Fact Statements for all offered financial products.
       o This should set out minimum requirements for the content, wording, and format of Key Fact
          Statements, such as information on annual effective interest rate, total cost, payment
          schedule and components, available complaint mechanisms and information on late payment
          fees and debt collection. For insurance, details on coverage, exclusions and reductions
          should be provided, as well as on premiums to be paid. The statements should be
          mandatorily added to contracts, and also be made generally available. To facilitate
          comparisons across the different financial services providers, all service providers should use
          a standard format and the same terms and concepts. Examples of such Fact Statements can
          for example be found in Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru and Portugal (see also Annex
          2).
       o Initial focus in implementation could be on loans and credit cards, and then rolled out to all
          other products and service providers, including e-money issuers. The mandate to provide
          clients with a fact sheet should also apply to agents.
       o Key Fact Statements should be tested prior to their introduction to ascertain that the provided
          information is clear and easily understandable for clients.
       o On the medium to longer term, SEDECO should also explore options to mandate other
          financial service providers, such as pre-paid insurance, burial societies and microcredit
          providers, to provide clients with a standardized factsheet for financial products prior to
          contract signing.

   The development and use of user-friendly price transparency websites and other measures to
    facilitate comparison, stimulate transparency and enable better consumer choice should be
    facilitated.
        o BCP has already taken first steps in this direction, and includes as part of its financial
             education website a calculator for loans and a link to a interest rate comparison for banks and
             finance companies. However, the information is limited to loans, is not yet easy to find and
             assess, and should be distributed through various forms of mass media. Examples of other
             price comparison tools include Chlle, Mexico and Peru.
         o   Information also needs to cover other financial products offered. For savings and payment
             products, standardized sample packages could for example be created to model clients with
                                                       22
             low and high volumes of transactions. The market participants could then be required to
             publicly disclose information on the costs of these packages in their pricing table, and the
             information could regularly be compiled on the supervisor’s website and in public media.
         o   The information can be provided as part of the financial regulator’s website, or independently
             via associations or private sector entities.

    Considerations should be given to phase out the current usury regime. The above suggested
     transparency standards (Total Financial Costs, usage of standardized terms, and price comparison
     tables) would establish a more efficient regime for promoting price transparency and encouraging
     competition that can push prices down, which would not distort the market as has been noticed for
     the usury rate.

    Provisions should be introduced to periodically provide clients with account statements. The
     account statements should include all transactions and costs, and should be in a format that is clear
     and easily understandable for the client.

    Finally, INCOOP needs to regularly update its registry (including elimination of inactive /
     dormant cooperatives) and greatly enhance the publicly available information on the sector as
     a whole and on individual entities. Consideration should also be given to differentiate between
     financial and other types of cooperatives to enhance user-friendliness of the information, and facilitate
     compilation of statistics.




As neither of the financial supervisors has an explicit mandate to cover consumer protection-
related market conduct in their regulations and supervision, the norms and regulations on
business and market conduct focus mostly on measures to ensure the viability of the entities. The
regulatory framework for financial cooperatives mandates for example that interest rates should be
sufficient to cover the costs of funds, operational and lending costs, provisions and the building of
reserves, but there are no regulations on how to calculate annual effective interest rates or mandating
public disclosure of interest rates. For banks, as well as finance and insurance companies, a stronger
focus is for example placed on ensuring that contracts and premiums charged are filed with the
supervisor, but no systematic approach to assessing the appropriateness of the contracts seems to be in
place.




22
  For example, the low transaction sample package for a current account could reflect the total monthly account
costs including 2 withdrawals at an ATM, two electronic transfers and one account statements, while a high volume
sample would for example reflect the total costs if including 10 ATM withdrawals, 30 electronic transfers, 5 automatic
debits.
The mission observed some deficiencies in the regulations on contracts, which appear to have
facilitated the widespread use of bundling of products and of non-transparent business practices.
Banks and finance companies mostly work with unified contracts, which include paragraphs pertaining to
credit and debit cards, overdrafts, etc. This bundling of clauses and services under one contract makes
the contracts lengthy, complex, and leads to clients signing up for services they have not actively
requested. The practice of banks and employers negotiating special conditions for current accounts of
employees, into which the salary is then deposited, is also widespread, leading to market distortions and
lack of transparency in applicable prices. In the insurance sector, the Group Life Insurance Contracts are
frequently linked to loans, and in many instances do not directly require a signature of the insured. As a
result, the client is not properly informed about the terms of that contract, nor about the charged cost or
who is providing the coverage. In cooperatives, the practice of unified contracts was not observed.
However, contracts provided to the mission did not disclose important product features like for example
rules and fees for early cancelation of term deposits. This gap in information makes it difficult for a client
to choose the most suitable product. E-money issuers are not yet required to provide the clients upfront
with the contract.

Cooling off periods are only foreseen in a limited number of cases. The Consumer Protection Law
(Art. 26) gives the customer the right to a cooling off period of 7 days if the contract was made outside of
the business premises or over the phone. This is however usually not the case for financial products. In
the absence of other relevant regulations, the financial institutions generally do not include a cooling off
period in their contracts. While a client can instead opt to withdraw early from a contract, the mission
                                                                                        23
noted some heavy fees being levied by individual institutions for early cancellation. The lack of cooling
off periods, and the elevated costs for early cancellation make it both difficult and costly for a client to e.g.
withdraw from a bundled product, or to make use of the right to cancel a contract if the client disagrees
with changes in interest rates and commission adopted by the bank.




According to the Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy a number of countries
have introduced provisions to ensure fair treatment of clients (see Figure 3). Amongst the most
frequently regulated are the confidentiality of client data and the prohibition of deceptive advertising.
Regulations on both are also incorporated into the legislation in Paraguay.

As part of restrictions on predatory lending, a number of countries have introduced cooling off periods for
contracts. The World Bank Good Practice recommends a cooling-off period of 3-5 days after contract
signing, which allows the client to withdraw from a contract without penalty. Some countries like Mexico
have introduced a cooling off period of 10 days or more. Cooling-off periods are particularly relevant in
countries were terms of services and products are not readily available and thus cannot be compared,
and where seemingly attractive terms of contracts involve additional, non-transparent costs. Given the
noted opacity of information and complexity of contracts, such a cooling-off period appears warranted for
Paraguay.




23
  Some entities for example add charges equivalent to 30-50 percent of the interest that would have to be paid on
the remaining term or a loan, while for term deposits the interest rate can get retroactively dropped to the rate
applicable for sight deposits.
Source: Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, 2014


Credit evaluation (due diligence) processes in many entities focus on payroll deductibility,
                                                           24
available guarantees and / or simple scoring models , and do not sufficiently focus on assessing
the client’s true repayment capacity. The team learnt of cases where government employees had up to
100 percent of their salaries deducted at source for payroll loans they had received from banks. The
increasing incidence of multiple loans, in particular through credit cards, was reported to the team from a
number of different sources, but neither the credit registry under BCP nor the private credit bureau
explicitly monitor this trend. The regulations on financial cooperatives include a requirement to assess
and document the repayment capacity of a borrower, but capacity of credit officers to adequately assess
the collected information is reportedly limited. There are some signs of unethical practices also in the non-
regulated financial markets, which contribute to over-indebtedness among vulnerable segments of
population.

The available credit-reporting systems contribute to the observed difficulties in establishing the
level of indebtedness of customers. The World Bank’s General Principles of Credit Reporting
recommend that “credit reporting systems should have relevant, accurate, timely and sufficient data –
including positive – collected on a systematic basis from all reliable, appropriate and available sources




24
     For example scoring models based on the use and payment history of a client with a telecommunications company
     25
(…).” This is not yet the case in Paraguay. The credit registry of BCP contains only positive and
negative information of the institutions under its regulation and supervision (banks and financial
companies). INCOOP launched its credit registry for financial cooperatives in June 2014, but so far only
the 26 largest financial cooperatives (Type A) are required to report, and only once a month. There are no
specific plans for collaboration between the two Credit Registries to establish a more holistic database.
The private credit bureau contains credit information on a broader universe of credit providers, (including
also some credit unions, microcredit providers, and shops), but only provides information on people with
debt in arrears of 90 days or more and not the broader positive and negative information suggested by
                         26
the General Principles. In light of the fragmented and insufficient credit information available, some of
the financial intermediaries spent substantial time and resources to call around and construct a likely level
of indebtedness this way, while others increasingly use scoring or payroll deduction to establish the
creditworthiness of a client.

Debt collection processes are not sufficiently made transparent upfront, and no rules on abusive
enforcement practices have been established. As mentioned above, debt collection standards and
information requirements are not included in any of the applicable legal frameworks for formal or informal
financial intermediaries, and no Codes of Conduct are in place. Banks and finance companies usually
include in their contracts information on the fees related with the recovery process (e.g. phone calls) and
the moratorium and punitive interest rate, but they do not specify the steps that an entity would follow for
their debt collection in cases of arrears (including the possibility to transfer or sell the loan to a third
party). Some of the observed practices appear excessive. The mission learned for example of multiple
(and for the client costly) reminder calls, excessive fees levied on late payments, and some indication of
apparently abusive enforcement practices by third parties to whom the loan has been sold. For financial
cooperatives, the regulations require to include information on the rights and obligations of each party in
case of non-compliance into the credit contracts and to specify the procedures for debt collection in their
credit manuals. The requirements are however general, and do not set minimum standards. In practice,
financial cooperatives do make use of third parties for debt collection, and the mission team is not aware
of reports that they use excessive fees or aggressive enforcement methods to recover outstanding debt
from their members.

Gaps were also identified in regulations covering advertising and sales materials, which together
with limited enforcement lead to incomplete information being provided and limited liability of the
financial service provider for rectifying damages incurred to the consumer. The Consumer
Protection Law establishes as a basic right of the consumer to be protected against misleading sales
practices and advertisement (Art. 35-37), and that the client should receive “adequate” information about
a product (Art. 6). However, this is not sufficiently covered and specified in the financial sector specific
                                                                                                          27
regulations. For cooperatives, there is for example no requirement to include interest rate information,
and no provision is in place that the client can hold the cooperative responsible for damages incurred due
to misleading information. For banks and finance companies, a regulation for price transparency is in




25
   See Principle 1 of the General Principles for Credit Reporting, World Bank, 2011
26
   The General Principles for Credit Reporting states on p. 25 (para. 106) that collected data “should include all
relevant information to enable any given user to adequately evaluate and manage credit risks on a continuous basis.
This includes information that is necessary to make an unequivocal identification of the data subject, as well as
information related to the creditworthiness of the debtor and/or the repayment prospects of a new loan (e.g. current
credit exposure, maturities, guarantees and/or collateral, default information, etc.).”
27
   Art. 2.6 of the compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives only mandate that the annual nominal and
effective interest rate should be used if providing this information.
place, but there is no requirement to include costs of products in sales materials and the information is
not included in practice. Banks, as well as finance and insurance companies are held responsible for
information they provide and the sales material they produce, but no regulation is in place to regulate
which entity is liable for additional information provided by their non-bank agents (outside of the
information produced by the financial entity itself). Furthermore, while the insurance regulation mandates
that consumers be given appropriate information about the nature of the relationship between the
agent/broker and the insurance company, adherence is not formally supervised and may not be
consistent.




To improve observed business practices, regulations pertaining to the bundling of products, debt
enforcement and sales material need to be revised:

      BCP and INCOOP should issue regulations or guidance (e.g. Circular or Norms) to improve
       contract-related business practices. This should include:
          o A prohibition of the practice of using a unified contract to bundle (cross sell) other financial
              products in a non-transparent way (and without opt-out clause). The “Negative Option Billing
              Regulation in Canada for example requires the consumers’ express consent for being offered
              a new or additional product. If given verbally, the institution has to confirm the consumer’s
              consent in writing without delay. The client has a right to cancel the contract within 30 days,
                                                                                    28
              with a refund of charges paid in accordance to a developed formula.
          o A requirement that the contracts are written in a clear and understandable language. Where
              possible, considerations should be given by the industry to develop standardized contracts,
              which have been tested in focus groups. The contracts should include the above mentioned
              fact sheets, possibly as a cover sheet as done in Mexico.
          o A ruling out of mandatory insurance requirements except in specific circumstances (e.g.
              mortgage property insurance, insurance required by law). Where insurance is required, the
              client should be provided with at least three choices of providers, and receive full information
              on commissions and insurance policy premiums and terms (see Annex 2 for an example of
              information to be included). A cooling off period would have to be given.
          o A requirement that the customer receives a copy of the contract (with all applicable clauses)
              prior to signing, and that standard contracts are available on the website and branches of
              financial service providers for upfront information.

      BCP should introduce guidelines on credit evaluations. This should clarify practice on payroll
       deductions for loan repayments, and requirements for assessment of borrower repayment capacity,
       and make clear what the consequences are if there is a failure to comply (e.g. court powers to re-
       open a loan contract). A number of countries have i.e. established limits for payroll deductions to
                                             29
       between 30 – 50 percent of the salary, while Panama has put in place a borrowing limit for credit
       cards three times the monthly income. The consequences of an institution’s failure to comply should
       also be made clear, and could for example include court powers to re-open a loan contract.




28
     http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/SOR-2012-23/FullText.html
29
     This includes Malawi, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia.
      Cooling off periods should be introduced into the regulations by both BCP and INCOOP, and
       guidance on early repayment of products provided. The cooling off periods should provide the
       client with a general right to withdraw from a contract free of charge within a defined period of time,
                                                                            30
       such as for example 3-5 days as suggested by the Good Practices. In addition, the client should be
       given the right to withdraw without any penalty fees from a contract if done as consequence to a
       change in conditions unilaterally adopted by the financial entity. Finally, reasonable limits (both in
       terms of costs as well as types of commissions and fees to be charged) should be set for early
       repayment of loans and early withdrawal of term deposits.

      A framework for defining and prohibiting abusive debt collection practices and associated
       charges has to be put in place. The Fair Debt collection Act in the USA for examples sets limits in
       communication to third parties, prohibits the use of threats, and requires truth in representation.
       Standards for abusive debt collection practices should apply to both regulated and non-regulated
       financial service providers, as well as to dedicated debt collection agencies, so should ideally be
       incorporated into the General Consumer Protection Law or the Civil Code. The financial sector
       specific frameworks should then be updated accordingly to facilitate supervision and enforcement and
       specify / tailor individual rules.

      Standardized training requirements and programs should be developed for supervisors, staff
       and agents/non-bank intermediaries in the area of credit evaluation and credit-worthiness
       assessments, product design and transparency/ disclosure rules. The lead for this could be
       taken by training institutes and industry associations. The programs should be rolled out
       systematically, with attention paid to self-sustainability on the longer term.




The legal and regulatory framework does not require financial institutions to have internal
complaint handling processes in place. In practice, many providers have some form of internal
complaints handling mechanism (ranging from a Facebook page to a call center), but there are no
minimum standards or guidelines in place for industry players across the financial sector. In many
instances the information on complaints received and processed is not systematically collected within
each entity to allow management to understand the frequency and areas of concern, as well as actual
handling of complaints. A regulation setting a minimum standard, such as timelines for the resolution of
claims, record-keeping and classification of claims, and the generation of statistics on claims (to be
reported to the market conduct authorities) is not yet in place for any of the regulated financial service
providers. For the insurance sector, almost all the complaints received are related to settlement of claims,
but insurers are not obliged to record and process these complaints. The Law on Cooperatives mandates
that member complaints should be addressed by the Supervisory Board of each entity, and in case of
ongoing dispute presented to INCOOP, but in practice no standardized systems for dispute handling are
in place in financial cooperatives or in INCOOP, and the client is not formally informed about available
processes. Members apparently use a variety of channels to complain, including the General Assembly,
but no statistics or information on complaints are available.




30
     See World Bank (2012), Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection, p. 14.
In the majority of countries surveyed in the Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial
Literacy, internal and external dispute mechanism are in place. The World Bank Good practices
recommend that every financial institution should have a designated contact person with clear
                                                1
procedures for handling consumer complaints. Between 2010 and 2013, 25 countries introduced such
regulations, and now 83 countries (out of 114 surveyed) formally requiring internal dispute mechanisms
to be in place. In addition, both the WB Good Practices and the G20 High Level Principles on Financial
Consumer Protection call for the availability of accessible, affordable, independent, fair and timely
external complaints handling mechanisms. While in general clients can take their complaint to the court,
this is costly and time consuming, and inefficient for small disputes. Based on the results of the Global
Survey, 75 percent of the surveyed 114 countries have now some form of external out-of-court redress
mechanism in place. As can be seen in Figure 4, the most prominently used mechanisms is a financial
ombudsman, followed by general mediation and arbitration services.




Source: Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (2014)


BCP, INCOOP and SEDECO do not receive statistics on complaints from financial service
providers, and would also lack the capacity to process this information. BCP’s consumer protection
team only has one staff member each for the different functions, while there is no dedicated unit in place
in INCOOP. SEDECO does not have any staff specialized in financial sector issues to handle incoming
issues, and at the moment no formal requests from SEDECO to BCP have been made.
Processes for the correction of errors in credit reports can in practice be cumbersome. Consumers
in general can access their own reports from the BCP credit registry for free but they have to go to the
BCP headquarters in Asunción, which can be difficult and costly. While consumers can nominate a proxy
to do this on their behalf, this process excludes a significant proportion of the population. Furthermore,
correction of errors is handled directly by the data provider, which means that a consumer still has to
request the credit provider to correct the problem, as BCP does not conduct any modifications to the
credit registry database. This can be time consuming, and can lead to a significant delay in correction of
the mistake. Being only recently introduced, the process for correcting errors in the Credit Registry of S&L
cooperatives remains to be tested.

The alternative dispute resolution mechanisms currently in place lack in capacity, structure, and
are not widely advertised to consumers. As of now, other than the ability to go to a court, customers
can turn to SEDECO, the Office of Consumer Protection of BCP, or INCOOP. Internal structures for
complaints handling are in place for BCP and SEDECO, but both lack staff resources to be able to handle
a larger volume of complaints. In INCOOP, no internal unit for complaints handling is in place, and
complaints are distributed amongst units and handled in an unsystematic way. The financial consumer
has no clear and accessible information of where, when and how he/she should fill a claim outside of the
financial service provider. None of these channels are widely publicized to customers, as also indicated
by the low number of complaints they have received thus far.

An independent out of court mechanism such as an ombudsman is currently not in place. The
financial regulators would face a potential conflict of interest in handling complaints that are not related to
a violation of the legal and regulatory framework, but instead pertain to individual business practices,
prices and renegotiation of contract terms. These complaints, which cannot cost-efficiently be settled in
court if involving lower values and thus frequently do not get resolved, can be efficiently settled through
                                                                                     31
an ombudsman scheme, as has been demonstrated in a number of countries. This can greatly help
improve client satisfaction and the image of the financial sector overall. ADEFI at one point had such an
ombudsman scheme internally available, but actual usage had been limited in the absence of broader
dissemination and the scheme eventually became dormant.




An adequate system for complaints handling and resolution needs to be put in place for both
regulated and non-regulated financial service providers.

    Financial service providers should be required to have a formal system and procedure for
     complaints and claims handling in place. This should include (i) identification of internal processes
     and persons in charge, as well as (ii) regular compilation of reports and statistics for management as
     well as sending to the relevant supervisor. To cover both regulated and non-regulated service
     providers, SEDECO and the dedicated financial sector supervisors should ideally put these
     regulations in place.




31
   In Germany, for example, the association of private banks has launched its own ombudsman scheme, and has
recruited independent retired judges for this task. Up to a certain amount, the suggested solution is binding for the
respective private bank, but the client retains his right to pursue higher level dispute resolution if not satisfied with the
ruling. A similar but public scheme was introduced successfully in Armenia.
   SEDECO and supervisory agencies should establish internal systems/procedures for
    receiving and resolving complaints. This should include processes and methodologies for
    analyzing complaints information, establishing formal processes for information sharing and
    supervision with on- and off-site supervision in case of noted problems, and a system for making
    statistics available to the public.

   The data correction process for BCP’s credit registry and the private credit bureau should be
    made more straightforward for consumers. Consideration should be given to allow borrowers to
    access and dispute information on their credit report more easily, including through telephone. Once
    experience with the first data correction processes has been made, INCOOP should assess the
    process for effectiveness and efficiency.

   Consideration should also be given to establish an alternative dispute resolution mechanism,
    such as a Financial Ombudsman, which can be used for low value disputes. To be effective,
    financial ombudsman should be independent and impartial, and possess the legal and technical
    expertise to resolve financial disputes authoritatively. Information on the scheme and on an ongoing
    basis disputes resolved needs to be made publicly available, and presenting a complaint easily
    accessible for the consumer. A number of institutional options exist worldwide for the Ombudsman
    scheme:
        o Independent statutory body, funded by its members and / or receiving allocations from the
             central government. Such a scheme, which covers a broad range of financial service
             providers, is for example used in Armenia, with the decisions being binding for financial
             institutions up to USD 25 000. The ombudsman scheme is financed by the sector, and covers
             banks, credit institutions, insurance companies and other financial service providers.
        o Industry-based Financial Ombudsman, which is financed by individual financial sectors. This
             approach has for example been taken in Germany, where the German Banking Association
             launched an Ombudsman scheme for clients of private commercial banks in 1993, and hired
             a high-profile and independent lawyer to carry out this task. Up to a certain amount under
             dispute (currently EUR 5000), the decisions are binding for the financial institution, while the
             client can opt to seek additional recourse if he does not agree. In its 20 years of existence, it
             has processed 70 000 disputes. Similar schemes exist for financial cooperatives, insurances
             etc.
        o Ombudsman scheme within the supervisory agency. This approach is currently taken in 32
             countries. The cost in this case is borne by the government or by the financial regulator. The
             existing dispute facility inside the BCP is already a first step into this direction, but lacks
             independence, and clear rules for fulfilling this role of a formal ombudsman.




More and more countries worldwide are putting mechanisms in place to increase the level of
financial literacy of the population, and empower financial customers through enhanced access
and transparency of information. There is increasing awareness that reforms to strengthen the supply
side of the financial system (as discussed under section B) are not sufficient to effectively protect the
consumer. The latter also needs to be aware of the information at his disposition, and have the financial
capabilities to understand the presented information, as well as know his/her rights and obligations. Both
the G20 High Level Principles of Financial Consumer Protection and the World Bank Good Practices
cover financial education, recommending that financial education and awareness should be promoted by
all relevant stakeholders, and appropriate mechanisms be developed involving a broad range of
stakeholders. According to the Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, 49 out of
114 surveyed countries already have or are currently developing financial literacy strategies, while
regulators in 60 countries are directly involved in developing training material of provide training directly.

In Paraguay, information on the population’s level of financial capability / literacy is limited and
not regularly collected to establish baselines or measure changes over time. Surveys conducted by
the Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses (DGEEC) and other public stakeholders do not
collect information on the population’s level of financial literacy and use of financial services. A few donor-
funded demand side surveys have recently been carried out as input to the development of the National
Financial Inclusion Strategy (ENIF). This includes the National Financial Inclusion Survey (NFIS), which
was carried out by the World Bank to measure the adult’s actual usage of financial services, and also
includes a small module to gauge underlying financial behaviors of adults in Paraguay. It updates and
expands the 2011 Global Findex data for Paraguay. While the survey helps understand some of the
existing gaps in financial capabilities (see Section A for identified issues), it is not sufficiently detailed to
enable the understanding of the underlying causes and adequately help prioritize and target financial
education measures. It is also not conducted regularly. More in-depth focus groups will have to be carried
out to understand the cultural, behavioral, educational as well as perceived supply side factors that lead
to the observed gaps in usage.

Available supply-side information is fragmented and does not allow getting an overview of the
providers of financial services, their outreach and uptake of products by clients. There is no entity
formally in charge of providing consolidated and consistent supply-side information across the various
types of financial intermediaries and their products. The BCP regularly publishes information on entities
under its supervision (banks, finance and insurance companies), but there a gaps in the data such as
number of accounts and clients, and size distribution of loans and deposits. INCOOP has not published
any new data on financial cooperatives since 2011, which makes it difficult to understand the apparently
important role financial cooperatives play for financial inclusion and assess trends. The limited and
fragmented availability of data is reflected in the annual compilation of statistics ( Anuario Estatistico) done
by the DGEEC. The compilation includes balance sheet information from the banking system, as well as
some general indicators for insurance companies, but no information on finance companies, financial
cooperatives or other financial service providers is included. An initial effort to overcome some of the
fragmentation was recently done by BCP. It included a section on financial inclusion and a one-page
summary on financial services provided by cooperatives in its financial stability report.

Stakeholders from both the public and private spheres have stepped up efforts to provide
financial education programs to clients and students. The BCP signed a number of memoranda of
understanding with public sector agencies to establish bilateral working groups and design joint financial
education programs. This has led, amongst other programs, to the development of a dedicated high
                                                                                32
school course, which is now incorporated into the high school curriculum and received a prize
nomination from Child and Youth Finance International. The BCP also maintains a webpage with links to
basic financial education materials, and provides capacity building to teachers and professors,




32
  The course explains students the core pillars and functions of a financial system and the role of individual entities
such as the Central Bank, and also provides general financial education in the area of budgeting, financial products
and their usage, as well as financial security.
supervisors, and individuals on a broad range of topics. Donors, NGOs and individual financial institutions
provide capacity building in financial matters to producers, clients, and beneficiaries of social programs,
but these programs have a limited outreach, and their content is not well coordinated (see Box 6). The
cooperative sector, which has internal funds for education, does not provide financial education on a
broader scale to their members, neither on the individual cooperative nor on the second tier level.




A number of banks and finance companies have independently developed brochures, training materials
and games to provide during financial education workshops and courses to students, clients and
interested enterprises. Some of the material is also available on the web, including for example guides to
help clients understand the information on financial statements or the calculation of interest rates.
One of the NGOs provides financial education to children to help them establish a sound savings culture,
and includes financial education and management in its vocational training programs. Donors, public
banks and NGOs are also actively supporting member of cooperatives and producers to help improve
their financial management skills and understand financial concepts.

Finally, over 20,000 beneficiaries of a conditional cash transfer program will soon receive government
transfers directly into a basic account at a public bank, together with innovative capacity building from a
leading international NGO to foster savings and help beneficiaries understand financial products and
services. This is consistent with earlier initiatives in which two private banks provided capacity building to
beneficiaries of the government’s conditional finance program Tekopora to help them understand how to
withdraw money with payment cards in ATM cards, and improve their understanding of financial
products.


Overall, the implemented financial education initiatives have remained fragmented, and are of
limited visibility and scale. According to the NFIS (2014), just one in ten adults report that they or
someone in their household have received lessons on personal finances or money management. Schools
appear to be most common source of financial education, followed by parents or family members, while
very few reported having received financial education from a formal financial institution. Available material
is generally not widely distributed and publicly available in branches, and sector associations have not yet
played an active role. No standardized material is yet developed in support of high school teachers.

None of the public institutions has a clear legal mandate and dedicated funding for providing
financial education, or for coordinating the various stakeholders. Chapter XII of the Consumer
Protection Law put the Department of Consumer Protection and participating municipalities in charge of
rolling out general capacity building programs and materials on general consumer rights. In the absence
of an adequate budget, this was however not implemented. The new Secretariat for Consumer Protection
SEDECO will have a dedicated fund for general consumer education, but currently lacks capacity and
technical expertise in financial services and may not be able to dedicate substantial resources to financial
education. The Organic Law of BCP only provides for regular publication of information on the financial
system under its supervision. In the aftermath of the worldwide financial crisis, the BCP Board formally
incorporated into its work plan measures to inform the population on financial markets and the economy,
and recently also created an internal unit to foster financial education and promote financial inclusions.
This is however not yet a formal mandate. Finally, INCOOP only has a broad mandate to foster the
cooperative movement in the country, and does not provide measures in the area of transparency of
services and financial education.
The creation of a working group on financial education is planned under the umbrella of the newly
establish Financial Inclusion Committee, but will likely not have a dedicated budget. The working
group is expected to develop priority interventions (based on the overall financial inclusion action plan)
and coordinate programs of public and likely also private stakeholders in the area of financial education.
There is no dedicated budget foreseen to implement the programs of the working group. Instead, the
expectation is that the participating stakeholders will finance identified measures from their regular
budget. This is likely to create bottlenecks, unless the planned measures are firmly integrated in each
entity’s budget for the respective fiscal year.




Moving forward, coordination needs to improve to enhance outreach and efficiency of financial
education initiatives, and to foster sound financial habits. The following provides a number of
recommendations to achieve this:

   Surveys to systematically gather demand side information on financial capabilities and usage
    of financial services should be developed and conducted on a regular basis, and existing
    information further explored:
        o To be cost-effective, a module to measure usage and understanding of financial services
            could for example be included in regular demand-side surveys such as the national
            household survey (Encuesta de Hogares). Adequate budget would have to be made
            available for this. An alternative would be to launch periodic financial capability surveys, as
            done for example in Kenya through the Financial Access Survey (see Annex 3).
        o Focus groups or other qualitative research should be conducted to better understand the
            underlying cultural and behavioral factors leading to the low level of usage of financial
            products reported in the NFIS (2014). This could also help with the design of survey
            questions to be included in regular national surveys.

   Holistic supply-side statistics should be prepared and published on a regular basis. This would
    not only give the consumer’s an overview of available service providers and products, thus
    empowering him/her to make appropriate and informed choices, but – outside of the diagnostic’s
    remit – enable regulators, financial service providers and consumer representatives to monitor market
    trends. The statistics ought to consistently reflect all regulated financial intermediaries, and include
    supply side information on actual usage of different financial services.
        o An entity needs to be identified and given a clear institutional mandate and adequate funding
            for this. BCP or DGEEC both appear natural candidates for this.
        o A standardized spreadsheet with data and definitions will have to be developed to allow
            comparability and compilation of data from the different sources, and each financial sector
            supervisor mandated to report the respective data in the timeframe and quality needed to the
            entity in charge for compiling the data.

   The Central Bank and the financial sector supervisors should be given an explicit mandate in
    the area of financial education. The mandate ought to cover (i) fostering transparency on available
    financial products and service providers, and (ii) enhancing the financial capabilities of the population
    through direct programs and measures, and indirectly through market players and associations.
    Furthermore, a stronger effort needs to be made to accompany regulatory changes in the area of
    consumer protection with communication campaigns. For example, regulatory changes in the area of
    credit cards, standardization of terms, introduction of fact sheets or the availability of the complaints
    handling facility within the BCP should be broadly disseminated to create awareness amongst
    consumers and improve their understanding of the presented information.

   The establishment of a working group on Financial Education under the umbrella of the
    Financial Inclusion Committee follows international best practice and is highly encouraged.
    The mandate of the working group should be to develop a prioritized and well-sequenced financial
    education strategy, and monitor its implementation:
        o To create broad ownership, the working group should ideally include representatives from
            both public and private stakeholders. In the public sphere, in addition to the Financial
            Inclusion Committee members, the Deposit Insurance Fund, the BCP credit registry, the
            Secretariat of Social Assistance, as well as the Ministry of Education should be included as
            needed. Participants from the private sector should include the sector associations, and
            selectively also donors, NGOs and financial entities that actively conduct financial education
            programs.
        o The plan should be based on identified underlying constraints, and define remedial actions
            and entry points, sequencing, communication media to be used, responsibilities of public and
            private stakeholders, and funding sources for each measure. A monitoring and evaluation
            framework should be included to assess the effectiveness of individual measures, and
            progress over time.
        o Prior to launching of activities to improve the financial literacy of clients, the programs /
            modules should be tested in focus groups for effectiveness.
        o Consideration should be given to provide the financial education working group with a
            dedicated budget or to pool available resources.

   The government should continue to assess possible entry points for financial education
    programs. Entry points could for example include the delivery of conditional cash transfers, pension
    payments for former civil servants, as well as other government payments, as well as moments when
    a consumer is in the process of making a financial decision, thus is receptive for this information.
As can be seen in Figure 5, entities with a dedicated consumer protection unit are much more likely to
use a broad range of monitoring tool for verifying compliance with consumer protection provisions. These
tools are generally considered cost-efficient approaches to monitor a larger number of players, and
identify abusive or misleading market practices in an ongoing way. Below is an example from Portugal
how these tools are being used in the supervision process.




Source: Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (2014), and World Bank Technical
Note (2014), “Establishing a Financial Consumer Protection Supervision Department” .
In Mexico, the Law on Transparency of financial services (Art. 11) establishes the basic content
requirements that financial institutions need to adhere to in their contracts, including the use of clear
language, provision of correct information and minimum standards on conditions and costs of products.
As regulatory agency the law determines the national Financial Consumer Protection Agency
CONDUSEF, which has the power to further specify the requirements and mandate the use of a
standardized fact sheet for individual products. The latter included a standardized key fact sheet for basic
account, deposit and credit contracts in the unified dispositions for financial institutions.




Source: http://www.condusef.gob.mx/PDF-s/marco_juridico/disposicion_entidades_financieras.pdf
Portugal requires credit institutions to provide a detailed standardized information sheets for mortgage
loans and other credits secured by a mortgage (see Notice 2/2010 and its recent update 16/2012). While
overall the requirements are extensive and take the form of a full contract, the client is to receive
standardized information on (i) the amount, terms and general conditions of the credit, including the
promotional material on which the credit is based, (ii) information on the cost of the credit, including
nominal interest rate, annual percentage rate (based on total costs), as well as a separate sections
detailing the up-front commissions and commissions during the life-time of the contract, (iii) internal
contact information for dispute resolution, and (iv) a detailed payment plan.

As can be seen in Figure 8, the key information sheet also includes a section on life insurance contracts
used for the credit. This includes information on the clients right to freely choose or use an already
existing life insurance, as well as information on the premium to be paid and scope of coverage.




Source: http://www.bportugal.pt/sibap/application/app1/docs1/manual/anexos/45-2012m1.pdf
In 2006, the first Financial Access survey was rolled out in Kenya to provide baseline information on
financial access of the population, track progress of government programs to foster financial inclusion and
inform policy makers about main barriers to financial access. The data also facilitated the identification of
needed products to reach otherwise unbanked segments of the population. The second survey was
carried out in 2009, and included a module to measure consumer financial capabilities (see Figure 9).
The third survey in 2013 included a module to gauge actual financial knowledge and information on past
behaviour.

The results of the survey helped identify three broad categories of consumers: (i) the struggling excluded,
(ii) the disciplined planners, and (iii) the engaged elite. Different Strategies were identified for the different
categories of consumers:

    1. For the category “struggling excluded”, a focus was placed on community-based organizations
       and radio programs to familiarize this client base with formal financial products and services, and
       assist them with developing strategies for consumption smoothing and using financial products to
       mitigate potential financial shocks / emergencies.
    2. For the category of “disciplined planners”, mass media and community workshops were used as
       tools to convey information on financial regulation mechanisms, and familiarize them with long-
       term planning and investments. Similar to the other client category, information on products to
       mitigate the potential impact of financial shocks / emergencies was provided.
    3. Finally, for the “engaged elite”, the focus in financial education was on credit management, a nd
       long-term financial planning. As outreach tools, the media, as well as employer based financial
       education workshops and one on one advice was identified.

The periodic surveys, which covered both information on usage of financial services as well as
information on financial capabilities, allowed tracking of impact of provided measures over time and set
baseline and evaluation framework for the government’s and donor’s financial inclusion strategy. Based
on the 2013 survey results, the proportion of the adult population using different forms of formal financial
services increased to 66.7% compared to 41.3% in 2009. The proportion of the adult population totally
excluded from financial services declined during the same period from 31. 4 % to 25.4%.
Source: World Bank (2014), Making Sense of Financial Capability Surveys around the World, and
FinAccess National Survey 2013
