93928 V2
DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.
Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................................................................... 4
Acknowledgments ...................................................................................................................................... 5
Preface ......................................................................................................................................................... 6

I. Consumer Protection in the Banking and Finance Company Sector ................................................. 7
II. Consumer Protection in Savings and Loan Cooperatives ............................................................... 57
III. Consumer Protection in the Insurance Sector.................................................................................. 91
IV. Consumer Protection in Digital Financial Services ....................................................................... 115
V. Financial Education and Consumer Empowerment ....................................................................... 130




Table 1. Consumer Protection Institutional Arrangements in Digital Financial Services .......................... 116
Table 2. Main Consumer Protection Provisions Applicable to Digital Financial Services ........................ 119
Table 3. Selected Results of Recent Demand-Side Surveys ................................................................... 131




---

Currency and Equivalent Units
(As of January 2015)
Currency Unit = Paraguayan Guarani (PYG)
USD 1 = PYG 4,707.72

Government Fiscal Year
January 1 – December 31
ADEFI       Association of Finance Companies (Asociación de Entidades Financieras)
AML         Anti-Money Laundering
APCS        Paraguayan Association of Insurance Companies (Asociación Paraguaya de Compañía de
            Seguros)
ASOBAN      Association of Banks (Asociación de Bancos)
ASUCOP      Association of Users and Consumers of Paraguay (Asociación de Usuarios y Consumidores
            de Paraguay)
BCP         Banco Central del Paraguay
BCP-SIB     Banking Superintendency (Superintendencia de Bancos)
BCP-SIS     Insurance Superintendency (Superintendencia de Seguros)
BNF         National Development Bank (Banco Nacional de Fomento)
CAMP        Centre of Arbitration and Mediation of Paraguay (Centro de Arbitraje y Mediación Paraguay)
CFT         Combating the Financing of Terrorism
CGAP        Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
CONACOM     National Competition Commission (Comisión Nacional de la Competencia)
CONATEL     National Telecommunications Commission (Comisión Nacional de Telecomunicaciones)
CONPACOOP   Cooperatives Cooperation of Paraguay (Confederación Paraguaya de Cooperativas)
CPFL        Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
DCF         Financial Consumer Ombudsman (Defensora al Cliente Financiero)
DDUS        Division for the Defense of the User of Insurance
DGEEC       Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses (Dirección General de Estadística,
            Encuestas y Censos)
DRGV        German Cooperative and Raiffeisen Confederation
EMPE        E-Money Issuer (Entidad de Medio de Pago Electrónico)
ENIF        National Financial Inclusion Strategy (Estrategía Nacional de Inclusion Financera)
GSMA        GSM Association
FGD         Deposit Guarantee Fund (Fondo de Garantía de Depósitos)
IAIS        International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IIF         Financial Inclusion Intendency (Intendencia de Inclusión Financiera)
INCOOP      National Institute for Cooperatives (Instituto de Cooperativismo)
INTN        National Institute of Standards and Technology (Instituto Nacional de Tecnología,
            Normalización y Metrología)
KYC         Know-Your-Customer
MIC         Ministry of Industry and Commerce (Ministerio de Industria y Comercio)
MOU         Memorandum of Understanding
NGO         Non-Governmental Organization
PIN         Personal Identification Number
POS         Point of Sale
PYG         Paraguayan Guarani
SEDECO      Secretariat for Consumer Protection (Secretaría de Defensa al Consumidor)
SEPRELAD    Secretariat for Prevention of Money Laundering (Secretaría de Prevención de Lavado de
            Dinero o Bienes)
SIPAP       National Electronic Payment System of Paraguay (Sistema Nacional de Pagos Electrónicos
            del Paraguay)
SNIPC       National Integrated System of Consumer Protection
TELCO       Telecommunications Provider
TFC         Total Financial Cost
WOCCU       World Council of Credit Unions
This Diagnostic Study was prepared by a team led by Douglas Pearce (Lead Financial Sector Specialist,
GFMDR) and Ilka Funke (Financial Inclusion Specialist), and included Sarah Fathallah (Financial Analyst,
GFMDR), Manuel Peraita (Insurance Sector Specialist), Jose Rutman (Banking Sector Specialist) and
Luis Trevino (Sr. Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR). Technical guidance and input was provided by
Dante Mossi (Resident Representative for Paraguay, LCCPY), Javier Suarez (Lead Economist, GTCDR),
Jane C. Hwang (Sr. Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR) and on the legal framework by Mariana
Paredes (Consultant). Maria Cristina Heisecke Paredes (Consultant, GFMDR) provided both technical
and administrative support, while Rosa Arestivo de Cuentas-Zavala (Team Assistant, LCCPY) and
Monzerrat Garcia (Consultant, GFMDR) also gave valuable administrative support. Marianna Camino
(Consultant, GFMDR) provided translation support.

Peer review comments were provided by Javier Suarez (Lead Economist, GTCDR), Jane C. Hwang (Sr.
Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), and Ros Grady (Sr. Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR).

The team would like to express its gratitude to the authorities and private stakeholders for the support and
collaboration it received during the preparation of the Review. Special thanks go to the management and
staff of the different financial supervisory authorities for their excellent cooperation and the warm welcome
extended, and to the management and staff of the Financial Inclusion Intendency (Central Bank of
Paraguay) for their valuable assistance and input provided during the review.

The Diagnostic was prepared with financial support of the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
(SECO), through the Global Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Trust Fund.
Volume II of the CPFL Diagnostic Review includes a detailed assessment of the institutional, legal and
regulatory framework for consumer protection in four segments of the financial sector: (i) banks and
finance companies, (ii) financial cooperatives, (iii) insurance companies, and, - in reflection of the
important role they play in Paraguay - (iv) non-bank agents and mobile payment providers. The review
further assesses the institutional framework and infrastructure in place in the area of Financial Education
and Empowerment of Consumers. Volume II complements Volume I, which summarizes the key findings
of the diagnostic and provides prioritized recommendations.

The World Bank’s Good Practices for Consumer Protection were used as a benchmark for assessing the
                                                                                                         1
frameworks applicable to banks and finance companies, S&L cooperatives and insurance companies.
The Good Practices are based on findings of in-depth country level reviews of consumer protection and
financial literacy conducted by the World Bank since 2006, as well as international benchmarks, including
(i) principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO and IAIS, (ii) OECD recommendations in this area,
as well as (iii) laws, regulations and codes of business practices from the European Union, United States,
Australia, Canada, France, Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and South Africa. The World
                                                                                          2
Bank (WB) has already conducted similar reviews in more than thirty countries worldwide.

For the diagnostic of consumer protection in digital finance services, no formal Good Practices have so
far been established. The review is based on general principles of institutional arrangements and legal
frameworks established under the Good Practices, complemented with guidance provided by a number of
recent publications, including (i) World Bank (2014), Responsible Digital Financial Services: Consumer
Protection in an Electronic Environment, Presentation in preparation for the Responsible Finance Forum
V, (ii) Alliance for Financial Inclusion (2014), Consumer Protection in Mobile Financial Services, Guidance
Note No. 13, (iii) GSMA (2012), Mobile Privacy Principles: Promoting a User-Centric Privacy Framework
for the Mobile Ecosystem, Document Version 1.0, and (iv) CGAP (2010), Protecting Branchless Banking
Consumers: Policy Objectives and Regulatory Options, Focus Note 64.

Finally, Financial Education and Consumer Empowerment is covered as a stand-alone assessment, and
not as usually done under each of the sectors. It is based on Good Practices for Financial Education and
Consumer Protection established for individual sectors, and complemented with relevant guidance
material, including (i) the G20 High Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection and the Annex to
the G20/OECD Task Force Report on Financial Consumer Protection, (ii) the sections on Financial
Education in World Bank (2014) Global Survey on Consumer Protection, and (iii) Financial Literacy, as
well as World Bank (2013), Making Sense of Financial Capability Surveys around the World),

To prepare the review, a World Bank (WB) mission visited Asunción from May 26 to June 5, 2014.
Extensive consultations were held with stakeholders from the public and private sectors.




1
  The Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012) are available at:
 http://bit.ly/GoodPracticesConsumerProtection
2
  Recent CPFL Diagnostic reviews are available at: http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/diagnostic-reviews
SECTION A               CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS


Good Practice A.1.      Consumer Protection Regime
                        The law should provide clear consumer protection rules regarding banking
                        products and services, and all institutional arrangements should be in place
                        to ensure the thorough, objective, timely and fair implementation and
                        enforcement of all such rules.
                        a. Specific statutory provisions should create an effective regime for the
                           protection of a consumer of any banking product or service.
                        b. A general consumer agency, a financial supervisory agency or a
                           specialized financial consumer agency should be responsible for
                           implementing, overseeing and enforcing consumer protection regarding
                           banking products and services, as well as for collecting and analyzing
                           data (including inquiries, complaints and disputes).
                        c. The designated agency should be funded adequately to enable it to carry
                           out its mandates efficiently and effectively.
                        d. The work of the designated agency should be carried out with
                           transparency, accountability and integrity.
                        e. There should be co-ordination and co-operation between the various
                           institutions mandated to implement, oversee and enforce consumer
                           protection and financial system regulation and supervision.
                        f. The law should also provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the
                           private sector, including voluntary consumer organizations and self-
                           regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer protection regarding
                           banking products and services.
Description             a. The provisions of the law should create an effective regime for the
                        protection of banking consumers.
                        The legal framework for general consumer protection is set forth in the Consumer
                        Protection Law number 1334 of 1998. It covers all sectors of the economy,
                        including the provision of financial products and services. This law covers, among
                        others, the basic rights of a consumer, contractual issues, information to be
                        provided when selling goods and services, rules for advertising, legal defense of
                        consumer rights, enforcement authority, consumer education, consumer
                        associations, and sanctions. The Consumer Protection Law does not contain a
                        specific chapter on financial products and services (except as stated, very briefly,
                        under "credit operations").

                        The Organic Law of the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP-Law 489 of 1995)
                        establishes as fundamental objectives of the BCP to preserve and safeguard the
                        stability of the value of the currency and to promote the efficiency and stability of


3
    Prepared by Jose Rutman
the financial system. It does not have a specific mandate for consumer protection,
although some aspects of "market conduct" could be included within the broad
concept of "efficiency and stability" of the financial system. The same law, in Article
44, states that interest rates may be freely agreed upon, but establishes a ceiling
on lending rates (compensatory and punitive) equal to 1.30 times the average
financial system interest rates for consumer loans (called "usury rate"). The fixing
of maximum interest rates is mandated by Article 475 of the Civil Code, which
states that arrears or countervailing interest rates cannot be more than the
maximum rates established by BCP, under penalty of nullity of the corresponding
clause, regardless of the denomination given to the ancillary benefit borne by the
debtor. Furthermore, the General Law of Banks, Finance Companies and Other
Credit Institutions (Banking Law number 861 of 1996) states in Article 107
("Information Transparency") that the BCP, based on the opinion of the Banking
Superintendency (SIB), will ensure information transparency of credit institutions in
relationship to their customers.

Overall, the Consumer Protection Law creates a broad regime for the protection of
the consumer, while other laws (i.e. Organic Law of BCP and the Banking Law)
cover selected issues like transparency of information in more depth and
specificity. This raises some questions about the specific powers of the institutions
involved in regulating and supervising consumer protection issues. As discussed in
more detail in other best practices, there are some gaps in regulation.

b, A general consumer protection agency, a financial supervision entity, or a
specialized financial consumer protection agency should be responsible for
implementing, monitoring and enforcing consumer rights regarding banking
products and services as well as to collect and analyze information
(including requests for information, complaints, and disputes).

The Consumer Protection Law initially established as regulatory and supervisory
agency the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MIC), and also allowed
municipalities to play a role in supervising its implementation on a voluntary basis
(see Decree 20572/03, which establishes the National Integrated System of
Consumer Protection (SNIPC)). To implement the system, the MIC issued various
regulations, such as a summary of proceedings (Decree 21001/03); a scale of fines
(Resolution 520/06); and a registry of offenders, reconciliations and complaints
(Resolution 521/06). In practice, the system was however never implemented and
the technical platform not created.
A new system was established in September 2013 through Law 4974, which
created the Secretariat of Consumer Protection (SEDECO) as the new
enforcement authority of the general Consumer Protection Law. SEDECO is an
autonomous and decentralized body with its own legal status and budget (Art. 1).
Relations with the executive branch stand through the MIC, which may establish,
for the operations of SEDECO, direct links with other government agencies and the
private sector (Art. 4). Additionally, Law 4974 sets out the objectives and functions,
authority, human resources, structure, economic regime, and internal control for
SEDECO.
                         A number of issues currently impede the effective functioning of SEDECO.
                         Regulations for Law 4974 are only being developed, and SEDECO has scarce
                         human resources (16 staff, partly non-technical) and budget. Together with its
                         recent creation, as well as the nonexistence of expertise in financial matters,
                         SEDECO has so far been unable to effectively monitor and enforce consumer
                         rights (including regarding to banking products and services), publicize its role in a
                         broad public campaign or collect and analyze statistical data on the claims
                         received from users (including requests for information, complaints, and disputes).

                         The general Consumer Protection Law and its subsequent amendments do not
                         expressly contemplate a role for the BCP in regulating or supervising financial
                         consumer protection, except for establishing the usury rate (mandated by the Civil
                         Code). However some business conduct related topics are included in the Banking
                         and Organic Law of BCP. Furthermore, Resolution 2 of June 2007 instructed the
                         BCP-SIB to verify the consistency of the provisions with those of the Consumer
                         Protection Law. BCP approved transparency rules relating to the calculation and
                         publication of interest rates (Resolution 2 of November 2001, revised in 2007),
                         while moving forward with the approval of credit card and bank account contracts
                         of the institutions under its supervision.
                         BCP disseminates on a monthly basis the usury rates, which establishes a
                         maximum annual interest rate for lending (currently 56.16% for operations in local
                         currency and 16.15% for foreign currency). In 2013, the BCP-SIB also constituted
                         a Financial Inclusion Intendency (IIF) under BCP-SIB’s Extra-Situ Supervision
                         Department, which covers Financial Consumer Protection, Financial Education and
                         Financial Inclusion per se.

                         In summary, neither SEDECO nor BCP-SIB exercises full and effective regulation
                         and supervision of financial consumer protection. Nevertheless, the BCP-SIB has
                         made significant progress in regulating information transparency and reviewing
                         contracts and claims handling, but actual supervision is hampered by the lack of
                         standardized procedures.

                         c, The work of the designated agency for financial consumer protection
                         should be done with transparency, integrity, and accountability.
                         The enforcement authority of the Consumer Protection Law (i.e. the MIC and, more
                         recently, SEDECO) has not released information on the activities it carried out in
                         the area of consumer protection (either in general or with regards to financial
                         products and services). No widespread consumer complaints have been
                         addressed, nor their characteristics documented (size, products/sectors, type of
                                    4
                         resolution) , nor have the penalties for financial service providers been published.
                         The BCP-SIB has also not released information on its activities in the field of
                         consumer protection, including statistics on claims received. It has added to its
                         website a tab on "Consumer Protection" which includes FQAs, information on
                         procedures for filing a claim (i.e. who should file a claim and how to do so), the
                         process that should be expected by the user and the final resolution.



4
    See Good Practice E.3.
d, The designated agency should be adequately funded so that it can carry
out its mandate efficiently and effectively.
SEDECO has 16 people in total (6 of which in the Legal Department) to cover
consumer protection issues for all economic sectors. In addition, under the old
scheme, 13 municipalities (out of over 250) also participated in the supervision on
a voluntary basis , with low to no participation in practice SEDECO is currently
exploring options to renew and standardize the participation of the municipalities,
but at the time of the mission no agreement had yet been signed. Under the
current arrangement SEDECO does not appear to have sufficient funds and
staffing to carry out its very broad mandate (Art. 5 and 6 of Law 4974) efficiently
and effectively.

The IIF created under the BCP-SIB has 5 employees in total, of which one person
is focused specifically on financial consumer protection. Furthermore, on-site
supervision has a total staff of 65 people, dedicating on average 10% of their time
to review issues related to the transparency of information and compliance with
maximum interest rates of banks and finance companies. Off-site monitoring of
non-prudential aspects covers the approval of contracts for financial products and
services.
Overall, the resources of the IIF are insufficient for the activities it currently
performs. For example, only one person is in charge of handling consumer claims,
evaluating financial institution contracts with regard to compliance with consumer
protection aspects (along with the department of Licenses and Authorizations, who
has primary responsibility), and monitoring the structure and level of fees and
commissions, among other responsibilities. The Capacity of off-site supervision
(e.g. evaluating the information published by financial institutions) is also limited.
The in-situ supervision of market conduct is done by the same team of prudential
supervisors, and from the available information it cannot be judged whether the
resources for this are sufficient. However, the mission noted as a core deficit the
lack of manuals and standard operating procedures to carry out these tasks (which
should be done in collaboration with officials of the IIF).

e, The various institutions mandated to implement, monitor, and enforce
consumer protection, financial sector regulation, and supervision should
work in a coordinated and cooperative manner.
Coordination and cooperation between SEDECO and BCP-SIB is limited. They do
not meet regularly to exchange information on issues related to financial consumer
protection, nor have developed procedures for referral and/or technical
collaboration for the treatment of claims related to financial services or products.
Under the former regime, the MIC and BCP signed a cooperation agreement,
which however was not implemented effectively. Given the establishment of a new
application authority for the Consumer Protection Law (SEDECO), a new
agreement would have to be signed. Some interaction between SEDECO and the
BCP with regard to legal initiatives has recently been observed. One example is
the draft law on credit cards.

f, The law should also provide or at least not prohibit, a role for the private
sector, including voluntary consumer organizations and self-regulatory
                 organizations with regard to consumer protection for banking products and
                 services.
                 The Consumer Protection Law establishes in Article 6 paragraph g) as a basic
                 consumer rights "the formation of consumer associations in order to defend and
                 represent themselves." Art. 45 of the Consumer Protection Law sets out what is
                 meant by consumer association, defining it as "any association formed by
                 individuals who do not have economic, commercial or political interests and whose
                 intent is to ensure the protection and defense of consumers and users, and
                 promote information, education, representation and respect of their rights."
                 Art. 46 defines the requirements to be met in order to act as a consumer
                 association, such as incorporating as a non-profit; not engaging political activity;
                 not receiving donations/contributions/support from commercial enterprises; not
                 accepting advertisements; among others. Finally, Art. 47 defines the purposes of
                 consumer associations, which are to promote and protect the rights of consumers;
                 to support consumer defense (or act jointly in this regard) in court and
                 administrative procedures; to promote judicial proceedings aimed at legal
                 enforcement (insofar as the users do not or do not claim compensation); to collect,
                 report, and divulge objective information on goods and services; and to conduct
                 training programs, counseling and consumer education.
                 There is one major consumer association in Paraguay, the Association of Users
                 and Consumers of Paraguay (ASUCOP), which is limited in size and activities. Its
                 operation is carried via legal entities that voluntarily adhere to the association, and
                 it conducts studies in an ad hoc manner on issues they consider of interest. The
                 Association has not carried out a specific study of the financial sector.
                 Communication is channeled mainly through social networks, where the
                 Association has 35,000 followers. It played an important role in collecting claims for
                 the mandatory auto insurance law (later repealed) and is currently participating in
                 the draft credit card law.
Recommendation   1. The legal framework should be enhanced to provide clarity on the mandates,
                    responsibilities, and powers of SEDECO as the regulatory and supervisory
                    authority of the Consumer Protection Law and of the BCP-SIB (within the
                    framework set by BCP’s Organic Law and the Banking Law) for the effective
                    regulation and implementation of financial consumer protection for entities
                    under its supervision (in line with the broad principles established by the
                    Consumer Protection Law).
                    Alternatively, if feasible under the current legal framework, the BCP-SIB should
                    establish and monitor regulations on information transparency, business
                    practices, and complaint resolution mechanisms that banks and finance
                    companies should implement. It would then intervene in cases of non-
                    compliance with these regulations. In this scenario, SEDECO could
                    periodically determine whether such regulations are consistent with the general
                    Consumer Protection Law. Furthermore, SEDECO (and the participating
                    municipalities), or a financial ombudsman, could deal with and resolve
                    complaints from users regarding specific aspects of the relationship between
                    the user and the provider of financial services.
                    For either alternative to work, the coordination between SEDECO and BCP-
                    SIB needs to improve, i.e. establishing an effective exchange of information,
                    technical training, referral of claims, and consistency of the legal and
                       regulatory framework.
                    2. Once SEDECO is strengthened in terms of human and economic resources,
                       and has established regulations for the implementation of its function, it is
                       recommended to institute mechanisms for adequate training and
                       implementation of procedures to ensure the application of criteria for dispute
                       resolution through the participating municipalities in a homogeneous and
                       consistent manner (e.g. the same resolution when faced with the same
                       circumstances). To achieve this objective, an electronic platform (something
                       that once was contemplated by the MIC, when it was the enforcing authority for
                       the Consumer Protection Law, but was never implemented) could be used.
                    3. The BCP-SIB should define what model of supervision to apply in monitoring
                       aspects of financial consumer protection: if only addressed by the IIF, a greater
                       amount of resources will be required, compared to the alternative that in-situ
                       supervision of these aspects is made by the same team that carries out
                       prudential supervision. Adopting this last alternative will require the
                       development of procedures and training manuals (with the active participation
                       of the IIF in the process) so that the team of supervisors exercises its market
                       conduct supervision in a homogenous and efficient manner.
                    4. Depending on the mandates and division of roles adopted, appropriate
                       resources should be given assigned to SEDECO as well as BCP-SIB, in order
                       to allow for the effective implementation of legal and regulatory framework for
                       financial consumer protection.
Good Practice A.2   Code of Conduct for Banks
                    a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for banks that is
                       devised by all banks or the banking association in consultation with the
                       financial supervisory agency and consumer associations, if possible.
                       Monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory agency,
                       this code should be formally adhered to by all sector-specific
                       institutions.
                    b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized and
                       disseminated to the general public.
                    c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes of
                       conduct for banks on such matters as facilitating the easy switching of
                       consumers’ current accounts and establishing a common terminology in
                       the banking industry for the description of banks’ charges, services and
                       products.
                    d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                       disseminated.
Description         Neither the Association of Banks (ASOBAN) nor the Association of Finance
                    Companies (ADEFI) has as yet developed a code of conduct based on well-
                    developed principles. However, some individual financial institutions have
                    developed and published their own individual codes of conduct. One bank has
                    adopted a code based on the SMART Campaign, whose principles can be found
                    on its website and in the brochures it distributes. Other financial institutions have
                    evaluated adhering to these best practices, without much progress or
                    implementation to date.
                       .
                    Overall, the role of ADEFI and ASOBAN in the dissemination of good practices and
                    the homogenization of fees and commissions has been very limited.
                    Communication with the community at large has also been limited; as an example
                    ASOBAN lacks an institutional website and has not developed external
                    publications.
Recommendation      1. ADEFI and ASOBAN could consider creating and publishing a Code of
                       Conduct for implementation by banks and finance companies, or providing
                       other form of guidance material. Membership in the Code would be voluntary,
                       but should be publicly announced by participating institutions and include a
                       scheduled review for compliance by an independent person or institution. The
                       scheme should contemplate incentives (or penalties) for the implementation (or
                       lack thereof) of the Code, contemplating (in extreme cases) the removal of the
                       institution from the larger list of adherents. A simple mechanism should also be
                       implemented for users to report breaches of the Code or lack of adherence to
                       the established guidance material.
                    2. The Code or guidance material should include aspects related to transparency,
                       business practices and customer complaints, such as guidelines on the
                       analysis and offer of appropriate financial products and services, practices
                       deemed abusive, possibility of customer suspension, credit recovery practices,
                       and information transparency.
                    3. ASOBAN and ADEFI could furthermore play an active role in spreading among
                       their members the best practices in areas that are identified as most critical in
                       terms of transparency, business practices and complaint resolution.
                    4. An alternative to developing the Code of Conduct or stand-alone guidance
                       material would be to incorporate aspects that the Code would contain within
                       the regulatory framework issued by BCP. To do this, ASOBAN and ADEFI
                       could adopt a coordinating role for their member institutions to consolidate the
                       vision and experience of the market and provide input to BCP for better and
                       more effective guidance on the best practices. From the point of the view of the
                       mission, this would be preferable.
                       Some of the initiatives that could be included in the regulatory framework and
                       where the industry associations could have a role to play include:
                       standardization and definition of commissions and fees; definition of total
                       financial cost; content and format of key fact statements, among others (the
                       abovementioned proposals are further developed in the following Good
                       Practices).
Good Practice A.3   Appropriate Allocation between Prudential Supervision and Consumer
                    Protection
                    Whether prudential supervision of banks and consumer protection regarding
                    banking products and services are the responsibility of one or two
                    organizations, the allocation of resources to these functions should be
                    adequate to enable their effective implementation.
Description         SEDECO does not have sufficient resources to implement its mandate.
                    Similarly, the IIF does not have sufficient resources to perform the financial
                    consumer protection functions of off-site monitoring, approval of contracts, and
                    consumer complaint resolution.
                    The In-Situ supervision at BCP-SIB does not have specific assigned resources to
                    address monitoring issues related to financial consumer protection; the main
                    aspect relating to consumer protection it covers is compliance with the maximum
                    interest rate; although it has also detected other excesses –, for example in life-
                    insurance premiums. In addition, the prudential supervisors have not been trained
                    to detect issues related to transparency, business practices and customer
                    complaints. The procedures carried out by In-Situ supervision in this area are not
                    properly formalized or standardized.
Recommendation      1. Having clarified the scope of the mandate for SEDECO and BCP on financial
                       consumer protection, the allocation of necessary resources for SEDECO and
                       BCP-SIB (particularly the IIF, Licenses and Authorizations, and In-Situ
                       Supervision) is recommended so that both institutions can effectively carry out
                       their respective tasks.
                    2. In the short term, regardless of the mandates that may be defined in the
                       medium term as mentioned in the previous paragraph, it is imperative to
                       allocate more resources to the IIF, with regards to financial consumer
                       protection, in order to allow it to carry out the tasks it is currently assigned to
                       do and advance the development of manuals and processes for market
                       conduct supervision and training of on-site supervisors.
Good Practice A.4   Other Institutional Arrangements
                    a. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any
                       dispute regarding a consumer protection matter in respect of a banking
                       product or service is affordable, timely and professionally delivered.
                    b. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in
                       promoting banking consumer protection.
Description         a) The judicial system is not efficient and effective in the resolution of disputes
                    between banks and users of financial services. Judicial processes are time
                    consuming and expensive.

                    b) The news media have begun to engage on the issue of financial consumer
                    protection, including the publication of articles related to personal finance. Some
                    private initiatives published web pages including tables comparing interest rates on
                    bank loans. The radio has significant penetration in Paraguay; weekly programs
                    addressing issues to personal finance for low-income segments have also been
                    identified (though with less impact). The ASOCUP does not play an active role in
                    the dissemination and promotion of consumer protection in relation to the banking
                    system.
                    In practice there is not clear communication and interaction between SEDECO,
                    BCP-SIB and the mass media/ consumer associations. The development of
                    regulatory projects are not shared or done in consultation with consumer
                    associations; there is no exchange of information between these institutions on
                    improper business practices, lack of transparency and of the type and quality of
                    consumer complaints.
Recommendation      1. Agencies with primary responsibility for consumer protection in financial
                       services should strengthen links with the media and consumer associations to
                       promote the dissemination and understanding of the rights and obligations of
                       financial users, reaching out to segments of the population that traditionally
                       would be costly or difficult to reach.
                    2. Also, consumer associations should be consulted during the process of
                       drafting of laws and regulations related to financial consumer protection
                        (currently they are actively participating in the drafting of the credit card law).
Good Practice A.5   Licensing
                    All banking institutions that provide financial services to consumers should
                    be subject to a licensing and regulatory regime to ensure their financial
                    safety and soundness and effective delivery of financial services.
Description         According to the provisions of the Banking Law, only institutions that are licensed
                    by BCP can operate as banks or finance companies (Articles 1 and 5). An
                    institution cannot use the word bank, finance company or similar misleading
                    language if not authorized by BCP to perform the operations reserved for those
                    institutions. BCP, via the BCP-SIB, develops standards around the supervision of
                    banks and finance companies.
                    The approval process for gaining a license as a bank or finance company only
                    marginally evaluates aspects related to financial consumer protection.
Recommendation      Strengthen the review process prior to licensing of a bank or finance company,
                    including the evaluation of its transparency policy, business practices and
                    response to claims brought by financial consumers. This would encourage financial
                    institutions to have structures, policies and personnel to deal with financial
                    consumer protection from their inception.



SECTION B           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES


Good Practice B.1   Information on Customers
                        a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a bank should
                           gather, file and record sufficient information from the consumer to
                           enable the bank to render an appropriate product or service to that
                           consumer.
                        b. The extent of information the bank gathers regarding a consumer
                           should:
                             (i) be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the
                                  product or service either being proposed to or sought by the
                                  consumer; and
                             (ii) enable the bank to provide a professional service to the
                                  consumer in accordance with that consumer’s capacity
Description         The norms established by BCP for the classification of assets, credit risk, and
                    interest accrual (Resolution 1, Act 60 of 2007) state that managers of financial
                    institutions should establish written policies, criteria, procedures, information
                    systems and controls designed to ensure the sound and prudent management of
                    the risks involved, at the time of the origination of loans, throughout their existence,
                    and until maturity or cancellation.
                    Furthermore, these rules set forth (points IV.C and IV.D.4) the following minimum
                    information requirements for medium, small and personal debtors: identification of
                    the debtor (National ID or equivalent); information on the application, use and
                    conditions of the credit; status report or sworn statement of assets, both of the
                    debtor and the guarantor, if applicable; income certificate or information about
                    the source of repayment of the loan; official court or business reports;
                    information about the mortgage guarantee (if applicable), and Tax Compliance
                          Certificate, where applicable. For microcredit (point IV.E.1), only the debtor
                          identification and information about the application and credit conditions are
                          required (neither a business report nor a query to the credit registry are required;
                          the draft regulation on microcredit has not established this requirement either).
                          Although included as minimum information, the "business report" for medium, small
                          and personal (excluding micro) borrowers does not explicitly require entities to
                          consult the credit registry of the BCP-SIB prior to granting a loan. On the other
                          hand, point IV.4 provides that the classification of credit risks will be based on the
                          assessment and qualification of the ability to pay with respect to all obligations,
                          using the public credit registry as a reference for this qualification.
                          In practice, entities obtain information through completed forms filled in by the
                          consumer alongside documentation that the applicant must provide (e.g. proof of
                          income, address) and inquiries made to the BCP-SIB’s credit registry, the private
                          credit bureau, or entities which have knowledge had made previous inquiries of the
                          applicant in the credit bureau.
                          Information on the degree of indebtedness of potential borrowers collected by the
                          financial institutions has limitations. While the BCP credit registry contains positive
                          and negative information on borrowers, it covers only the financial institutions
                          supervised by the BCP-SIB (banks and finance companies). On the other hand,
                          the private credit bureau does have information from other credit providers, such
                          as financial cooperatives and white goods retailers; however, such information
                          includes only negative information (more than 90 days delinquent), requests from
                          entities for information about the borrower, and other negative events from public
                                                                         5
                          sources (e.g. trials or lawsuits initiated) . The private credit bureau contains no
                          positive information.
                          Consequently, financial institutions do not have complete information on the total
                          level of indebtedness of the customer, and may try to directly contact those
                          institutions who have had contact with the person listed by the private credit bureau
                          (typically cooperatives, but also pawn shops and credit stores, all of them not
                          supervised by the BCP-SIB). On that occasion they consult if the person was given
                          a credit and the amount currently owed. This method of aggregating the debtor's
                          credit information is unreliable, expensive, and inefficient. With the explicit
                          permission of the owner authorizing their data to be provided (Art. 84 of the
                          Banking Law and Art. 5 of the Private Information Law number 1682/01 as
                          amended by Law 1969/02) the provision of positive data would be unlimited; if not,
                          only negative information would be shared in accordance with the provisions of Art.
                          9 of Law 1682/01.
                          On the other hand, some limitations on the reporting of negative credit information
                          also affect the ability of financial institutions to properly assess prospective clients.
                          More specifically, the legal constraint that negative information is only reported
                          once the client is in arrears of at least 90 days restricts access to useful
                          information, such as late repayments from 1 to 89 days. As a result of this
                          shortcoming, financial institutions may provide credit to individuals who are already
                          having difficulty repaying their current obligations, without being aware of it.
                          Banks incorporate in the contract information necessary not only for opening a
                          deposit account, but also for the granting of a credit card (even if the user does not


5
    See Good Practices D.2, D.3 and D.4.
                    want it at that time). Therefore, the requirement for information in opening a
                    demand deposit account is comprehensive and its authorization demands at least
                    three days from opening, but then facilitates the offer and approval of financial
                    products and services in the future. Financial institutions argue that the request for
                    information is related to the Know-Your-Customer (KYC) requirement of emerging
                    from regulations that prevent money laundering.
                    Financial institutions have difficulties in accessing information in a timely manner,
                    on direct debit for debt repayment via deductions on the salary of their clients. In
                    many cases, the institutions only become aware of the actual salary when they see
                    the amount credited to accounts opened in the institution.

                    For the provision of other financial products, the widespread use of unified
                    contracts leads to banks and finance companies collecting a broad range of
                    information on the client. As discussed in more detail under Good Practices B.2.
                    and B.4., the contracts already pre-approve certain products without the client
                    needing to express his explicit interest in receiving this product or the product
                    necessarily being in his / her interest.
Recommendation      1. Require legislation (for all types of debt) that establishes a minimum
                       consultation with the BCP-SIB credit registry (currently it is implicit in the
                       requirement to have business reports for medium, small and personal credit,
                       while totally excluding microcredit).
                    2. Facilitate access to information by financial institutions, including total levels of
                       indebtedness for clients; for that BCP-SIB could remind institutions (via a
                       public announcement) that there are no legal limitations for the collection and
                       sharing of positive information to private credit bureaus, provided there is
                       consent from the owner of the data (client). The banks and finance companies,
                       together with the association of cooperatives and representatives of other
                       credit providers should act in concert to encourage their members to provide
                       positive credit information to bureaus, which will facilitate access to information
                       about the degree of indebtedness of their users.
                    3. Deepen the scope of the credit registry to include the cooperative sector (the
                       credit registry has been working with the largest cooperatives since June 2014)
                       and its interaction with banks and finance companies, which would be helpful
                       in facilitating access to comprehensive information on potential users of
                       financial products and services.
                    4. Expand the regulations regarding repayment capacity evaluations, especially in
                       relation to microcredit (e.g. pro forma cash flow evaluation from field visits).
                    5. Establish an effective mechanism to allow financial services providers to
                       access information in a timely manner, including the degree to which earned
                       salary is used to pay loans.
                    6. Amend the law to lift the restriction that negative credit information cannot be
                       shared if the customer is past due less than 90 days (alternatively, reduce this
                       period to 30 days).
Good Practice B.2   Affordability
                    a. When a bank makes a recommendation regarding a product or service to
                        a consumer, the product or service it offers to that consumer should be
                        in line with the need of the consumer.
                    b. The consumer should be given a range of options to choose from to meet
                    his or her requirements.
                 c. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided to
                    the consumer to enable him or her to select the most suitable and
                    affordable product or service.
                 d. When offering a new credit product or service significantly increasing the
                    amount of debt assumed by the consumer, the consumer’s credit
                    worthiness should be properly assessed.
Description      The regulatory framework of BCP does not establish a suitability or
                 appropriateness evaluation that financial entities should utilize prior to credit
                 approval. It emphasizes, for credit products (e.g. "Rules for classification of assets,
                 credit risk, and accrual of interest") the need for a proper assessment of the
                 repayment capacity, which does not necessarily go hand in hand with what the
                 user needs.
                 Financial entities generally offer a range of deposit products (savings, checking
                 and time deposits) and credit cards. In most cases, even if the person concerned
                 wishes to purchase only one product (e.g. a savings account), the financial
                 institution requires the customer to only sign one contract for banking services,
                 which includes various products and financial services (savings, demand deposits,
                 credit cards, safe deposit boxes, etc.). This method of acquisition and marketing
                 could induce the purchase of financial products and services that are not
                 necessary for nor desired by the user. This practice would contravene the
                 provisions of Art. 14, paragraph a) of the Consumer Protection Law which prohibits
                 conditioning the purchase of a product or service to another product or service,
                 except by custom and habit or due to the nature of the product or service typically
                 offered as a bundle.
                 On the other hand, financial institutions believe that by offering various products
                 and services they can meet user needs and ensure that the user makes a suitable
                 choice. In practice, it is necessary to supplement this with appropriate counseling,
                 based on the information collected and the actual needs of the user.
                 In some cases, banks have detected needs for debt refinancing, especially with
                 regards to credit card debt, either among their own customers or those of other
                 financial institutions. To this end, they have begun offering personal loans to
                 reduce the number of loans with short-term maturities and lower the financial cost
                 of credit.
                 There has been a growth in the operations of direct debit of public employees’
                 wages, which in some cases have reached 100%. While the Law on the General
                 Budget of the Nation incorporated an article specifically to limit these debits to 50%
                 of salary (Art. 227 of Law 5142 of 2014), previous credits have compromised the
                 availability of said wages. For this reason the article has been appealed,
                 compromising its effectiveness.
Recommendation   1. Limit / prohibit unique contracts that involve opening an account or purchasing
                    products and services that are not required by the client and/or not needed to
                    be offered together.
                 2. Incorporate into the regulatory framework that banks and finance companies
                    must focus on providing financial products and services that are appropriate,
                    that meet the needs of customers, and that customers have the capacity to
                    repay (in the case of loans).
                 3. Set by regulation a maximum percentage (e.g. 30%) of the total
                       wages/income, considering all loans (in aggregate), that may be debited for
                       repayment of said loans (to effectively implement this recommendation,
                       customer information must be collected as per the recommendation in Good
                       Practice B.1.). Malawi, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia have for example
                       established limits for payroll deduction of between 30-50 percent, while
                       Panama has put in place a borrowing limit for credit cards three times the
                       monthly income.
                    4. Institutions should promote awareness to salaried employees (especially in the
                       public sector) regarding the risks of multiple direct salary debits to pay off
                       loans.
Good Practice B.3   Cooling-off Period
                    a. Unless explicitly waived in advance by a consumer in writing, a bank
                       should provide the consumer a cooling-off period of a reasonable
                       number of days (at least 3-5 business days) immediately following the
                       signing of any agreement between the bank and the consumer.
                    b. On his or her written notice to the bank during the cooling-off period, the
                       consumer should be permitted to cancel or treat the agreement as null
                       and void without penalty to the consumer of any kind.
Description         The regulatory framework does not include the requirement that banks offer a
                    cooling off period during which clients can withdraw from a contracted financial
                    product or service. The Consumer Protection Law (Art. 26) provides that the
                    consumer is entitled to withdraw within seven days after signing the contract if the
                    agreement is reached by phone or in the consumer's home (this does not refer
                    specifically to financial products). Similarly, Art. 30 provides that the consumer has
                    the right to prepay the entire amount owed with a consequent reduction in
                    proportional interests. No mention is made of whether a prepayment fee may or
                    may not be charged.
                    Financial institutions do not include in their policies cooling-off periods during which
                    clients can undo the acquisition of financial products or services. Some of them,
                    informally, accept the withdrawal even without a commitment to do so (this practice
                    is not very common, and few offer it publicly).
                    Institutions generally do charge for prepayment; in some cases up to 30% or 50%
                    of the interest for the remaining term. In other cases, entities establish a
                    cancellation fee calculated as a percentage of the outstanding debt at the time of
                    early repayment. Such practices may be in violation of the provisions of the
                    Consumer Protection Law (Art. 30), but would require further guidance /
                    clarification on the interpretation of Art. 30. Cancellation fees quoted are included
                    in the contracts of loan products, although do not figure prominently and are
                    generally found at the end.
                    In the case of deposit products, banks do not apply a penalty for canceling the
                    contract, beyond the obligation – in the case of current accounts – to return any
                    checkbooks and the face value any checks already issued.
Recommendation      1. Introduce in the regulatory framework of BCP the right of withdrawal from the
                       contract by the customer within a shortened period of time for all marketed
                       financial products and services.. Evaluate the treatment to be provided at time
                       of cancellation (total refund, partial or no), including potential fees charged
                       prior to the withdrawal of the customer.
                    2. Assess the scope of Art. 30 of the Consumer Protection with regards to the
                       payment of fees for early cancellation of credit. Consider including in the
                       regulatory framework a prohibition on such fees or fixing a maximum limit (i.e.
                       proportion of the remaining accrued interest).
Good Practice B.4   Bundling and Tying Clauses
                    a. As much as possible, banks should avoid bundling services and
                       products and the use of tying clauses in contracts that restrict the choice
                       of consumers.
                    b. In particular, whenever a borrower is obliged by a bank to purchase any
                       product, including an insurance policy, as a pre-condition for receiving a
                       loan from the bank, the borrower should be free to choose the provider of
                       the product and this information should be made known to the borrower.
Description         As mentioned in Good Practice B.2. Art. 14, paragraph a) of the Consumer
                    Protection Law, the tying of the purchase of one product or service to the purchase
                    of another product or service, except by custom and habit or due to the nature of
                    the product or service, is prohibited.
                    The regulatory framework does not provide specifics on this topic, but approves the
                    use of unique contracts in banking services through the authorization of such
                    contracts.
                    The only provision relating to the supply of tied products/services (life insurance
                    associated with credit products) was implemented because of concerns identified
                    by the BCP-SIB alongside the Insurance Superintendency (BCP-SIS). The SIS
                    established a cap on the fees that agents or brokers can charge for intermediation
                    and other concepts of life insurance, with the same maximum 30% of the premium
                    (Resolution SS.SG 45/13 of August 2013).
                    The above resolution was caused by the practices of financial institutions, including
                    tying their loan products, obligatorily, to life insurance calculated on outstanding
                    balances. Such policies are contracted by the entity and premiums are
                    incorporated into payable balances. The client does not have the option to endorse
                    to the financial institution their own policy with an insurance company. In addition,
                    banks do not offer alternative insurance companies, and do not report the name of
                    the company involved.
                    Setting limits on life insurance premiums prompted some institutions to incorporate
                    as pre-requisites for credit, insurance covering additional risks other than life (such
                    as hospitalization, unemployment, etc.) and are not covered by existing limitations
                    on life insurance premiums.
                    The increasing tying of insurance products to credit is motivated, among other
                    reasons, by the desire to circumvent the interest rate limits provided for in Art. 44 of
                    the BCP Organic Law, and eventually sell products reflecting a lower interest rate
                    (although the total cost of credit does not change, since the reduced interest rate
                    are offset by the higher insurance premiums).
                    Entities that do not perform this practice, are compelled to do so because if they do
                    not:
                    - Commercially, they are affected as users perceive that they charge a higher
                         rate interest than competitors, when in fact it is offset by a lower premium;
                    - Operationally, their rates are closer to the maximum interest rate established,
                         since it is calculated on the average (now smaller in relative terms) of the
                         entire financial system.
                    There has also been an increase in the amount and number of commissions on
                    loans that do not form part of the interest rate, since these charges have the same
                    attributes as insurance premiums (no limit and permit a lowering of the stated
                    interest rate).
                    Financial institutions offer, along with deposit accounts, life insurance policies that
                    reduce the cost of maintenance if the balance falls below the minimum required.
                    While such insurance products are optional, the manner in which the products are
                    marketed does not provide the customer with a way to analyze the costs and
                    benefits.
Recommendation      1. Prohibit, by regulation, the use of unified contracts to bundle other financial
                       products in a non-transparent way (and without opt-out clause) and rule out
                       mandatory insurance requirements except in specific circumstances such as
                       for mortgage property insurance or insurance required by law. In cases where
                       the individual must possess an insurance product (e.g. life insurance) to obtain
                       another financial product or service (e.g. credit), institutions must offer a choice
                       from at least two insurance companies and include information on the
                       coverage, restrictions and premiums to be paid. The client should also have
                       the option to endorse in favor of the financial entity - for the compliance of the
                       compulsory insurance policy in question - the policy he/she has already
                       contracted. The bank or finance company should incorporate into the contract
                       information on the minimum solvency standards (e.g. risk-rating of the
                       insurance company) that it is ready to accept in order to endorse the policy of
                       the insurance company hired by the customer.
                    2. Develop a regulation to introduce the concept of Total Financial Cost (TFC) of
                       credit, which would incorporate all interest, fees, charges and premiums
                       (resulting in the internal rate of return on the total loan). The inclusion of this
                       concept, along with an appropriate education would limit (at the margin) the
                       commercialization of tied products (as it would reduce the incentive to collect
                       more fees and lower interest rates).
                    3. Establish, for the purpose of maintaining the maximum interest rates provided
                       for in Art. 44 of the Organic Law of BCP, that rates be calculated based on the
                       TFC and not only on the effective interest rate.
                    4. Coordinate with other agencies that supervise credit providers (e.g. INCOOP
                       for cooperatives and SEDECO for other unsupervised credit providers) to
                       incorporate in their regulatory frameworks the concept of TFC, in order to
                       ensure that it is calculated and disseminated by all credit providers ("leveling
                       the playing field") and that all users receive the same standard of
                       transparency, regardless of which credit provider is utilized. The dissemination
                       and explanation to the general public of this concept (TCF) is simpler when
                       applied equally in all sectors.
Good Practice B.5   Preservation of Rights
                    Except where permitted by applicable legislation, in any communication or
                    agreement with a consumer, a bank should not exclude or restrict, or seek to
                    exclude or restrict:
                       i.  any duty to act with skill, care and diligence toward the consumer in
                           connection with the provision by the bank of any financial service or
                           product; or
                      ii.  any liability arising from the bank’s failure to exercise its duty to act
                         with skill, care and diligence in the provision of any financial service
                         or product to the consumer.
Description      Art. 28 of the Consumer Protection Law defines a set of general contractual
                 clauses as unfair, such as those that: strip obligations or eliminate or restrict
                 liability for damages; waiver or restrict consumer rights or expand the rights of the
                 other party; contain provisions that reverse the burden of proof to the detriment of
                 the consumer; impose the mandatory use of arbitration; among others. Such
                 clauses are general, and are no further guidance is provided for banking products.
                 In the case of credit cards (Resolution of May 5, 2007), general rules have been
                 established as to what appears in the credit card agreement without defining
                 specific terms deemed to be abusive.
                 The review and approval of contracts by the BCP-SIB is based on paragraph b) of
                 Art. 107 of the Banking Law, which empowers the BCP-SIB to "point out certain
                 obligations regarding the delivery and content of contract documents and
                 communications of interest settlements to customers ". Up to now, the financial
                 institutions complied with the clauses observed by the BCP-SIB; however it is not
                 entirely clear whether the BCP-SIB has the legal authority to conduct such reviews.
                 The only contracts that, by regulation, must be approved by the BCP-SIB are credit
                 card and basic account contracts. However, when a unique contract of banking
                 services is used, including deposit accounts, credit/debit cards and safe deposit
                 boxes, clauses related to these other products and services are also analyzed.
                 Contracts for deposit or credit only product (other than credit cards) are not
                 required to be approved by the BCP-SIB (and in practice are not analyzed or
                 reviewed off-site or one-site).
                 The process of review and approval of contracts by the BCP-SIB is done by the
                 Intendency of Licenses and Authorizations, supported (in aspects of consumer
                 protection) by the IIF. As such, clauses that delimit the liability of banks in
                 situations that do not call for it were detected. Some examples: (A) delineation of
                 responsibility for financial institutions when funds are withdrawn from one account
                 with a receipt containing a counterfeit but similar signature to the account holder;
                 (B) delineation of responsibility for the financial institutions for any type of error (not
                 only in cases where the customer can file suit). Another clause could be
                 considered abusive is the one that curtails the right of users to refer the submission
                 of cases exclusively to the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts of the city of Asunción
                 (or, at the option of the bank, the courts of the city of resident for the client). This
                 may be difficult, expensive and/or prevent the client from exercising his/her right to
                 sue the financial institution if he/she is based outside of Asunción.
                 The BCP-SIB has not made any comments on the use of unique banking
                 contracts, even though these customers could be buying products and financial
                 services which they are actually not interested in nor need.
                 The BCP-SIB has not developed an internal procedure for the analysis of
                 contracts, nor has it formalized a list of clauses that based on its own experience
                 and analysis could be identified as abusive. The implementation of the above
                 would ensure uniform treatment of contracts – during the review process and
                 authorization – regardless of what analysts later determine.
Recommendation   1. Analyze the feasibility of prohibiting entities from offering (in general or
                    exclusively) unique contracts for banking products and services. Alternatively,
                    require that such contracts contain clauses that require the user – with a
                       signature, and practical, simple procedures during the signing of the contract –
                       to accept or reject the acquisition of each individual financial product and
                       service included in the contract.
                    2. Develop a regulation stipulating (as an example) the clauses which are
                       deemed unfair and that banks may not include in their contracts of adhesion.
                       Alternatively, the BCP-SIB could issue a list of already objected clauses so that
                       entities become aware and adapt their contracts to the criteria adopted by the
                       supervisory body.
                    3. Establish BCP internal procedures and a database of challenged clauses for
                       review and approval of contracts.
                    4. Require entities to publish their contracts on their respective websites. This
                       would provide greater transparency and knowledge for the user, while
                       facilitating the process of off-site supervision.
Good Practice B.6   Regulatory Status Disclosure
                    In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio or otherwise, a
                    bank should disclose the fact that it is a regulated entity and the name and
                    contact details of the regulator.
Description         Banks and finance companies do not include in their advertising (brochures,
                    advertisements, etc.) information on being regulated and supervised by BCP-SIB.
                    However, only banks or finance companies that are authorized by the BCP may
                    use the word “bank” or finance company to describe themselves (Art. 5 of the
                    Banking Law).

                    Banks and finance companies are mandated to (and de facto also adhere to)
                    publish the coverage of the deposit insurance scheme in their branches and at
                    least once a month in newspapers (Resolution on Information Transparency
                    number 2 Act 125 of 2001, item 1). From the latter, users could infer that it is a
                    regulated financial institution, although this would be implied.

                    The existence of other depository institutions, such as cooperatives (possessing
                    significant market share in Paraguay) that are not regulated and supervised by the
                    BCP-SIB, means that the dissemination and publicity of the status of being
                    regulated and supervised by BCP is of even greater importance.
Recommendation      Establish a regulation, which requires financial institutions to include in their
                    advertisements and communications with customers standard wording (to be
                    included in the regulation) that it is an entity regulated and supervised by BCP-SIB.
Good Practice B.7   Terms and Conditions
                    Before a consumer opens a deposit, current (checking) or loan account at a
                    bank, the bank should make available to the consumer a written copy of its
                    general terms and conditions, as well as all terms and conditions that apply
                    to the account to be opened. Collectively, these Terms and Conditions
                    should include:
                    a. disclosure of details of the bank’s general charges;
                    b. a summary of the bank’s complaints procedures;
                    c. a statement regarding the existence of the office of banking ombudsman
                        or equivalent institution and basic information relating to its process and
                        procedures;
                    d. information about any compensation scheme that the bank is a member
                 of;
              e. an outline of the action and remedies which the bank may take in the
                 event of a default by the consumer;
              f. the principles-based code of conduct, if any, referred to in A.2 above;
              g. information on the methods of computing interest rates paid by or
                 charged to the consumer, any relevant non-interest charges or fees
                 related to the product offered to the consumer;
              h. any service charges to be paid by the consumer, restrictions, if any, on
                 account transfers by the consumer, and the procedures for closing an
                 account; and
              i. clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer should follow
                 in the case of unauthorized transactions in general, and stolen cards in
                 particular, as well as the bank’s liability in such cases facilitates the
                 reading of every word.
Description   The regulatory framework of BCP has established the characteristics of adhesion
              contracts only for credit cards (Resolution 5 Act 13 of 2007). For the remaining
              asset and liability products, there are no specific regulations on the minimum
              content or minimum terms and conditions. The Consumer Protection Law (Art. 24-
              28) established the concept of "contractual protection", defining what is meant by
              contract of adhesion; requiring that the contract is clear, legible and
              understandable; introducing the right of cancellation for the consumer; specifying
              the interpretation of contractual clauses in a way favorable to the consumer; and
              adding a number of clauses that are deemed abusive and thus considered void.
              Most contracts (with the exception of personal loan contracts) are presented to the
              BCP-SIB for approval. However, only in the case of basic savings account (Act 51,
              Resolution of July 25, 2013) such a product has to be offered separately from the
              unique contracts for banking services (in other financial products/services there is
              no request to that effect).
              Only some aspects of contracts have been regulated, such as the minimum font
              size (BCP-SIB Circular No. 575/2009), which states that "... no font should be less
              than 2.5 mm, of good contrast between the letter and support, with spaces
              between characters and lines that allow readability".
              On the other hand, BCP-SIB recently (Circular 735/2014 of June 11, 2014) recalled
              the obligation to give the client a copy of the contract before signing the credit card
              service (Paragraph 3.3 of the Credit Card Resolution) and this requirement was
              extended to any product involving signing an agreement between the parties
              (contract), the bank and the customer, in which case it must necessarily deliver a
              copy of the document.
              In practice, banks have developed unified banking contracts that have resulted in
              very similar, but not equal, offerings between them. They are applicable for
              opening a savings account; current account; debit card and credit card; and safe
              deposit boxes. Since the same contract is usable for any of these products, it is
              large (12 to 17 pages, depending on the specific contract) and it is unclear to the
              customer which products and services are optional, available or, on the contrary,
              obligatory at the time of signing (an example in this regard is the possibility that the
              bank grants a credit line for overdraft on the current account, even if the customer
              did not request it).
              Some commissions are incorporated into the text of the contract itself, but most are
                 referenced in the rate schedule.
                 In some cases, financial institutions do not include in the product documentation or
                 application the terms and conditions of the product; instead they simply reference
                 that a document containing such terms and conditions is available on the website
                 of the financial institution (the mission team found that some of these references
                 were outdated).
                 Contracts do not include mechanisms and processes for dealing with complaints
                 and compensation schemes, which the bank adheres to. The list of commissions
                 and fees is available on the boards / walls of the entities (in small letters) and on
                 their websites, but are generally not delivered together with contracts to the client.
                 Some entities include formulas for calculating interest and fees, while others
                 mention that they are available upon request. The rate schedule generally contains
                 a significant amount of fees for different items.
                 Furthermore, it is common practice for companies to negotiate with financial
                 institutions for the accreditation of wages in bank accounts. In these cases, the
                 customers have a preferential fee structure, more beneficial than the available
                 rates for the rest of the clientele.
                 There is a wide dispersion in commissions and fees: at the level of the entire
                 financial system, there are over 250 fees and commissions with different
                 denominations, some of which are the same concepts with different names (for
                 example, fee for the preparation of financial statements and charges for account
                 maintenance). Also, many charges are related to the intensity of use and average
                 balances held in the accounts, making it significantly more difficult for the user to
                 understand and compare products.
                 It has been observed that commissions are paid twice (with different names) for the
                 same concept (e.g. checkbook fee and excessive use of checks; fee arrears and
                 debt recovery fee). Entities do not provide to customers in general or in summary
                 form (quarterly or annually) a total and list of commissions that have been charged
                 over a certain period, such as a quarter or year (this would allow the customer to
                 view, simply, the impact commissions have on the operation of each account).
                 In one financial company that offers small credit operations, a signed copy of the
                 contract (or a copy of the promissory note) is not given to the customer. The
                 customer simply gets the liquidation of loans (signed by the cashier of the bank)
                 and a reminder stub with a repayment schedule. The information in the loan
                 settlement document does not include all contract information (e.g. it does not
                 specify the cost of early repayment).
                 Only some banks publish their standard contracts of adhesion on their websites,
                 and in some cases these are not easily accessible.
Recommendation   1. Require, via regulation or through the contract authorization process of BCP-
                    SIB, that financial institutions incorporate into their contracts their procedures
                    for handling complaints.
                 2. Prohibit the inclusion of clauses allowing the provision of services that are not
                    explicitly required by the client (unified contracts).
                 3. Move forward with the standardization of commissions and fees in order to
                    decrease their number and facilitate their understanding and comparison by
                    users. Prohibit the collection of fees twice for the same service.
                 4. Prohibit financial institutions from excluding the terms and conditions
                    applicable to the financial products from the documentation available at the
                       time of subscription (e.g. prohibit references to terms and conditions which are
                       available on the website of the entity and are not part the contract or offer).
                    5. Require that contracts include, at least in the Annex, a table comprising all
                       rates in effect at the time of contracting the financial product or service.
                    6. Establish that model contracts should be available at branches and other
                       service points of the financial institutions, and published in easily accessible
                       locations on their websites.
                    7. ASOBAN and ADEFI should promote the design of standard contracts for the
                       different products they offer, so that the user need not compare the general
                       contract between different financial institutions, but instead focuses on the
                       comparison of particular terms (e.g. commissions, interest rates, deadlines,
                       etc.)
Good Practice B.8   Key Facts Statement
                       a. A bank should have a Key Facts Statement for each of its accounts,
                           types of loans or other products or services and provide these to its
                           customers and potential customers.
                        b. The Key Facts Statement should be written in plain language and
                           summarize in a page or two the key terms and conditions of the
                           specific banking product or service.
                        c. Prior to a consumer opening any account at, or signing any loan
                           agreement with, the bank, the consumer should have delivered a
                           signed statement to the bank to the effect that he or she has duly
                           received, read and understood the relevant Key Facts Statement from
                           the bank.
                        d. Key Facts Statements throughout the banking sector should be
                           written in such a way as to allow consumers the possibility of easily
                           comparing products that are being offered by a range of banks.
Description         The regulatory framework does not require financial institutions to incorporate into
                    their contracts a key facts statement for the different products that they offer.
                    This aspect is relevant, considering that contracts are extensive and contain
                    excessive information, making it difficult for the client to identify the most relevant
                    terms.
Recommendation      1. Incorporate a regulatory requirement that institutions must complete and
                       deliver a key facts statement. In a first stage this could be mandated each time
                       a loan product is quoted and/or agreed upon, and in a second stage extended
                       to all other products. The key facts statement should form a supplementing
                       part of the contract. The content and format of this document should be
                       standardized for all banks and finance companies, and be part of the
                       regulatory framework issued by BCP.
                    2. For the design and content of this document, BCP should identify the most
                       relevant terms and conditions for the financial product or service. To this end,
                       the content and format should be discussed with the associations of banks and
                       finance companies so as to ensure that the variables chosen are
                       representative and are written in a simple and understandable manner. This
                       document must also include information for making complaints to the financial
                       institution, as well as options for alternate dispute resolution if the user is not
                       satisfied with (or has not received) the response to his / her complaint or
                       grievance. Also, the document should contain some key information
                       disclosures specific to the type of product involved.
                    3. Coordinate with INCOOP and SEDECO to ensure that the key fact statement
                       template, including its content and format, is adopted and introduced by all
                       financial service providers (banks, financial cooperatives, other credit
                       providers, etc.).
Good Practice B.9   Advertising and Sales Materials
                       a. Banks should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
                           procedures do not mislead customers.
                       b. All advertising and sales materials of banks should be easily
                           readable and understandable by the general public.
                       c. Banks should be legally responsible for all statements made in their
                           advertising and sales materials (i.e. be subject to the penalties under
                           the law for making any false or misleading statements).
Description         The Consumer Protection Law prohibits misleading advertising (Art. 35), defined as
                    any form of information, dissemination, or transmission made for advertising
                    purposes, which is totally or partially untrue, or otherwise able to induce consumer
                    error, even by omission.
                    Furthermore, the Transparency Resolution (Resolution 2, Act 123 of November
                    2001) states that institutions should provide information on interest rates, fees and
                    other expenses to the public in a clear and comprehensive way by placing signage
                    in visible and prominent places containing only such information. In addition,
                    financial institutions must make available to the public a statement with examples
                    of procedures for calculating interest rates and fees. The resolution also states (in
                    paragraph i)) the format for publishing interest rates, in daily newspapers with
                    national circulation, detailing the breakdown for liability (demand savings, deposits
                    and savings certificates for different maturities) or asset (current account overdraft,
                    personal loan, credit card, etc.) operations. Alongside interest rate information, a
                    legend about the coverage of deposit insurance is also required.
                    In practice, the information posted on boards within the entities is of limited utility.
                    The excessive number of commissions and fees, and in some cases, the
                    complexity of the calculations, may discourage the user from reading and
                    consulting this information.
                    Furthermore, paper brochures and product promotion web pages only describe
                    some characteristics of individual products, but do not provide information on costs
                    (e.g. there is no link between the product promotion page and its complete cost
                    structure). The fees and commission provided on the web pages are not easily or
                    directly accessible, compared with the product promotion pages. This practice
                    leaves the user with unclear and incomplete information.
                    The person in the bank or finance company with responsibility for consumer
                    protection is usually not consulted prior to the development of advertising material.
Recommendation      1. Require through regulation that entities link their advertisements to the
                       products’ associated costs (or facilitate access to them).
                    2. Additionally, those responsible for financial consumer protection within financial
                       institutions should intervene, prior to publication, in assessing advertisements
                       to determine that they are not misleading, confusing and/or incomplete.
Good Practice       Third-Party Guarantees
B.10             A bank should not advertise either an actual or future deposit or interest rate
                 payable on a deposit as being guaranteed or partially guaranteed unless
                 there is a legally enforceable agreement between the bank and a third party
                 who or which has provided such a guarantee. In the event such an
                 agreement exists, the advertisement should state:
                     i.  the extent of the guarantee;
                    ii.  the name and contact details of the party providing the guarantee;
                         and
                   iii.  in the event the party providing the guarantee is in any way
                         connected to the bank, the precise nature of that relationship.
Description      All banks, except the National Development Bank (BNF), which being a public
                 entity is guaranteed by the national government, are covered by deposit insurance
                 scheme administered by BCP. Financial entities, according to the requirements of
                 the regulatory framework, promote the scope and characteristics of such coverage
                 (one of the most used channels is through folders within branches and in footnotes
                 on interest rate schedules). Banks do not offer additional guarantees from third
                 parties other than the national Deposit Guarantee Fund (FGD), except in the case
                 of the BNF as mentioned.
Recommendation   No recommendations.
Good Practice    Professional Competence
B.11.            a. In order to avoid any misrepresentation of fact to a consumer, any bank
                    staff member who deals directly with consumers, or who prepares bank
                    advertisements (or other materials of the bank for external distribution),
                    or who markets any service or product of the bank should be familiar
                    with the legislative, regulatory and code of conduct guidance
                    requirements relevant to his or her work, as well as with the details of
                    any product or service of the bank which he or she sells or promotes.
                 b. Regulators and associations of banks should collaborate to establish
                    and administer minimum competency requirements for any bank staff
                    member who: (i) deals directly with consumers, (ii) prepares any Key
                    Facts Statement or any advertisement for the bank, or (iii) markets the
                    bank’s services and products.
Description      There is no specific regulation establishing a requirement for training by financial
                 institutions in matters related to financial consumer protection.
                 Financial institutions engage periodically in training staff on issues related to the
                 products and services they offer. However, the staff is not told the importance of
                 informing the customer fully (beyond what is required by formal regulation) on fees,
                 commissions and risks associated with the different products offered (at least those
                 that are offered in general, and, in the case of specific agreements with employers
                 to accredit salaries in deposit accounts, where the user could obtain further
                 information). These issues are exacerbated in cases of financial institutions that
                 work with agents (sales people or business) who sell loans on behalf of the
                 financial institution and receive little to no training for this (apart from incentives
                 associated exclusively with sales volume). A similar situation occurs in the
                 marketing of loans from financial institutions via cellular phone companies and their
                 non-bank agents.
                 There is no unified training at the sectoral level, led by associations of banks and
                    finance companies, for staff dealing directly with consumers or offering them any
                    key information document for advertising or marketing banking products and
                    services.
Recommendation      1. BCP regulations should incorporate the requirement for institutions to
                       adequately train client-facing staff (including those with whom they outsource
                       this activity), especially regarding the conditions and risks of financial products
                       offered, the evaluation of the customer profile, the care arrangements for
                       complaints and the regulatory framework. The entities should keep and make
                       available to the BCP-SIB documentary evidence of the training provided
                       (number and type of staff trained, content, dates, exams, results, etc.).
                    2. The association of banks (ASOBAN) and finance companies (ADEFI) should
                       develop and offer training courses, including assessments to ensure adequate
                       knowledge for all staff that interacts with customers. The content of the training
                       should focus on the proper evaluation of the user's profile and needs, to offer
                       those products and services that best suit the user. The entities should also
                       develop the skills to convey the characteristics and risks of the different
                       products and services and, in general terms, the current regulatory framework.



SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Statements
                    a. Unless a bank receives a customer’s prior signed authorization to the
                        contrary, the bank should issue, and provide the customer free of charge,
                        a monthly statement of every account the bank operates for the
                        customer.
                    b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions concerning the
                        account during the period covered by the statement; and (ii) provide
                        details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during the period
                        covered by the statement.
                    c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment
                        required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder
                        makes only the required minimum payment.
                    d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly indicate
                        the amount paid during the period covered by the statement, the total
                        outstanding amount still owing, the allocation of payment to the principal
                        and interest and, if applicable, the up-to-date accrual of taxes paid.
                    e. A bank should notify a customer of long periods of inactivity of any
                        account of the customer and provide a reasonable final notice in writing
                        to the customer if the funds are to be treated as unclaimed money.
                    f. When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such statements
                        should be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable format.
Description         The Civil Code contemplates the statements (summary) of current accounts (Art.
                    1402), without specifying the minimum content and frequency that it should have.
                    In addition, Art. 1405 provides that if the bank issues a passbook savings, the
                    interest income earned and fees paid should be recorded in it. BCP has regulated
                    the minimum information that must be sent to the holder of a credit card (see more
                    detail in Good Practice C.5.). Other than the abovementioned provisions, the legal
                    and regulatory framework does not provide specifics on statements to be directed
                    to financial customers.
                    In practice, financial institutions offer monthly financial statements in which the
                    movements of deposit accounts are detailed; and often also give the possibility to
                    customers to receive their statement by email.
                    Furthermore, the unified contract establishes that debits, credits, balances,
                    interests, commissions, deductions, adjustments, taxes, tariffs or fees associated
                    with the account will be reported in extracts or summaries of the account available
                    to the customer within 5 business days after the month following the relevant
                    extract or summary (unless the legislation provides for a different period). It is
                    established that the customer may withdraw and/or revise the statements of
                    account made available by the financial institution, whether in paper, in any of the
                    financial institution’s branches, through the website of the entity or by other
                    accessible means.
                    With regards to electronic banking contracts, the client choosing to receive
                    statements through this channel agrees to receive all account statements via the
                    internet and expressly authorizes the bank or finance company not to send
                    statements by any other means. Nonetheless, the financial institution will make
                    available to the client those paper statements in their headquarters on the fifth
                    business day of the month, being the date of notification and transmittance of the
                    extract.
                    There is no specific provision providing for customer notifications or other action to
                    be taken in the case of deposit accounts with an extended period of inactivity.
                    In the case of credit transactions, the payment schedule is given at the time of
                    disbursement, stating the amount and due date of each payment. Only in some
                    cases the amount of each payment is broken further down into interest and
                    principal payment and fees/expenses.
Recommendation      1. Develop a regulation establishing in a comprehensive way, minimum
                       standards related to statements, such as frequency, permissible media,
                       consent, content, etc.
                    2. Include in adhesion contracts between the bank and the customer that
                       information will be available in a paper bank statement or, for those that
                       operate with electronic banking, should be available at the headquarters office
                       or at the branch where the customer has opened the deposit account and/or
                       contracted credit (current practice states that it is only the headquarters that
                       must provide this information, which can be complex or costly to the customer).
                    3. Incorporate in the existing regulations an obligation to notify the user of periods
                       of inactivity (i.e. not making a deposit, transfer, payments, etc.) longer than one
                       year. This recommendation is to help prevent liability for fraudulent
                       transactions in the account.
                    4. Require at the time of disbursement of credits the listing of all payments,
                       including a schedule showing the components thereof (interest, principal,
                       commissions, expenses) for each installment to be paid.
Good Practice C.2   Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-interest Charges
                       a. A customer of a bank should be notified in writing by the bank of any
                            change in:
                                (i) The interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the
                                    customer as soon as possible; and
                                (ii) A non-interest charge on any account of the customer a
                                     reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the
                                     change.
                        b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she
                           should have the right to exit the contract without penalty, provided
                           such right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                        c. The bank should inform the customer of the foregoing right whenever
                           a notice of change under paragraph a. is made by the bank.
Description         The regulatory framework establishes that in the case of credit cards any changes
                    to the fees and/or charges must be communicated by the issuer to the user via a
                    statement at least 30 days prior to the change going into effect (point 3.1
                    subsection h) of Resolution 5 Act of May 13, 2007). Art. 1 letter g) of the
                    Transparency Resolution provides that financial institutions may not unilaterally
                    change the conditions that formed the basis for setting interest rates and
                    expenses other than interest rates. However, advance notice of changes prior to
                    the actual change in fees and commissions for other products and services (except
                    credit cards) is not contemplated.
                    Credits are generally fixed-rate and in local currency (Guarani).
                    In reviewing some contracts, the mission team found that entities provide notice of
                    the terms in news media and on their website, setting a deadline of 10 days to
                    express their rejection and interest to cancel the product. In some cases, the
                    advance notice and the possibility of product cancellation is explicit, but without
                    specifying that it is free of charge (this aspect is relevant, considering the existence
                    of significant commissions for prepayment of loans).
                    In general, the user is not alerted to information that may give him/her the option to
                    cancel his/her contract.
Recommendation      1. Introduce a standard notification period, after which changes in fees and
                       commissions can go into effect. This should apply to all products and services.
                    2. Specify that should the client reject such changes, he or she may cancel the
                       product or service purchased at no additional cost (e.g. no fee for
                       prepayment).
Good Practice C.3   Customer Records
                              a. A bank should maintain up-to-date records in respect of each
                                    customer of the bank that contain the following:
                              (i) a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and
                                    provide the customer’s profile;
                              (ii) the customer’s address, telephone number and all other
                                    customer contact details;
                              (iii) any information or document in connection with the customer
                                    that has been prepared in compliance with any statute,
                                    regulation or code of conduct;
                              (iv) details of all products and services provided by the bank to
                                    the customer;
                              (v) all documents and applications of the bank completed, signed
                                    and submitted to the bank by the customer;
                              (vi) a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in
                                    support of an application by the customer for the provision of
                                    a product or service by the bank; and
                               (vii)any other relevant information concerning the customer.
                    b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period for
                       retaining all such records and, throughout this period, the customer
                       should be provided ready access to all such records free of charge or for
                       a reasonable fee.
Description         Art. 99 of the Banking Law states that financial institutions must retain their books
                    and records for at least a five-year term and if, within that period, proceedings were
                    initiated against them, the obligation to retain all documents relating to the disputed
                    matter shall continue until the dispute is resolved. It provides that for the purposes
                    of the provisions of this article, the entity may use microfilm or other similar means.
                    Furthermore, Resolution 349 of November 2013 (section 2.13 on the Manual of
                    Prevention of Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism of the Secretariat of
                    Prevention of Money Laundering – SEPRELAD) provides that said manual should
                    contain "procedures to conserve, protect backups of operating records,
                    information, and documents relating to customers and end users, for a period of 5
                    years."
                    However, the client’s right to access all records kept at the bank is not covered by
                    the Paraguayan regulatory framework or the contracts analyzed by the mission
                    team.
                    Habeas Data is incorporated in Art. 135 of the Constitution. It establishes that
                    "everyone may access their own personal information and data or data on their
                    property that is contained in official or private records, and learn how those data
                    were used and their purpose. A user may apply to a competent magistrate to
                    update, correct or destroy any records that are erroneous or unlawfully affect their
                    rights. "
                    In practice, entities keep reasonably up to date records of their clients, including
                    contact information, documents required for the customer profile, details of the
                    products and services provided, documents/requests signed by the client, among
                    others.
Recommendation      Incorporate a regulation that banks must inform customers that they have the right
                    to access a copy of the documentation kept on them. Furthermore, this regulation
                    should contemplate that access to this documentation is free or at a reduced cost
                    for the client or person acting on his/her behalf, which will ensure that customers
                    have effective access to their personal data.
Good Practice C.4   Paper and Electronic Checks
                       a. The law and code of conduct should provide for clear rules on the
                           issuance and clearing of paper checks that include, among other
                           things, rules on:
                           (i) checks drawn on an account that has insufficient funds;
                           (ii) the consequences of issuing a check without sufficient funds;
                           (iii) the duration within which funds of a cleared check should be
                                 credited into the customer’s account;
                           (iv) the procedures on countermanding or stopping payment on a
                                 check by a customer;
                           (v) charges by a bank on the issuance and clearance of checks;
                           (vi) liability of the parties in the case of check fraud; and
                           (vii) error resolution
                       b. A customer should be told of the consequences of issuing a paper
                     check without sufficient funds at the time the customer opens a
                     checking account.
                  c. A bank should provide the customer with clear, easily accessible and
                     understandable information regarding electronic checks, as well the
                     cost of using them.
                  d. In respect of electronic or credit card checks , a bank should inform
                     each customer in particular:
                     (i) how the use of a credit card check differs from the use of a credit
                           card;
                     (ii) of the interest rate that applies and whether this differs from the
                           rate charged for credit card purchases;
                     (iii) when interest is charged and whether there is an interest free
                           period, and if so, for how long;
                     (iv) whether additional fees or charges apply and, if so, on what
                           basis and to what extent; and
                     (v) whether the protection afforded to the customer making a
                           purchase using a credit card check differs from that afforded
                           when using a credit card and, if so, the specific differences.
                  e. Credit card checks should not be sent to a consumer without the
                     consumer’s prior written consent.
                  f. There should be clear rules on procedures for dealing with
                     authentication, error resolution and cases of fraud.
Description   The concept of checks is provided for in the Civil Code. The Civil Code
              contemplates the consequences of writing checks against an account with
              insufficient funds for payment, as well as writing checks against a canceled bank
              account, foreign checks or an adulterated checkbook.
              Art. 10 of Law 805/96, as amended by Law 3711/09, provides that in the event that
              a check be presented at the time of collection and does not have sufficient
              available funds (or does not have authorization to overdraw) within the specified
              deadline will suffer a penalty of 2% of the amount of the returned check. In
              addition, people who in the course of a year write 3 checks, which are denied for
              insufficient funds, or write 10 checks which are denied for reasons attributable to
              the drawer of the check, shall be disqualified from operating a current account at
              any bank for one year. Such disqualification is published by the entity for 2 days in
              national newspapers and is disseminated to other banks by the BCP-SIB. After the
              period ends, debarment may be lifted after canceled checks are returned and the
              corresponding fines are paid.
              Art. 13 of Law 805/96, as amended by Law 3711/09, provides that the prohibition
              to operate a current account is 3 years if the person has drawn against a canceled
              current account or foreign check or adulterated check. In this case, the drawer will
              suffer a penalty of 1%. Notification of disqualification and lifting of the debarment
              operates in the same manner as disqualification for insufficient funds.
              If the prohibitions laid down in Articles 10 and 13 above were to occur because of
              an error caused by the drawer’s bank, the user may communicate this fact to the
              BCP-SIB for reinstatement within 48 hours.
              In addition, Art. 16 of Law 3711/09 establishes that banks should provide all
              current account holders, one a one time basis, with the extract of the current
              account along with the text of Laws 805/96 and 3711/09 that modified the Civil
                    Code on aspects relating to checks. Not all entities comply with this requirement
                    (only some entities deliver brochures about it, while others just keep this
                    information on their website).
                    In Resolution 22 Act 66 of November 2009, BCP regulates the procedures for
                    disqualification, cancellation, rehabilitation and other provisions relating to the
                    penalties provided for by Law 3711/09 in relation to issuing bank checks irregularly.
                    As such, the resolution requires that banks clarify and adopt internal mechanisms
                    and procedures to be used for the effective implementation of the Law and the
                    regulations issued by BCP, according to the nature of the legal relationship they
                    have with their account holders. It is worth noting that the Civil Code is not
                    consistent, in its current version, with the laws and regulations cited, making it
                    difficult in practice to know the current legal framework for checks.
                    No information on the terms of clearing time for checks was found, although
                    common practice is between 24 and 48 hours after the check has been deposited
                    for collection.
                    As to liability in situations of fraud, Art. 1733 of the Civil Code states that banks will
                    not pay checks if they appear counterfeit, adulterated, scraped, interlined or erased
                    in any essential way. On the other hand, Art. 1734 defines that a bank, which pays
                    for a forged check has to bear the consequences if: (a) the signature of the drawer
                    or endorser is noticeably forged; (b) the check has been altered in some way; and
                    (c) if the check does not correspond to the checkbook delivered to the drawer.
                    Furthermore, Art. 1735 provides that the drawer of the check is liable for damages
                    in cases (a) where counterfeit signature is not visibly apparent and the signature
                    corresponds to his or her own check stub; and (b) if the check is signed by a
                    dependent or authorized person.
                    In Paraguay, there is no operative electronic check or electronic check card,
                    beyond that which is currently promoted.
Recommendation      1. Homogenize the Civil Code in aspects related to current accounts and the
                       operation of checks in a single updated document containing the current
                       applicable legal framework related to the field of current accounts and check
                       operations.
                    2. Consider the inclusion in the legal framework of the non-payment of checks by
                       the drawer’s bank when the check stub has been denounced by the holder of
                       the bank account, as stolen or embezzled (currently there is no explicit
                       grounds for non-payment, if the signature does not differ significantly from the
                       signature recorded by the bank).
                    3. Establish, by regulation, a summary of all aspects of the Civil Code linked to
                       the operation of current accounts (today only the text of Law 805/96 and
                       3711/09, which modified the Civil Code in aspects relating to checks are
                       mandatory) that banks must comply with.
Good Practice C.5   Credit Cards
                       a. There should be legal rules on the issuance of credit cards and
                            related customer disclosure requirements.
                       b. Banks, as credit card issuers, should ensure that personalized
                            disclosure requirements are made in all credit card offers, including
                            the fees and charges (including finance charges), credit limit, penalty
                            interest rates and method of calculating the minimum monthly
                            payment
    c. Banks should not be permitted to impose charges or fees on pre-
       approved credit cards that have not been accepted by the customer.
    d. Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment
       warnings on each monthly statement and the total interest costs that
       will accrue if the cardholder makes only the requested minimum
       payment.
    e. Among other things, the legal rules should also:
       (i) restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing of
             credit cards to young adults (below age of 21) who have no
             independent means of income;
       (ii) require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest rates
             increase;
       (iii) prevent the application of new higher penalty interest rates to
             the entire existing balance, including past purchases made at a
             lower interest rate;
       (iv) limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
             consumers exceed their credit limits;
       (v) prohibit a practice called ―double-cycle billing‖ by which card
             issuers charge interest over two billing cycles rather than one;
       (vi) prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly payments in
             ways that maximize interest charges to consumers; and
       (vii) limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards issued to
             individuals with bad credit.
    f. There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of
       unauthorized transactions and of stolen cards, with the ensuing
       liability of the customer being made clear to the customer prior to his
       or her acceptance of the credit card.
    g. Banks and issuers should conduct consumer awareness programs
       on the misuse of credit cards, credit card over-indebtedness and
       prevention of fraud.
Resolution 5 Act 13 of May 2007 establishes the specific rules for the issuance,
operation, and administration of credit cards by financial institutions.
This regulation establishes that entities issuing credit cards should inform the BCP-
SIB of the type of cards they operate and forward sample contracts with clients,
businesses accepting cards and credit card administrators. Adhesion contracts
with customers must contain at least: identification of the issuer; original numbering
of the credit card; identification of persons authorized to operate the credit card; the
credit limit (in local and foreign currency, and may be modified upon notice to the
holder by the issuer of the card); term of the conditions; terms and conditions
applicable to the collection of fees and charges (that may be modified upon notice
by the issuer); interest rate applicable; cost of fees/service charges applicable to
emission, excess of credit limit, installment purchase, purchases abroad, insurance
coverage, and other services not attributable to interest rate costs, requiring that
any amendments thereto are notified to the holder at least 30 days before the
effective date of the change; security measures relating to the use of the card and
procedures and responsibilities in the event of theft, loss, forgery or falsification,
including the requirement that the institution has a system to cover fraud; the
grounds for suspension, termination, and/or cancellation of contracts; and
mechanisms for dispute resolution.
In general the credit card agreement must contain the rights conferred to the
customer by the general Consumer Protection Law.
The Resolution also provides that if the contract provides for automatic renewal of
the card, the conditions must be identified in the same contract and should enable
the user to discontinue the service through a notification given 30 days in advance.
It states that there must be copies of the contract for both the issuer (financial
institution) and the cardholder and co-titular cardholders, and the contract must be
in a clear and easily readable font. The same Resolution determines that the
contract will be enacted upon reception of the credit card by the cardholder,
pending proof of delivery by the issuer (financial institution). Any amendment to the
contract must be communicated to the BCP-SIB with at least two months’ notice
prior to its enactment.
In regard to the warnings to users about the use of the credit card and the
consequences of missed payments, Resolution 3 Act 7 of January 2014 states that
financial institutions should include physical and electronic extracts of credit
information regarding payments arising from the use of credit cards based on a
form provided by that resolution. The content of this information includes: (a) the
highlighted expiration date extract; (b) legends with warnings about the
consequences (payment of default interest and penalties) of non-receipt on the
date shown of at least the minimum payment, and-in the case where the minimum
payment was made and no new purchases were initiated, the months required to
pay down the debt and the total amount that the customer would eventually end up
paying. The entry into force of this provision was March 2014, which was
postponed to May 2014 (Resolution 34 Act 12 of February 2014).
Some aspects and clauses of the credit card contract observed in the unified
contract that financial institutions employ could be considered abusive. Some
examples are: (a) Accounts receivable and other unpaid expenses may be claimed
legally by the entity before the Courts of Asunción (in some cases, at the option of
the bank, it may be in the courts of the client's home: in that case, the client may
see limited right of defense if he or she lives in places far from Asunción and the
financial institution did not exercise the option of claiming in the courts of his or her
domicile; (b) the user agrees to inform in writing the bank (with delivery receipt by
the same) on the loss, diversion, damage or theft of his/her credit cards. The
complaint may be done by telephone and valid for 48 hours. Even after making the
complaint the user is responsible for the fraudulent charges made with the card
until two days after communication with the bank regarding what happened: the
user is unprotected even after making a complaint to the bank .
Some banks have been more proactive in alerting consumers about the risks
associated with using credit cards. However, in some cases certain conflicts of
interest arise, where the business objectives of the entity collide with offering
appropriate advice to the user. For example, the minimum payment warning from a
financial institution establishes that "the minimum payment is the smallest amount
required by the Bank, if I do not pay on time it may cause additional unnecessary
expenses. We recommend that whenever possible users pay a bit more than the
minimum amount in order to increase available credit and reduce the debt ” when in
reality paying the entire outstanding balance is the best advice, rather than “ a bit
more than the minimum”, and the user should only not pay off the balance in
                        exceptional circumstances.
                        With regards to the legal framework applicable to credit cards, there is a draft law
                        under consideration (led by SEDECO) that specifically addresses these issues,
                        called "Standards of Transparency and Consumer Protection in the Use of Credit
                        Cards." The most important aspects that are incorporated in the draft, as compared
                        to the regulatory framework defined by BCP are: (a) the right to transparency and
                        information; (b) the requirement that purchases can be accessed "online"; (c)
                        highlighting in bold the clauses of the contract obligations involving users; (d)
                        making explicit those aspects of the contract to be considered null and void; (b)
                        granting a 90 day period for payment of fees by the user without interest; (f) limiting
                        account payment fees; (g) granting a waiver to the co-debtor for the debtor
                        exceeding the line of credit originally granted (unless given proper notification of
                        the increase) and a late fee for the title debtor; (h) prohibiting having to
                        demonstrate that a card is lost or stolen prior to blocking; (i) requiring that the
                        issuer offers a phone number with 24 hour access where the cardholder can check
                        the balance; (j) requiring that information in the extract be approved by the BCP-
                        SIB based on good practices in the use of credit cards; (k) requiring the BCP-SIB
                        to verify compliance with promotions made by credit cards. Finally, the bill provides
                        that BCP is the institution empowered to issue the necessary rules for
                        implementation of the law, which must still be complied with by those institutions
                        not under the supervision of the BCP-SIB.
                        Regarding pre-approved cards, this was once in widespread use in the
                        Paraguayan market, but is no longer used.
Recommendation          1. Observe, and require modification of those contract clauses involving credit
                           cards that affect the rights of users (such as those mentioned above).
                        2. Consider the publication of the observed clauses for financial institutions to
                           review and adapt to, prior to the presentation of the model contracts for
                           analysis and approval by the BCP-SIB.
                        3. Revise some aspects of the draft SEDECO credit card law, such as financing
                           fees without interest (point "e") which would result in higher costs for all users;
                           and the requirement that the BCP-SIB verify compliance with the promotions
                           made by credit card issuers (point "k"), since this activity could be very
                           demanding in terms of human resources affected by that institution.
                        4. Enact the revised credit card law, which provides a better legal and regulatory
                           framework and a "level playing field" between bank and non-bank credit card
                           issuers.
                        5. Review and propose amendments to the credit card law in the following
                           articles: (a) fixing a period of 90 days interest free to pay commissions: the
                           usefulness of this article is not understood, since it would tend to make cards
                           more expensive; (b) requiring that the BCP-SIB audit all promotions for credit
                           cards: this could be very resource-consuming for the BCP-SIB.
                                                                             6
Good Practice C.6       Internet Banking and Mobile Phone Banking



6
  “Internet banking” is defined as banking services that customers may access via the Internet. The access to the
Internet could be through a computer, mobile phone (“mobile phone banking”), or any other suitable device. Payment
services that are only initiated via the internet using a mobile phone (e.g. by a mobile banking application using an
app on a smart phone) are not considered to be mobile payments; instead they are categorized as internet payments.
This interpretation is consistent with the view of the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the
                            a. The provision of internet banking and mobile phone banking (m-
                               banking) should be supported by a sound legal and regulatory
                               framework.
                            b. Regulators should ensure that banks or financial service providers
                               providing internet and m-banking have in place a security program
                               that ensures:
                                   (i) data privacy, confidentiality and data integrity;
                                   (ii) authentication, identification of counterparties and access
                                         control;
                                   (iii) non-repudiation of transactions;
                                   (iv) a business continuity plan; and
                                   (v) the provision of sufficient notice when services are not
                                         available.
                            c. Banks should also implement an oversight program to monitor third-
                               party control conditions and performance, especially when agents
                               are used for carrying out m-banking.
                            d. A customer should be informed by the bank whether fees or charges
                               apply for internet or m-banking and, if so, on what basis and how
                               much.
                            e. There should be clear rules on the procedures for error resolution
                               and fraud.
                            f. Authorities should encourage banks and service providers to
                               undertake measures to increase consumer awareness regarding
                               internet and m-banking transactions.
Description            As for safeguards of financial institutions to ensure adequate control of
                       technological risk, Resolution 4 Act 67 of December 2012 established the rules for
                       operational risk management, which include information technology. It defines the
                       set of tools and methods used to carry out the management of information,
                       including hardware, software, operating systems, database management,
                       networking, multimedia, and more. Regarding the latter, paragraph 4.3 of the
                       Resolution states that "entities should manage the risks associated with
                       information technology as a result of security breaches and operational continuity
                       of computer systems, errors in the development and implementation of such
                       systems, information quality problems, inadequate investment in technology,
                       among others. Institutions should have formal policies and procedures to ensure
                       proper planning and management of information technology...".
                       Additionally, Resolution SB.SG 179/2005 regulates safety procedures for
                       transactions through electronic means. It requires that the following security
                       precautions be undertaken to ensure the integrity of information transmitted
                       through the network: (a) include authentication and encryption algorithms; (b) have
                       a good technology architecture and constant monitoring of networks; (c) have
                       strong implementation rules for "firewalls" (including intrusion detection systems,



Bank for International Settlements (BIS), who is the relevant standard setting body on payment and settlement
systems. However, for practical reasons and due to the importance of mobile money in the country, Good Practice
C.6. is intended here as also covering mobile payments and, to some extent, e-money. Further analysis on e-money
issuers in Paraguay is provided in Section IV.
                    access control, etc.); (d) adhere to the standards in the Manual of Internal Control
                    of Information Systems.
                    The unified banking contracts analyzed by the mission team establish a specific
                    paragraph where the client agrees to the operation of electronic banking. There is
                    also a reference to the personal and private key that will serve to identify the holder
                    of the current account, savings account, credit card, or other service that uses
                    electronic banking. It is established that the key replaces the customer's signature,
                    being purely for personal use, setting aside the consequences of its use by third
                    parties.
                    In the same contracts the customer is informed that the bank does not assume any
                    responsibility for error, fault or negligence on the part of its representatives or
                    dependents of the client. It also provides that the bank may recoup damages
                    suffered by the breach of the obligations of the client, without questioning what
                    other deposits or other credits that the customer has in his or her favor (including
                    the possibility of over-drafting the current account). The clauses cited are
                    considered to be abusive clauses and may be invalidated as contemplated in Art.
                    28 of the Consumer Protection Law (e.g. subsection "a" refers to those that
                    eliminate/restrict liability for damages; and subsection "c" refers to those imposing
                    the burden of proof to the detriment of the consumer).
                    The unified contracts provide for the case of loss or theft of the secret key, where
                    the user must immediately notify the bank of the lost password; to make the
                    notification valid, it must be made in writing the first business day after the block
                    request is made and must necessarily be accompanied by a copy of the police
                    report. If the customer’s block is lifted due to failure to file the note and police
                    report, the client would face serious negative consequences such as undue
                    purchases generated in the account. Only in some entities were specific alerts
                    about the risks and precautions to be taken in the operation of electronic banking
                    observed.
Recommendation      1. The BCP-SIB should ensure that unified adhesion contracts cannot hold
                       harmless the financial institutions in case of error, fault or negligence of its
                       representatives.
                    2. The BCP-SIB should also prohibit clauses that enable the entity to initiate
                       debits (or overdraft the customer) for damages that are not previously reported
                       or challenged by the client.
                    3. Prohibit the requirement of filing a formal note with police report as a
                       requirement for an account and password block.
Good Practice C.7   Electronic Fund Transfers and Remittances
                        a. There should be clear rules on the rights, liabilities and
                           responsibilities of the parties involved in any electronic fund transfer.
                        b. Banks should provide information to consumers on prices and
                           service features of electronic fund transfers and remittances in easily
                           accessible and understandable forms. As far as possible, this
                           information should include:
                               (i) the total price (e.g. fees for the sender and the receiver,
                                     foreign exchange rates and other costs);
                               (ii) the time it will take the funds to reach the receiver;
                               (iii) the locations of the access points for sender and receiver;
                                     and
                            (iv) the terms and conditions of electronic fund transfer services
                                 that apply to the customer.
                     c. To ensure transparency, it should be made clear to the sender if the
                        price or other aspects of the service vary according to different
                        circumstances, and the bank should disclose this information
                        without imposing any requirements on the consumer.
                     d. A bank that sends or receives an electronic fund transfer or
                        remittance should document all essential information regarding the
                        transfer and make this available to the customer who sends or
                        receives the transfer or remittance without charge and on demand.
                     e. There should be clear, publicly available and easily applicable
                        procedures in cases of errors and frauds in respect of electronic fund
                        transfers and remittances.
                     f. A customer should be informed of the terms and condition of the use
                        of credit/debit cards outside the country including the foreign
                        transaction fees and foreign exchange rates that may be applicable.
Description      The operation of electronic fund transfers is covered by the General Rules of the
                 National Payment Systems in Paraguay (SIPAP), Resolution 1 Act 67 of December
                 2012. Among other things, paragraph 5 of the Resolution sets the deadline for
                 clearing the funds, and the consequences for breaching this period (including
                 consideration of the interest rates that apply on the funds delayed in clearing). It
                 also clearly defines the responsibility of the sending and receiving transfer
                 institution. It provides that the filing of claims for breaches of the terms of clearing
                 must be submitted by the customer to the respective financial institution, which
                 should then investigate with all due diligence, following which the customer can file
                 a complaint with BCP if still not satisfied.
                 In regard to remittances, Resolution 9 Act 69 of 2004 states that entities can only
                 perform routine services on behalf of third party financial institutions. Furthermore,
                 Resolution 9 Act 92 of 2007 provides minimum requirements and procedures that
                 supervised entities must meet for foreign currency remittances. The resolution
                 specifies the obligation to provide the BCP-SIB with statistical data on the
                 purposes, currency, amounts and geographical destinations of remittances. It also
                 sets safety requirements for the transport and registration of foreign currency within
                 the country, hiring theft insurance, registration of transportation companies, among
                 others. Finally, Resolution 17 Act 18 of March 2013 establishes the requirement to
                 have prior authorization to operate in physical remittances of funds abroad
                 (including requirements for correspondent countries, monitoring of subjects, among
                 others).
                 The rights and obligations of users are not mentioned and neither are obligations
                 by financial institutions to channel information to the user about costs, fees, terms,
                 rates of exchange and mechanisms for correcting errors in remitting funds.
                 The tariffs published by financial institutions generally include a schedule of fees
                 payable by customers for both domestic and international wire transfers. In the
                 latter case, they vary if the clearing is immediate, of 24 hours or 48 hours. In
                 general, it is not specified if there are costs to the transferee, or if it is credited in
                 local currency or in the currency of the remitting country.
Recommendation   Require through regulation that financial institutions provide information on the
                 costs of remittance, terms of clearing, the rates of exchange (in the case of
                    remittances to/from abroad) and resolution mechanisms for errors and fraud.
Good Practice C.8   Debt Recovery
                       a. A bank, agent of a bank and any third party should be prohibited from
                           employing any abusive debt collection practice against any customer
                           of the bank, including the use of any false statement, any unfair
                           practice or the giving of false credit information to others.
                       b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a bank, the person
                           who can collect any such debt and the manner in which that debt can
                           be collected should be indicated to the customer of the bank when
                           the credit agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into between
                           the bank and the customer.
                       c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a bank
                           customer’s debt without informing that party of the debt collector’s
                           right to do so; and the type of information that the debt collector is
                           seeking.
                       d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed
                           by law, the borrower should be:
                           (i) notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of
                                 days;
                           (ii) informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt; and
                           (iii) provided with information as to where to make payment, as well
                                 as the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact information.
Description         The general Consumer Protection Law includes a provision concerning debt
                    recovery practices that could be considered abusive or prohibited (Articles 29 and
                    30 under Chapter VI "Credit Transactions") without providing any specific
                    examples. The regulatory framework issued by BCP does not cover unfair
                    practices for credit recovery.
                    In practice, the loan contracts do not establish procedures that the financial
                    institution must utilize for the recovery of debt in case the client enters in default.
                    The only aspect covered in the contracts refers to the fees that apply to debt
                    recovery: collection phone call charges, letters of complaint, overdue fees, among
                    others. In many cases, these charges are excessive, do not align with the actual
                    costs of the services provided and reflect an implicit violation of the maximum rates
                    (this may be due in part to the existence of a maximum interest rate of up to 30 %
                    above the average rate of interest charged for consumer loans in each currency).
                    In terms of effective management of debt recovery, it generally starts with phone
                    calls and later escalates to letters and eventually visits. Some entities recover
                    nonperforming loans by working with third parties (related or not to the financial
                    institution); in general, financial institutions do not review the mechanisms
                    employed by these companies for credit recovery, but instead focus principally on
                    the recovery rate.
                    Furthermore, some past due loans are sold to third parties. This transfer does not
                    require the consent of the debtor (Art. 524 of the Civil Code). This type of
                    operations is not very common in the financial system, and the degree of
                    information that is provided in these cases to the debtors in question is unknown.
Recommendation      1. Include, in a regulation to be issued by BCP, recovery practices that are
                       considered unfair. This could include a limit on the days and hours that phone
                       calls can be made, a ban on contacting with third parties other than the owner
                       or guarantor of debt, among others.
                    2. The same rules should include an obligation to report on debt recovery
                       mechanisms that the bank will use in case the credit falls in arrears, including
                       (if applicable), to whom and from when the credit may be transferred to a third
                       party to continue its recovery, notification of that transfer to the client, etc.
                    3. The financial institution must have knowledge of the practices used by third
                       party firms in debt recovery, making sure that their techniques and
                       mechanisms do not contain abusive practices and/or practices prohibited by
                       regulation.
                    4. If in the process of recovery the debt is sold to a third party, the transferor or
                       the transferee firm must inform the debtor, who remains bound by the debt, of
                       the transaction and information on where the debtor can direct payments and
                       contact the new creditor.
Good Practice C.9   Foreclosure of mortgaged or charged property
                       a. In the event that a bank exercises its right to foreclose on a property
                           that serves as collateral for a loan, the bank should inform the
                           consumer in writing in advance of the procedures involved, and the
                           process to be employed by the bank to foreclose on the property it
                           holds as collateral and the consequences thereof to the consumer.
                       b. At the same time, the bank should inform the consumer of the legal
                           remedies and options available to him or her in respect of the
                           foreclosure process.
                       c. If applicable, the bank should draw the consumer’s attention to the
                           fact that the bank has a legal right to recover the balance of the debt
                           due in the event the proceeds from the sale of the foreclosed
                           property are not sufficient to fully discharge the outstanding amount.
                       d. In the event the mortgage contract or charge agreement permits the
                           bank to enforce the contract without court assistance, the bank
                           should ensure that it employs professional and legal means to
                           enforce the contract, including regarding the sale of the property.
Description         Art. 93 of the Banking Law states that mortgages in favor of a financial institution
                    duly registered in the respective registry subsist with all their legal effects until the
                    complete cancellation of the obligation they guarantee for a period of twenty years
                    from the day of registration, having to be re-registered before the legal deadline. It
                    also provides that the creditor may release the debtor of guarantee rights on
                    properties with unpaid balances, provided that they have amortized over 50% of
                    the value.
                    On the other hand, for the enforcement of mortgage guarantees in favor of the
                    financial institution, Art. 94 of the Banking Law states that it may proceed with the
                    foreclosure sale of the property, as a whole or divided into lots, provided the parties
                    have not agreed on a price in writing, to cover the value of debt, including interest
                    and costs, without appraisals by experts. In case there is no bidder in the first
                    auction, a new auction should be realized with a 25% on the asking price, or
                    adjudication to the creditor will be performed.
                    Enforcing mortgage-backed loans requires the intervention of the courts, and all
                    deadlines are contained in the judicial legislation.
                    The mortgage market is not very developed in Paraguay. Housing loans
                    represented, as of April 2014, only 3.1% of total credit. On the other hand, new
                 products are being offered including deeds of trust property, which includes a more
                 streamlined settlement process in situations of default.
Recommendation   Require financial institutions, via regulation, to inform the debtor in advance and in
                 writing about the procedures involved, prior to beginning the process of
                 foreclosure. Such information should also contain legal remedies and options
                 available to the debtor as well as a clarification that the foreclosure does not relieve
                 the borrower of the debt, if it does not cover the entire debt.
Good Practice    Bankruptcy of Individuals
C.10                a. A bank should inform its individual customers in a timely manner and
                       in writing on what basis the bank will seek to render a customer
                       bankrupt, the steps it will take in this respect and the consequences
                       of any individual’s bankruptcy.
                    b. Every individual customer should be given adequate notice and
                       information by his or her bank to enable the customer to avoid
                       bankruptcy.
                    c. Either directly or through its association of banks, every bank should
                       make counseling services available to customers who are bankrupt
                       or likely to become bankrupt.
                    d. The law should enable an individual to:
                            (i) declare his or her intention to present a debtor’s petition for
                                  a declaration of bankruptcy;
                            (ii) propose a debt agreement;
                            (iii) propose a personal bankruptcy agreement; or
                            (iv) enter into voluntary bankruptcy.
                    e. Any institution acting as the bankruptcy office or trustee responsible
                       for the administration and regulation of the personal bankruptcy
                       system should provide adequate information to consumers on their
                       options to deal with their own unmanageable debt.
Description      The legal framework for bankruptcy, bankruptcy certificates and the
                 order/execution of bankruptcy is contained in the Bankruptcy Law (Law 154/69).
                 The Law distinguishes and establishes different requirements and treatment for
                 commercial debtors and non-commercial debtors in a situation of inability to pay. In
                 the case of the personal debtors, the debtor must present accounting records and
                 inspection records, and have had a proper accounting, among others.
                 The topics contemplated in the Bankruptcy Law include: the convening of creditors;
                 the appointment of the liquidator; verification of debts; holding and subsequent
                 approval of the bankruptcy certificate; legal effects and eventual
                 annulment/termination of the bankruptcy certificate; the withdrawal and revocation
                 of declarative bankruptcy; legal effects of bankruptcy, including the resulting
                 measures following the bankruptcy filing; the close of the bankruptcy proceedings
                 and reopening of them; the rating of the financial conduct of the bankrupt debtor;
                 rehabilitation of the debtor that has been declared bankrupt. Finally, the
                 procedures to be followed for the implementation of the above aspects are
                 included.
                 Overall, for consumer and individual loans, bankruptcy is not generally applicable
                 unless the loans are used for commercial purposes.
                 In practice, financial institutions do not advise their clients who are in trouble on
                 alternatives at their disposal in a situation of inability to pay and insolvency.
                    From a regulatory point of view, the BCP rules provide that the notice of creditors
                    or the bankruptcy certificate entail an immediate deterioration of the borrower's
                    rating (and higher provisioning by the financial institution).
Recommendation      1. Issue a BCP regulation requiring that financial institutions should provide
                       objective information and advice to their clients about the legal channels they
                       have at their disposal to restructure their debts in an orderly manner.
                    2. Consider incorporating in the legal framework (Bankruptcy Law) a specific
                       figure or entity to facilitate (in a less onerous and more agile manner) the
                       process of bankruptcy certification or resolution for individuals (for relatively
                       small amounts of debt).



SECTION D           PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION


Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                    a. The banking transactions of any bank customer should be kept
                       confidential by his or her bank.
                    b. The law should require a bank to ensure that it protects the
                       confidentiality and security of the personal data of its customers against
                       any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such
                       information, as well as against unauthorized access.
Description         As a matter of principle, the legal framework provides that banking transactions are
                    covered by the duty of secrecy. These matters are regulated in Articles 84, 85 and
                    86 of the Banking Law.
                    This confidentiality restriction covers not only the financial institution (including its
                    directors, management, board, and staff) but also the directors and officers of the
                    BCP (except in the case of information regarding holders of current accounts
                    closed because of the issuance of checks without provision of funds);; as well as
                    partners, agents, contractors and employees of audit firms that examine the
                    balance sheets of financial institutions.
                    Additionally, the lender must have adequate management information systems and
                    risk management operations (such as those described in Good Practice C.6.).
Recommendation      Consider the incorporation of a specific regulatory requirement that states that
                    financial institutions should protect the confidentiality and security of personal data
                    of their customers against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or
                    integrity of such information, as well as against unauthorized access.
Good Practice D.2   Sharing Customer’s Information
                    a. A bank should inform its customer in writing:
                            a. of any third-party dealing for which the bank is obliged to share
                               information regarding any account of the customer, such as any
                               legal enquiry by a credit bureau; and
                            b. as to how it will use and share the customer’s personal
                               information.
                    b. Without the customer’s prior written consent, a bank should not sell or
                       share account or personal information regarding a customer of the bank
                        to or with any party not affiliated with the bank for the purpose of
                        telemarketing or direct mail marketing.
                    c. The law should allow a customer of a bank to stop or ―opt out‖ of the
                       sharing by the bank of certain information regarding the customer and,
                       prior to any such sharing of information for the first time, every bank
                       should be required to inform each of its customers in writing of his or her
                       rights in this respect.
                    d. The law should prohibit the disclosure by a third party of any banking-
                       specific information regarding a customer of a bank.
Description         Art. 84 of the Banking Law prohibits sharing customer information. This restriction
                    is lifted only when authorized by the customer in writing or when the conditions set
                    forth in the following articles (as mentioned in Good Practice in D.3.) are met. The
                    prohibition does not apply where the disclosure of the amounts received from
                    different customers is rendered for the purposes of forced liquidation of bank or
                    financial institutions.
                    Moreover, Art. 5 of the Private Information Law states that data from natural or
                    legal persons who reveal, describe or estimate their financial position, financial
                    solvency or compliance with obligations may only be published or distributed when:
                    (a) those persons have given express written permission to share data on their
                    obligations that are unclaimed in legal action; (b) in the case of information or
                    qualifications that public or private entities must publish; (c) when stemming from
                    public sources of information.
                    The Law does not specifically state the client's ability to retract the authorization
                    that had been granted to raise the duty of confidentiality; and a specific clause to
                    that effect is not observed in contracts.
Recommendation      Require contracts to explicitly grant the customer the power to withdraw
                    authorization for information being supplied to a database, except in the case of
                    information, which must necessarily be submitted to the authorities, such as
                    information sent to the BCP-SIB credit registry.
Good Practice D.3   Permitted Disclosures
                    The law should provide for:
                        a) the specific rules and procedures concerning the release to any
                           government authority of the records of any customer of a bank;
                        b) rules on what the government authority may and may not do with any
                           such records;
                        c) the exceptions, if any, that apply to these rules and procedures; and
                        d) the penalties for the bank and any government authority for any
                           breach of these rules and procedures.
Description         Art. 86 of the Banking Law sets out the exceptions to the duty of secrecy. In this
                    sense, bank secrecy does not apply when the information is required by: (a) BCP
                    or the BCP-SIB in exercise of their statutory powers; (b) the relevant judicial
                    authority under judgment rendered at trial, in which cases appropriate measures to
                    ensure privacy should be taken; (c) the Comptroller General of the Republic and
                    the tax authorities within their mandated powers on the basis that it must relate to a
                    particular charge and must be an ongoing tax verification with respect to that
                    charge and must have been previously formally requested; and (d) credit
                    institutions which exchange among themselves, according to reciprocity and
                    banking practices, while preserving bank secrecy. The duty of secrecy is
                    transmitted to the institutions and relevant persons. In all cases, when in judicial or
                    administrative proceedings for which information on operations covered by bank
                    secrecy has been shared, bank secrecy will cease automatically if the guilt of the
                    beneficiary can be derived from said operations. Those involved in a case that
                    resulted in the prosecution being dismissed maintain their right to privacy to protect
                    their operations.
                    In addition, Art. 88 of the Banking Law provides sanctions for breach of secrecy,
                    whereas the violation of the provisions by persons covered by the duty of secrecy
                    is considered a serious labor and disciplinary offense, regardless of any criminal
                    liability as established by law.
                    Furthermore, Art. 10 of the Private Information Law establishes penalties that apply
                    when the law is violated. The penalties depend on the type of violation committed
                    and by whom (e.g. updating/correcting information to be provided to the credit
                    bureau), varying between 50 and 100 minimum wages. Such penalties shall be
                    doubled, tripled, etc. in the case of recidivism. The application of fines for
                    recidivism requires that prior claims by the individual concerned are received in
                    writing.
Recommendation      No recommendation.
Good Practice D.4   Credit Reporting
                    a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with
                       sufficient enforcement authority.
                    b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and sufficient
                       data. The system should also maintain rigorous standards of security
                       and reliability.
                    c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting
                       system should be: (i) clear, predictable, non-discriminatory,
                       proportionate and supportive of consumer rights; and (ii) supported by
                       effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.
                    d. In facilitating cross-border transfer of credit data, the credit reporting
                       system should provide appropriate levels of protection.
                    e. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the right of
                       the consumer
                                (i) to consent to information-sharing based upon the knowledge
                                    of the institution’s information-sharing practices;
                                (ii) to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once
                                     a year), subject to proper identification;
                                (iii) to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-
                                      optimal conditions/prices due to credit report information;
                                (iv) to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such
                                     as six months;
                                (v) to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted
                                    and to mark (flag) information that is in dispute;
                          (vi) to reasonable retention periods of credit history, for instance
                               two years for positive information and 5-7 years for negative
                               information; and
                          (vii) to have information kept confidential and with sufficient
                               security measures in place to prevent unauthorized access,
                               misuse of data, or loss or destruction of data.
              f.   The credit registries, regulators and associations of banks should
                   undertake campaigns to inform and educate the public on the rights of
                   consumers in the above respects, as well as the consequences of a
                   negative personal credit history.
Description   There are basically two sources of credit reports for individuals: the BCP-SIB credit
              registry and private credit bureaus (although one company has almost exclusivity
              on the entire market).


              BCP-SIB Credit Registry
              In the case of the public credit registry, operated by the BCP-SIB, all financial
              institutions supervised by the BCP-SIB must report risks, both direct and indirect,
              incurred by an entity or institution with the same owner, in the public or private
              sector, regardless of legal form (Art. 90 of the Banking Law). Additionally, Art. 91 of
              the Banking Law states that financial institutions will have access to information
              from the credit registry, which will be used exclusively to make decisions about
              credit risk. Reports from the credit registry are private; they cannot be published,
              communicated or displayed to others, and in no case shall state the name of the
              creditor institution.
              Currently the reports from the credit registry provided to financial institutions on a
              particular user include historical data for the past 6 months, total amount, activity,
              currency; banks are not informed which credit provider the user has utilized. The
              reduced credit history and lack of information about banks’ operations limit the
              information available to properly evaluate borrowers.
              While the BCP-SIB is permitted to require payment of a fee for this service, it is
              free today. BCP is not responsible for damages arising from the provision of these
              reports to financial institutions or inaccurate data. To correct any errors in the
              information in the credit registry, the consumer must contact the reporting financial
              institution so that it can rectify the information, after which the correction is
              circulated to all financial institutions in the system. The BCP-SIB does not modify
              any information by itself (only incorporating data sent by financial institutions) or
              replace information retroactively. The BCP-SIB does not track whether the data
              was corrected or of the errors that were reported by the client referred to a
              financial institution.
              The BCP-SIB is developing an updated system for the credit registry, which will
              allow an almost daily update (currently monthly, about 15 days after the end of the
              previous month).
              To consult their information in the credit registry, users must go to the
              headquarters of BCP, or do so through a proxy. This process can be expensive
              and makes it difficult to query information from the credit registry. The right of a
              debtor to access his/her information at the Credit Registry is not widely publicized.
Private Credit Bureaus
The main (and practically only) company collecting credit data ("Informconf") is
governed exclusively by the provisions of the Private Information Law. The Law
does not establish an authority or agency of control. The absence of application
authority prevents the exercise of adequate supervision over the compliance with
the requirements or the aforementioned Law and the effective application of
sanctions (as mentioned in Good Practice D.3.), the latter being critical for the
execution of an agreement, mediation, or judicial intervention. No external audit is
conducted to certify compliance of procedures with the legal framework.
Credit bureau database queries can only be made by contributing entities or non-
contributing entities with a legitimate interest justifying the query. There is a
selection process for entities that can provide data; the criteria focusing on quality
and safety of the information with the express authorization of the owner of the
data to be shared.
Art. 8 of the Private Information Law states that everyone has the right to access
information and data concerning him/her held by public or private entities or entities
providing information on financial solvency and patrimonial status (credit bureau).
The consultation of the information available on the concerned user (including the
reports on him that were ordered and received by others) can be done in person or
through proxy, and are free of charge: they can be requested in any office of the
credit bureau (Asunción and two other locations in the interior of Paraguay), which
limits the effective exercise of the right to access information. It is being considered
to provide the client in the first visit with a personal password that will allow him/her
to access their data remotely in future consultations.
As for the type of information that can be included in the database of the credit
bureau, in addition to the provisions of Art. 5 of the Private Information Law
(discussed in Good Practice D.2.), Art. 9 of the Law provides limitations on the
negative information to be incorporated in the database, which excludes
information on the patrimonial status, financial solvency, and compliance with
obligations as follows: (a) judicially unclaimed debt arrears when less than 90 days;
(c) judicially unclaimed debt after 4 years of the registration of the unexpired debt
(if there have not been any further breaches); (c) 3 years following the time the
debt claimed in court has been canceled; (d) debts for which the lawsuit was
dismissed; (e) 5 years following the seizure of the debtor; (f) 7 years following the
date of final judgment with no compliance with the obligation; (g) 7 years following
the judgment granting r bankruptcy, which is reduced to 3 if the bankruptcy status
was lifted; (h) 5 years following the convocation of the creditors. In practice, it is the
same private credit bureau that keeps track of these deadlines and detracts from
the database information on users that have reached one of them (in line with the
legal framework).
With regards to updating information, Art. 7 of the Private Information Law states
that data must be continuously updated, but it remains the responsibility of the
credit bureau and the company submitting the data. For the latter, the deadline is
two days, while the credit bureau has up to 4 days to update the database. This
update has no cost to the concerned user. In practice, the credit bureau, when
approached by a user who has cancelled his/her debt, solicits information from the
                    creditor; if no reply is received within 48 hours of the information request, the data
                    is removed from the database.
Recommendation      1. Establish effective mechanisms to ensure that users can exercise their right to
                       access personal information in the public credit registry and private credit
                       bureaus (in the latter case, also to request an amendment to the information).
                    2. Explore a practical technology-based alternative to facilitate access to
                       information (both for the credit registry and the private credit bureau), including
                       potentially the use of cell phones, which have a high penetration in Paraguay,
                       with an association between the phone number and the user, as already used
                       in the case of e-money accounts by e-money issuers (EMPEs).
                    3. Establish a legal framework for the oversight of the private credit bureau, which
                       allows its supervision with regards to proper operation and compliance with the
                       provisions of the applicable laws. In this context, it should be defined which
                       institution would be responsible to carry this task (which could naturally be the
                       BCP-SIB).



SECTION E           DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Complaints Procedure
                        a. Every bank should have in place a written complaints procedure and
                           a designated contact point for the proper handling of any complaint
                           from a customer, with a summary of this procedure forming part of
                           the bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in B.7 abov e and an
                           indication in the same Terms and Conditions of how a consumer can
                           easily obtain the complete statement of the procedure.
                        b. Within a short period of time following the date a bank receives a
                           complaint, it should:
                                (i) acknowledge in writing to the customer/complainant the fact
                                       of its receipt of the complaint; and
                                (ii) provide the complainant with the name of one or more
                                        individuals appointed by the bank to deal with the
                                        complaint until either the complaint is resolved or cannot
                                        be processed further within the bank.
                        c. The bank should provide the complainant with a regular written
                           update on the progress of the investigation of the complaint at
                           reasonable intervals of time.
                        d. Within a few business days of its completion of the investigation of
                           the complaint, the bank should inform the customer/complainant in
                           writing of the outcome of the investigation and, where applicable,
                           explain the terms of any offer or settlement being made to the
                           customer/complainant.
                        e. When a bank receives a verbal complaint, it should offer the
                           customer/complainant the opportunity to have the complaint treated
                           by the bank as a written complaint in accordance with the above. A
                           bank should not require, however, that a complaint be in writing.
                        f.   A bank should maintain an up-to-date record of all complaints it has
                             received and the action it has taken in dealing with them.
                        g. The record should contain the details of the complainant, the nature
                           of the complaint, a copy of the bank's response(s), a copy of all other
                           relevant correspondence or records, the action taken to resolve the
                           complaint and whether resolution was achieved and, if so, on what
                           basis.
                        h. The bank should make these records available for review by the
                           banking supervisor or regulator when requested.
Description         The regulatory framework does not require banks and finance companies to have
                    internal procedures for handling customer complaints. Some entities, although not
                    required by regulation, have a system to handle customer claims, although it is
                    implemented disparately across different institutions and, in general, this function is
                    associated with other activities (e.g. marketing, quality control, sustainability, etc.).
                    Financial institutions generally do not inform the public about the mechanisms and
                    steps to take to make a claim, including the expected time for resolution. The
                    channels of communication between the company and the customer usually make
                    reference to queries or suggestions, with no mention of claims and complaints
                    (which hinders the effective access to information about the procedures for making
                    complaints).
                    Entities do not inform their clients about the alternative (third parties) means of
                    settling claims (in cases where they do not receive a response from the financial
                    institution, or that the response is not satisfactory).
                    It is estimated that several customers did not submit their complaints for lack of
                    knowledge on where and how to do so, while in other cases the complaints are not
                    recorded and processed.
                    Financial institutions generally make limited use of claims data in order to improve
                    their operations and management. This data is not used to identify weaknesses or
                    points of improvement in these institutions, based on the issues that commonly rise
                    in these complaints (e.g. errors in the recording of transactions, technological
                    problems, fraud, bad business practices, etc.), which could be reflecting greater
                    problems in the entities.
Recommendation      1. The BCP-SIB should finalize and adopt the draft regulation that requires
                       financial institutions to have procedures for complaints handling. Clear
                       guidelines should be established to cover channels available to make a claim,
                       identification, follow-up and response to the client, including the maximum
                       turnaround time.
                    2. Banks and finance companies should gather data on complaints filed by
                       customers. This should not only be done in order to identify whether these
                       claims were responded satisfactorily, but also to identify areas for improvement
                       that can prevent the repetition of claims in the future, as well as other aspects
                       that could be reflecting potential weaknesses or risks in the financial institution.
Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                        a. A system should be in place that allows customers of a bank to seek
                           affordable and efficient recourse to a third-party banking ombudsman
                           or equivalent institution, in the event the complaint of one or more of
                      customers is not resolved in accordance with the procedures
                      outlined in E.1 above.
                  b. The existence of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution
                     and basic information relating to the process and procedures should
                     be made known in every bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in
                     B.7 above.
                  c. Upon the request of any customer of a bank, the bank should make
                     available to the customer the details of the banking ombudsman or
                     equivalent institution, and its applicable processes and procedures,
                     including the binding nature of decisions and the mechanisms to
                     ensure the enforcement of decisions.
                  d. The banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                     appropriately resourced and discharge its function impartially.
                  e. The decision of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution
                     should be binding upon the bank against which the complaint has
                     been lodged.
Description   There is no regulatory requirement for financial institutions to inform their clients
              about alternative dispute resolution mechanisms for the resolution of their claims
              by a third party. Furthermore, the division of tasks and responsibilities between
              SEDECO and the BCP-SIB in addressing claims submitted to them from
              consumers of financial products and services provided by financial institutions
              regulated by BCP remains unclear.
              Both institutions (SEDECO and the BCP-SIB) do not have the infrastructure,
              budget, procedures and human resources to be able to respond in a timely manner
              to a significant quantity of claims (the number of claims that have been addressed
              to date are minimal, demonstrating the need for a wider dissemination of the
              existence of these channels).
              In the private sector realm, ADEFI developed a Financial Consumer Ombudsman
              (DCF). It was designed as a private instance that the user could appeal to as a
              second instance after filing a complaint with the financial institution and receiving
              no response or an unsatisfactory one. The DCF emitted a basic decision which a
              non-binding to the entity, so its role was more that of a mediator than an arbitrator.
              The Center for Arbitration and Mediation of Paraguay (which works in the private
              sector, under the Chamber of Commerce) also offers mediation services. In
              practice, both the DCF and the Center for Arbirtration have not been used widely
              as they have not been publicized, and the DCF went dormant in the meantime.
              One bank has also entered into a specific agreement with the Centre of Arbitration
              and Mediation of Paraguay as a third party to resolve claims, although this initiative
              has not had much impact on users in general.
              ASOBAN has not implemented any alternative resolution scheme dedicated to
              unresolved complaints from bank customers.
              Financial institutions do not inform their customers that they have alternatives
              available to them to resolve disputes through a second instance, such as SEDECO
              (which is the enforcement authority of the Consumer Protection Law) or the BCP-
              SIB (which has recently included into its website the possibility to submit claims).
              Law 1897/02 establishes the legal framework for arbitration and mediation.
                    Mediation, beyond the initiatives initiated by ADEFI and one individual bank (both
                    with minimal impact) is not considered as a dispute resolution channel for financial
                    consumers in Paraguay.
Recommendation      1. Clearly define the scope in addressing consumer claims between SEDECO
                       and the BCP-SIB.
                    2. SEDECO and the BCP-SIB should have adequate infrastructure, technology,
                       budget, human resources, manuals and procedures in place for filing and
                       resolving claims, based on the responsibilities defined in 1.
                    3. BCP should issue a regulation stating that financial institutions must
                       communicate, through different means, to users that they have the possibility
                       of going to a second instance (third party), after filing a complaint to the
                       financial institution and not receiving a response within a reasonable timeframe
                       (defined in the regulation), or not being satisfied with the response received.
                       Such information should be published at least on the website of each financial
                       institution, in the brochures where customer care channels are described, in
                       contracts, in posters in branches, and in key fact statements, among others.
                    4. In the medium term, SEDECO, BCP, ASOBAN and ADEFI should promote an
                       alternative (efficient for the user) dispute resolution scheme, independent of
                       financial institutions; it´s decisions should be binding for the financial
                       institutions.. International experience suggests that the creation of a financial
                       ombudsman dedicated to dealing with low-value claims is the preferred and
                       most efficient alternative. The ombudsman could be financed privately or
                       through public funds.
Good Practice E.3   Publication of Information on Consumer Complaints
                        a. Statistics and data of customer complaints, including those related to
                           a breach of any code of conduct of the banking industry should be
                           periodically compiled and published by the ombudsman, financial
                           supervisory authority or consumer protection agency.
                        b. Regulatory agencies should publish statistics and data and analyses
                           related to their activities in respect of consumer protection regarding
                           banking products and services so as, among other things, to reduce
                           the sources of systemic consumer complaints and disputes.
                        c. Banking industry associations should also analyze the complaint
                           statistics and data and propose measures to avoid the recurrence of
                           systemic consumer complaints.
Description         Neither the BCP-SIB nor SEDECO publish statistics on complaints they receive
                    related to financial products or services. SEDECO has not standardized, internally,
                    the collection of statistics on complaints received.
                    The BCP-SIB has not required financial institutions to collect, in a standardized
                    way (i.e. with a homogeneous classification) information on the complaints they
                    receive or the resolution thereof (if, for example, it was favorable or not to the
                    user). Additionally, the BCP-SIB has not requested that entities report compiled
                    data about their claims.
                    Banking and finance companies associations do not have statistics on complaints
                    received by their members, nor promote practices aiming at addressing the issues
                    from which these claims originate (e.g. business practices, staff training,
                    information transparency, clarity in advertising, etc.)
Recommendation      1. The BCP-SIB should establish (by regulation) a standardized categorization of
                       complaints and require entities to classify the received complaints in the most
                       appropriate category. This would facilitate the process of comparing across
                       entities. The same rules should require each financial institution to post the
                       data on its website in a standardized way. In addition, financial institutions
                       should periodically report (e.g. monthly or quarterly) compiled statistics on
                       complaints to the BCP-SIB.
                    2. SEDECO and the BCP-SIB should collect standardized data (under a uniform
                       classification by type of claim) on the financial sector claims that were
                       presented to them (as second instances).
                    3. Once the regulation enacted and fully implemented, the BCP-SIB should
                       publish on its website statistics on complaints received by the financial
                       institutions, in addition to the complaints received by the BCP-SIB. The list of
                       financial institutions should contain nominal data along with "normalized" data
                       that measure performance in relative terms to the volume of operations of the
                       entity (to facilitate comparisons between entities of different sizes).
                    4. ASOBAN and ADEFI should require (or use public information when available)
                       data on complaints in their respective sectors, in order to promote policies to
                       solve the issues that generate these complaints, in a proactive manner.



SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Depositor Protection
                        a. The law should ensure that the regulator or supervisor can take
                           necessary measures to protect depositors when a bank is unable to
                           meet its obligations including the return of deposits.
                        b. If there is a law on deposit insurance, it should state clearly:
                                 (i)   the insurer;
                                 (ii) the classes of those depositors who are insured;
                                 (iii) the extent of insurance coverage;
                                 (iv) the holder of all funds for payout purposes;
                                 (v) the contributor(s) to this fund;
                                 (vi) each event that will trigger a payout from this fund to any
                                      class of those insured;
                                 (vii)the mechanisms to ensure timely payout to depositors who
                                      are insured.
                        c. On an on-going basis, the deposit insurer should directly or through
                           insured banks or the association of insured commercial banks, if any,
                           promote public awareness of the deposit insurance system, as well
                           as how the system works, including its benefits and limitations.
                        d. Public awareness should, among other things, educate the public on
                           the financial instruments and institutions covered by deposit
                           insurance, the coverage and limits of deposit insurance and the
                             reimbursement process.
                        e. The deposit insurer should work closely with member banks and
                           other safety-net participants to ensure consistency in the information
                           provided to consumers and to maximize public awareness on an
                           ongoing basis.
                        f.   The deposit insurer should receive or conduct a regular evaluation of
                             the effectiveness of its public awareness program or activities.
Description         The legal framework clearly establishes the insurer (the Deposit Guarantee Fund –
                    FGD – administered by BCP), the extension of coverage (PYG 136,000, equivalent
                    to approximately USD 28,000), the calculation mechanisms (netting our overdue
                    debt, consolidating deposits), the grounds for payment (collapse of a financial
                    institution), mechanisms for payment and deposits which are excluded from the
                    guarantee (e.g. those linked to the entity). The amount of the deposit coverage is
                    high (enough to fully cover 97% of deposit accounts in the financial system).
                    The regulations make it compulsory for institutions to publish in their offices and
                    branches the existence and extent of the deposit insurance. In addition, entities
                    incorporate such information in some of the documents they use.
                    The FGD has distributed informational brochures describing the characteristics and
                    scope of the FGD, although they were not seen in branches visited by the mission
                    team.
                    There has been no assessment conducted on the extent of public awareness and
                    knowledge of the existence of the FGD, nor have there been any widespread
                    outreach programs in recent years.
Recommendation      1. Conduct an assessment of the degree of awareness of the population on the
                       existence and scope of the deposit insurance.
                    2. Adapt the dissemination channels based on the results of the abovementioned
                       assessment. Consider the launch of a major widespread communications
                       campaign on the deposit insurance scheme, using the most efficient channels
                       (e.g. radio), both in Spanish and in Guaraní.
Good Practice F.2   Insolvency
                        a. Depositors should enjoy higher priority than other unsecured
                           creditors in the liquidation process of a bank.
                        b. The law dealing with the insolvency of banks should provide for
                           expeditious, cost effective and equitable provisions to enable the
                           maximum timely refund of deposits to depositors.
                    Deposits are the only liabilities that are totally or partially covered (depending on
                    the amount) by the deposit insurance. Furthermore, Law 2334 of the Deposit
                    Insurance (Article 20) provides that, when an entity goes bankrupt, deposits are
                    moved as a liability with the first order of priority for inclusion in the balance of
                    exclusion and subsequent transfer (along with the assets that balance them) to one
                    or more solvent receiving financial institutions.
Recommendation      No recommendations.
SECTION H           COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION


Good Practice H.1   Regulatory Policy and Competition Policy
                    Regulators and competition authorities should be required to consult one
                    another for the purpose of ensuring the establishment, application and
                    enforcement of consistent policies regarding the regulation of financial
                    services.
Description         The legal and regulatory framework for competition is recent. The Competition Law
                    Number 4953 of June 2013 provides for the creation of the National Competition
                    Commission (CONACOM). Art. 61 of the "Collaboration and Information" Law sets
                    forth the requirement to submit information or issue reports as requested by the
                    CONACOM, be it from public institutions or regulatory bodies, including BCP (in
                    cases of violation, fines can be imposed). In any stage of the procedure, the
                    CONACOM may request the adequate collaboration of regulators, informing them
                    of the relevant actions needed for collaboration. In addition, the same article points
                    out that the CONACOM is the only competent public institution to assess
                    restrictions to free competition and to instruct the procedures it regulates.
                    Moreover, the implementing regulation of the Competition Law (Decree 1490 of
                    April 2014) provides in Art. 80 mandatory reporting requirements for regulated
                    sectors. Specifically in banking, the CONACOM must solicit BCP to issue a
                    compulsory report on the technical aspects of the services and/or products
                    evaluated, the markets involved, the conduct investigated and the applicable
                    regulations. In the processes associated with the notification of concentration
                    cases, the CONACOM should ask BCP to produce information on market share of
                    the entities involved in the operations. The report has no binding character for the
                    CONACOM, and failure to produce it does not suspend the proceedings.
Recommendation      While the legal and regulatory framework provides for the intervention of BCP in
                    procedures involving financial institutions, formal mechanisms for routine
                    interaction and coordination between BCP and the CONACOM should be
                    established (not just in cases of investigation). Once the CONACOM is running, it
                    is recommended to proceed with the drafting and signing of a Memorandum of
                    Understanding between the two institutions.
Good Practice H.2   Review of Competition
                    Given the significance of retail banking to the economy as a whole and to the
                    welfare of consumers, competition authorities should:
                        (i)   monitor competition in retail banking;
                        (ii) conduct, and publish for general consumption, periodic
                             assessments of competition in retail banking (such as the range of
                             interest rates across banks for specific products); and
                        (iii) make recommendations publicly available on enhancing competition
                              in retail banking.
Description         The newly established CONACOM has among its objectives the analysis of
                    competition in the sector. In practice, the CONACOM is not yet operational and
                    has not defined the priority areas in which market concentration will be analyzed.
Recommendation      Should the CONACOM have sufficient resources and begin to operate effectively,
                    it is recommended to include among its priorities the analysis and review of
                    competition in the retail financial sector.
Good Practice H.3   Impact of Competition Policy on Consumer Protection
                    The competition authority and the regulator should evaluate the impact of
                    competition policies on consumer welfare, especially regarding any
                    limitations on customer choice and collusion regarding interest and other
                    charges and fees.
Description         BCP has been analyzing the interest rate and the commissions and fees charged
                    by various financial institutions.
                    In addition, representatives of the CONACOM expressed interest to maintain a
                    close link with BCP and assess of competition in the banking sector.
Recommendation      BCP must continue and deepen their analysis of price trends for banking services
                    and products to collect the information that will, in time, form the basis, for a
                    working relationship between technical officers at BCP and the CONACOM.
SECTION A               CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS


Good Practice A.1       Consumer Protection Regime
                        The law should provide clear consumer protection rules in the area of non-
                        bank credit institutions, and there should be adequate institutional
                        arrangements to ensure the thorough, objective, timely and fair
                        implementation and enforcement of all such rules, as well as of sanctions
                        that effectively deter violations of these rules.
                            a. There should be specific statutory provisions, which create an
                               effective regime for the protection of consumers of non-bank credit
                               institutions.
                            b. There should be a government authority responsible for
                               implementing, overseeing and enforcing consumer protection in the
                               area of non-bank credit institutions.
                            c. The supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions should
                               have a register, which lists the names of non-bank credit institutions.
                            d. There should be coordination and cooperation among the various
                               institutions mandated to implement, oversee and enforce consumer
                               protection and financial sector regulation and supervision.
                            e. The law should provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the
                               private sector, including voluntary consumer associations and self-
                               regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer protection in the
                               area of non-bank credit institutions.
Description             a. Statutory provisions
                        Consumer Protection issues are covered by the general Consumer Protection
                        Law, the Civil Code as well as the legal and regulatory framework applicable to
                        financial cooperatives. The provisions in the cooperative sector framework in
                        many instances refine the Consumer Protection Law, and do not appear to be in
                        contradiction with it. Nevertheless, the regulations on consumer protection are
                        dispersed in different regulations and dispositions, which makes it difficult to get
                        an overview and establish possible overlaps. This also leads to fragmentation in
                        oversight and enforcement, with various oversight agencies being involved.


                        The Consumer Protection Law number 1334/98 and Decree 20572/03 create a
                        general consumer protection framework for the purchase of goods and services.
                        This explicitly also covers financial services. The law establishes the basic rights



7
 This section was prepared by Luis Trevino, with guidance from Ilka Funke. A stand-alone assessment for Savings
and Loan Cooperatives was conducted with view to the separate supervisory framework in place for cooperatives,
and the important role they play for financial inclusion in Paraguay.
and obligations of clients (both legal and natural persons), including the rights to (i)
freely choose a service or good, (ii) receive clear and correct information on the
composition, quality, price and risk of the product / service, and (iii) to be protected
against inadequate publicity and marketing and abusive contracts (Art. 6.).
Chapter 13 also includes special provisions for “closed circles”, where co nsumers
pool funds to obtain services or products. The Chapter establishes the freedom to
associate and withdraw from these circles, and rules on the authority for decision
making within the circle. As cooperatives are member based and in this respect
closed circles, this also applies to them. The provisions are broad in nature, which
in the absence of further regulations makes actual implementation and
enforcement more difficult.


The legal and regulatory framework for cooperatives includes a number of relevant
consumer protection provisions. The general law on cooperatives, Law 438/94,
establishes rules for the constitution, organization and function of all types of
cooperatives (sectorial or multifunctional), as well as second and third tier gremial
institutions. This includes core governance rules (including claims handling
processes), which in member-based institutions generates a first level of
consumer protection. It also provides for a dedicated funding for general member
education, but not explicitly for financial education. Decree 14052/96 regulates the
Law 438. More recently, Resolution 11102/13 (and subsequent amendments)
was issued, creating a compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives
(so called “Savings and Loan Cooperatives”), as well as their second tier entities.
The compiled framework establishes a tiered regulatory and supervisory regime
proportionate to the profile and risk posed by individual financial cooperatives. It
differentiates between three types of cooperatives according to their assets (Type
A with assets over ~USD 11 million, Type B over ~ USD 1.1 million, and Type C
below this threshold). This new framework for savings and loan cooperatives
includes e.g. provisions for a proper disclosure of information on credit operations,
the disclosure of the terms and conditions offered for each service or product, the
minimum requirements for general contracts of agreement, and general provisions
for the integrity of advertisement issued. The special framework is compiled into a
separate regulatory document available on INCOOP’s website, and is regularly
updated to reflect regulatory revisions.


Some consumer protection relevant provisions are also included in the Civil Code.
The latter establishes in Art. 475 a usury interest rate, which is to be determined
by the Central Bank and is the maximum interest rate that can legally be charged
for lending. The Civil Code also establishes some basic provisions for contracts,
including credits contracts. Art. 526 to 574 include e.g. rules for the sale of a loan
to a third party and for payments being made, Art. 437 onwards cover the
creditor’s rights to enforce collateral for outstanding credit. These are general
provisions on contracts, to be enforced in court.


b. Government authority responsible for implementing, overseeing and
   enforcing consumer protection
Two separate entities are involved in implementing, overseeing and enforcing
consumer protection issues pertaining to cooperatives: SEDECO and INCOOP.
Furthermore, the courts play a role for sanctioning violations:


Until recently, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MIC) and on a voluntary
basis the municipalities were in charge of overseeing the implementation of the
Consumer Protection Law. In 2013, this arrangement was modified via Law
4974/13, which establishes a new autonomous entity, the Secretary for the
Defense of the Consumer and the User (SEDECO), as entity in charge of
implementing and regulating the Consumer Protection Law. The entity reports to
the MIC, but has its own budget. Being recently created, it currently has limited
human resources and no IT system in place to carry out this cross-sectorial task.
There is also no dedicated financial sector specialist on board. Given the above,
SEDECO’s de facto capacity to supervise and follow-up on consumer protection
issues in the area of the financial sector (including for S&L cooperatives) is
currently limited. Chapter X (Art. 43-44) and Chapter XIV (Art. 51-52) of the
Consumer Protection Law assigns the courts as authority in charge of sanctioning
any consumer protection violations brought to their attention by individuals,
SEDECO or consumer protection associations and other stakeholders. They can
address both individual and collective cases. In practice, only few cases appear to
have been brought to the attention of the courts, so consumer protection violations
are usually not sanctioned.


Regulation and oversight over cooperatives, including savings and loan
cooperatives, is assigned by Law 438/94 (Art. 115) to a dedicated regulatory and
supervisory body, the “Instituto Nacional de Cooperativismo” or “INCOOP”. In
2003, INCOOP was created through Law 2157/03 as an independent and
autonomous supervisory body for the cooperative sector, which reports to the
Ministry of Agriculture. According to Art. 4 of the INCOOP Law, INCOOP ‘s
objective is to help implement Art. 113 of the Constitution, which mandates that
the government should support the formation of cooperatives operating under the
principles of solidarity and social benefit. Furthermore, its functions also include
the provison of capacity building and support to help strengthen the cooperative
movement in the country. Art. 5 (d) and (e) of the INCOOP law also provides
INCOOP in with the legal faculty to establish rules to govern the correct economic
and social functioning of cooperatives, and to perform an adequate supervision,
control and enforcement of cooperative activities. Overall, Incoop’s role in
supporting the economic and social functioning of member based institutions gives
it a direct mandate to supervise and enforcement the regulatory framework for
cooperatives, as well as an indirect mandate in protecting the interests of
members of cooperatives.
As discussed under A3, INCOOP de facto capacity to supervise and enforce
consumer protection provisions incorporated into its legal and regulatory
framework is limited.


c. Availability of registry
According to Law 2157/03 (Art. 5 h), INCOOP is in charge of maintaining the
National Registry of Cooperatives.
On its website, INCOOP provides information on registered entities, their location,
as well as a list of closed entities. However, the information is not updated on a
regular basis, with the latest available information dating from June 2011. For
further detail on this see section A.4.


d. Coordination and cooperation among involved institutions
A Memorandum of Understanding for collaboration in the area of consumer
protection was signed in September 2005 between the Ministry of Industry and
Commerce and INCOOP. Since then, INCOOP introduced several consumer
protection relevant modifications to its regulatory framework, in accordance to the
applicable Consumer Protection Law.
As MIC was recently replaced by SEDECO, a new MOU will have to be signed.


e. Role for the private sector, including voluntary consumer associations
   and self-regulatory organizations
Art. 6 g of the General Consumer Protection Law establishes as essential right of
consumers to form consumer associations with the purpose of defense and
representation of themselves. Art. 45 clarifies that consumers associations are
associations constituted by individual persons with no economic, political or
commercial interests, whose goals is to guarantee the defense and protection of
the consumers and users and to promote the information, education,
representativeness and respect of their rights. Art. 47 explicitly provides for a role
of consumer protection associations in the education and protection of the
consumer. Furthermore, Decree 20572/03 (which regulates and establishes the
National Integrated System of Consumer Protection – SNIPC) allows consumer
associations, NGOs and private entities associations to be part of the SNIPC. Art.
3 supports the active participation of civil society organizations through consumer
associations, NGOs and unions affiliated to SNIPC.
In practice, there is only one larger consumer association (Association of Users
and Consumers of Paraguay, “ASUCOP”) operational in Paraguay. ASUCOP only
has a reduced administrative structure in place, and its operations are managed
on a voluntary basis by legal entities. The ass ociation hasn’t performed a specific
role for protecting clients of the financial system, but is included in the
consultations for the Credit Card Law currently being drafted. There are no
specific consumer associations for cooperatives.
The General Cooperative Law allows cooperatives to horizontally integrate in the
form of associations to exchange and share services, complement activities more
adequately, meet social objectives and, finally, support the cooperative integration
principle (Law 438/94, Art. 78). Cooperatives can also integrate vertically in
Central Cooperatives with three or more cooperatives or into Federations with
seven or more cooperatives (Second grade cooperatives). Eight or more Central
                                                                             rd
Cooperatives and Federations can create a Confederation or 3                    grade
Cooperative (i.e., CONPACOOP) that is more a gremial institution of
representativeness of the sector. (Law 438/94, Art. 83, 88 and 92). While
consumer protection is not explicitly mentioned amongst the roles of the horizontal
or vertical forms of integration, it is also not forbidden. As of June 2014, there are
                    13 Central Cooperatives, 5 Federations and one Confederation (CONPACOOP).
Recommendation      1. The division of labor and responsibilities in the enforcement of consumer
                       protection in financial cooperatives need be clarified, and the role of INCOOP
                       in the area of protection of members strengthened:
                             INCOOP should sign as soon as possible a MOU with SEDECO, and
                              establish working groups with SEDECO to ascertain that the two
                              frameworks are in line with each other and form a coherent whole, as
                              well as to coordinate and improve efficiency of oversight and
                              enforcement mechanisms. Furthermore, consideration should be given
                              to introduce a formal mandate for consumer protection by INCOOP in
                              the Consumer Protection Law as well as INCOOP’s organic law.
                             INCOOP should compile all statutory consumer protection related
                              provisions into a separate guidance document, and establish structured
                              mechanisms for supervision, as well as response and recourse for
                              violation of these provisions. This exercise would on the one hand
                              facilitate coordination with SEDECO, help identify potential consumer
                              protection gaps in dedicated legal framework for cooperatives, and help
                              INCOOP assess cost effectiveness of existing measures. It would also
                              be useful to help coordinate the existing provisions with the BCP, with
                              the aim to create a level playing field and enhanced transparency
                              between financial services provided by banks, finance companies and
                              financial cooperatives.
                             Finally, it would be beneficial if BCP and INCOOP, and possibly
                              SEDECO, could collaborate to harmonize technical terms and disclosure
                              requirements (e.g. commission terms and financial terminology used).
                              This would help create a level playing field between financial service
                              providers, and provide the client with the needed transparency for
                              making financial decisions (see B7 of banking sector assessment).
                    2. As further discussed under A4, INCOOP should (i) establish clear and cost
                       effective regulations and procedures for the liquidation of Cooperatives to
                       allow closing of inactive cooperatives, and their elimination in the registry; and
                       (ii) enforce that cooperatives have to provide as a minimum in an annual basis
                       their financial statements to the supervisor. To adequately process the data
                       and disclose the compiled information on a regular basis, INCOOP should
                       acquire adequate IT systems to collect the information, and provide updated
                       information on a timely basis both in the registry as well in statistical
                       information on the sector. More detailed information could be disclosed in a
                       legal repositories of information which is only accessible for members and a
                       limited number of public authorities, while general financial and product related
                       information should be made available to the public (if possible for each entity)
                       on INCOOP’s general website.
Good Practice A.2   Code of Conduct for Non-Bank Credit Institutions
                        a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for non-bank
                           credit institutions that is devised in consultation with the non-bank
                           credit industry and with relevant consumer associations, and that is
                           monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory
                           agency.
                              b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized
                                 and disseminated to the general public.
                              c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes
                                 on matters specific to the industry (credit unions, credit
                                 cooperatives, other non-bank credit institutions).
                              d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                                 disseminated.
Description               a. No industry-wide code of conduct for financial cooperatives is in place.
                          CONPACOOP, the Paraguayan Cooperative Confederation, tried to establish a
                          formal Ethics code amongst its member Federations and Central Cooperatives in
                          2009, but in the absence of sufficient member support the Code could not be
                          adopted.
                          b. Not applicable.
                          c. Selected individual cooperatives and INCOOP itself introduced Codes of
                          Conduct/Ethics:
                            - In 2010, INCOOP introduced both an Ethics Code (Resolution 6652/10) and a
                              Good Governance Code (Resolution 6653/10). Both are part of INCOOP’s
                              internal control system MECIP. The Codes establish basic principles for
                              INCOOP staff in the conduct of business. For example, Art. 13 of the good
                              governance code mandates that INCOOP’s President and the Board should
                              establish and promote “ethical practices” amongst its staff, towards suppliers
                              and civil society in general; Art. 14 mandates that the institution should adhere
                              to transparency and integrity in its operations to prevent corruption; Art. 15 is
                              committed with the inter-institutional collaboration in the promotion of ethic
                              practices; Art. 20 establishes the protection of confidentiality of sensitive
                              information; and Art. 27 establishes attendance to claims.
                            - Cooperative Nemby introduced its Code of Ethics in 2010, prohibiting e.g.
                              fraudulent conduct of its staff, as well as improper usage or public disclosure of
                              confidential information on members.
                            - Cooperativa Universitaria published in 2011 a Code of Conduct to establish
                                                                   8
                              proper governance towards members.
                          d. All of INCOOP’s Internal Control resolutions, Code of Conduct, and good
                          governance protocol are disclosed on the Internet. Some of the individual
                          cooperative’s Codes of Conduct are also publicly disclosed on the Internet.
Recommendation            1. CONPACOOP, INCOOP and the different gremial associations should
                             collaborate to establish a principle-based Code of Conduct for cooperatives.
                             The Code of Conduct could e.g. be modeled on Codes of Conducts or model
                             provisions for consumer protection established by WOCCU or the DRGV,
                             which cover corporate governance, disclosure of rates and fees, honest and
                             fair promotion material, claims and dispute resolution mechanisms among
                             others etc. CONPACOOP should assume a lead role in pursuing this project.
                          2. Once established, the generally applicable Code of Conduct should be
                             publicized, broadly disseminated and become part of the cooperative


8
    http://www.cu.coop.py/images/descargas/codigo.pdf
                        education program. CONPACOOP could act as the self-regulatory body to
                        help enforce adherence to the principles based code of conduct and for
                        disseminating to members information on the content of the code.
Good Practice A.3   Other Institutional Arrangements
                        a. Whether non-bank credit institutions are supervised by a financial
                           supervisory agency, the allocation of resources between financial
                           supervision and consumer protection should be adequate to enable
                           their effective implementation.
                        b. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any
                           dispute regarding a consumer protection matter with a non-bank
                           credit institution is affordable, timely and professionally delivered.
                        c. The supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions should
                           encourage media and consumer associations to play an active role
                           in promoting consumer protection regarding non-bank credit
                           institutions.
Description         a. INCOOP, as the supervisory body for Cooperatives, has two teams for
                    supervision: (i) a supervision team dedicated to on-site supervision, and (ii) an off-
                    site team which helps attend consumer protection issues in the area of corporate
                    governance, management and general complaints. Overall, of the 200 INCOOP
                    employees, only 45 (25% of INCOOP’s total human resources) are dedicated to
                    on- and off-site supervision. With view to the 1,405 registered cooperatives in
                    Paraguay, this appears highly insufficient. INCOOP currently only has the capacity
                    to supervise the larger cooperatives (Type A) every three years (on average), and
                    the remaining ones when deemed critical.
                    Given these technical and human resources constraints, in combination with the
                    lack of a clear mandate identified above, no dedicated consumer protection or
                    market conduct supervision is carried out, and no structured and consistent
                    approach to non-prudential supervision is established. Complaints received from
                    individual members or from the management / Board of cooperatives are
                    distributed to various departments within INCOOP, and not systemically tracked.
                    As a result, no information on the complaints received, areas of concern and the
                    suggested resolution is available as will be discussed below.
                    b. There is no evidence that the judicial system has been involved in a more
                    systematic way in the resolution of disputes over financial products.
                    c. INCOOP has not been directly promoting financial consumer protection. As
                    discussed above, the confederation CONPACOOP has taken some initiatives, but
                    so far without direct result.
Recommendation      1. Given the strategic importance of the cooperative sector in Paraguay (more
                       than a third of the adult population is member of a financial cooperative), the
                       strengthening of the technical and overall available human resources of
                       INCOOP’s supervision department is urgent. As part of this strengthening,
                       INCOOP should develop a systematic approach to non-prudential supervision
                       and on the long term consider establishing a dedicated unit in charge of
                       consumer protection / market conduct.
                    2. INCOOP, the BCP and SEDECO should collaborate to create recourse
                       mechanisms that provide affordable out of court mechanisms for resolving
                        disputes for clients of the financial system (for further detail see
                        recommendations under Good Practice E.2.).
                    3. CONPACOOP and INCOOP should help build sector-wide awareness of the
                       advantages of having adequate consumer protection frameworks in place, and
                       support capacity building in this area on various levels of the sector, as well as
                       public stakeholders.
Good Practice A.4   Registration of Non-Bank Credit Institutions
                    All financial institutions that extend any type of credit to households should
                    be registered with a financial supervisory authority.
Description         According to Law 2157/03 (Art. 5 h, o and p), INCOOP has the mandate to
                    register and cancel the registration of any cooperative in Paraguay (independent
                    of size and type of activity). INCOOP is in charge of maintaining the National
                    Registry of Cooperatives, and of keeping it up to date.
                    In practice, the National Register of Cooperatives is not regularly updated, does
                    not differentiate between cooperatives by type of activity, and many inactive
                    entities continue to be included in the registry. Two factors contribute to this: (i)
                    problems in INCOOP’s internal system to maintain the register updated; (ii)
                    weaknesses in the legal and regulatory processes for closing cooperatives, which
                    provides INCOOP with only a limited role in initiating the closing of a cooperative,
                    and makes a voluntary liquidation costly and time consuming (see Chapter VII of
                    the General Law on Cooperatives). As a result, particular the small Type C
                    Cooperatives become inactive without formally closing. In the absence of
                    notification to INCOOP, the inactive cooperative continues to be registered.
                    As of June 2014, the information from the registry, which is publicly available on
                    INCOOP’s website, dates from 2011. The registry lists 1405 cooperatives for
                    2011, while the Cooperative Census carried out by CONPACOOP in 2012 reveals
                    that only around 450 of the 1405 cooperatives are actually in operation. The
                    information in the registry is thus not reliable, and does not create value added.
Recommendation      1. The registry should urgently be updated to provide the general public with
                       information on how many cooperatives are currently registered, as well as de
                       facto in operation. In the future, all changes in registration should be instantly
                       reflected in the registry, and on a periodic basis the de facto operational
                       entities confirmed.
                    2. To solve the problem of the many inactive cooperatives, INCOOP should
                       consider revising the regulations and procedures for the liquidation of
                       Cooperatives. The regulations could give e.g. INCOOP a right to at least
                       eliminate from the registry those entities that do not provide annual financial
                       statements to the supervisory authorities.
                    3. INCOOP should enforce the annual reporting requirements for cooperatives
                       active in financial intermediation, and should acquire adequate IT systems to
                       collect and report the information in a transparent, efficient and timely way.



SECTION B           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES
Good Practice B.1   Information on Customers
                    a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a non-bank credit
                       institution should gather, file and record sufficient information from the
                       consumer to enable the institution to render an appropriate product or
                       service to that consumer.
                    b. The extent of information the non-bank credit institution gathers
                       regarding a consumer should:
                                (i) be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the
                                    product or service either being proposed to or sought by the
                                    consumer; and
                                (ii) enable the institution to provide a professional service to the
                                     consumer in accordance with that consumer’s capacity.
Description         a. The compiled legal and regulatory framework for financial cooperatives
                    incorporates a range of information requirements to enable the institution to render
                    an appropriate product to the member.


                    With regard to credit:
                      Art 5.13 establishes that each cooperative has to have a credit manual in
                       place, and sets minimum standards on information gathering and
                       documentation to be included in the credit manual. This includes e.g.
                       information on the available products, conditions to be fulfilled by solicitants to
                       be eligible for receiving credit, specific aspects of the financial products, as well
                       as procedures for credit evaluation.
                      Art. 5.9 establishes the basic parameters for lending, including (i) that the
                       member has to formally apply for credit, and (ii) that all documents for
                       establishing the income generating capacity of the member have to be
                       collected and assessed to determine the repayment capacity. The cooperative
                       also needs to verify the repayment history of the applicant through INCOOP’s
                       Credit Bureau or other available credit information services. The underlying
                       analysis has to be appropriately documented.
                      Art. 5.2 covers credits that are deemed to be high risk and thus should not be
                       granted. It is e.g. prohibited to grant a credit to a member who does not want to
                       provide financial information and/or adequate referrals as requested in each
                       the credit manual, or who provides guarantees that are legally disputed.
                      Finally, Art. 5.8 establishes the general functions of the Credit Committee
                       including compliance with credit approval procedures established by the credit
                       manuals, attendance of claims and observations from members, periodic
                       provision of non-performing loans etc.


                    Regarding savings and deposits, Chapter 9 of the regulatory framework for
                    financial cooperatives relates to the basic conditions for taking member deposits.
                    Art. 9.1 establishes that Type A and B cooperatives and central cooperatives
                    should have a manual for taking deposits, which specifies the deposit and savings
                    products offered, conditions and general characteristics of the products, as well as
                    internal control mechanisms needed to assure the veracity and security of
                    information:
                      According to Art. 9.1 (a-1), the manual for deposits should determine the
                       eligible subjects for savings (including legally entities) in line with constraints
                       established by Law 438/94 and its Reglamentary Decree No. 14.052/96. The
                       latter determines in Art. 24 that both natural and legal entities can become
                       members of cooperatives, and establishes responsibilities and minimum
                       membership contributions to be paid when affiliating.
                      According to Art. 9.1 (a-2 and a-3) manuals should establish the types of
                       savings that are offered and their basic characteristics; as well as information
                       on the administrative organization and processes for taking deposits, approval
                       and management of the savings portfolio”;
                      Type C cooperatives must only have a basic manual of rules for savings in
                       place in which the general conditions and characteristics of savings products
                       and security scheme to protect the information of the deposit accounts are
                       established.


                    b. The above-described regulations are comprehensive, and provide for a
                    thorough assessment of the repayment capacity of clients in the case of credit
                    applications, as well as for appropriate documentation of products offered to a
                    member (e.g. Art. 5.12 for credits, and 9.1.h for deposits).


                    However, discussions and observations during the mission indicate that the
                    human resources and capacity to actually implement the regulations and
                    undertake a sold repayment assessment of a client is limited in many
                    cooperatives. INCOOP’s capacity to actually monitor and enforce compliance is
                    also restricted by the above-mentioned capacity constraints to supervise this
                    diverse and large sector.
Recommendation      1. To support implementation of the applicable regulatory framework and
                       strengthen the sector’s capacity to assess member’s repayment capacity and
                       product needs, substantial and ongoing capacity building of cooperative sector
                       staff should be provided. The training should focus on tools for assessing the
                       repayment capacity of clients, collecting and filing the needed information on
                       clients in a safe and secure way, and on product development.
                    2. INCOOP should put in place standardized procedures for supervising (both on
                       and off-site) the adherence of financial cooperatives to the information
                       requirements established by the legal and regulatory framework, as well as on
                       a sample basis the undertaken assessment of the repayment capacity of a
                       borrower.
Good Practice B.2   Affordability
                        a. When a non-bank credit institution makes a recommendation
                           regarding a product or service to a consumer, the product or service
                           it offers to that consumer should be in line with the need of the
                           consumer.
                        b. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided
                           to the consumer to enable him or her to select the most suitable and
                      affordable product or service.
                  c. When a non-bank credit institution offers a new credit product or
                     service that significantly increases the amount of debt assumed by
                     the consumer, the consumer’s credit worthiness should be properly
                     assessed.
Description   a. There are no formal provisions that mandate that the financial product or
              service offered to the member is in line with the actual needs of the member.


              With regard to credit, a number of provisions however establish that the credit
              should be affordable for the client:
                As discussed above, Art. 5.9 of the legal and regulatory framework for financial
                 cooperatives mandates that the cooperative must determine, prior to conceding
                 credit, the repayment capacity of the member, as well as his or her credit
                 history (passed and ongoing). Furthermore, the cooperative should summarize
                 in a report or any other written document the realized analysis and conclusions.
                 Information from INCOOP’s newly created Credit Registry, or any other private
                 credit should be included in the assessment.
                Art. 5.9. g forbids that an additional credit is provided to a member who is
                 behind with repayment of a credit to the cooperative, while Art. 5.2 requests
                 that more diligence in the credit evaluation should be done for “high risk”
                 credits such as (ii) credits needed for the repayment of a loan with another
                 financial service provider, or (iii) that hinge on the provision of a guarantee for
                 which a limited market is available.


              b. Chapter II, Art. 6 of the Consumer Protection Law establishes the basic right of
              the consumer to receive adequate education and information about the features of
              the products and services offered, ensuring the liberty to decide and fairness in
              the contracts.
              In addition, Art. 2.6.g of the compiled legal and regulatory framework of financial
              cooperatives provides as basic requirement that all public communication and
              advertising of financial cooperatives is in line with the provisions of the consumer
              protection law and other applicable specific laws and regulations, and Art. 2.5 d
              and e establish that interest rates, if provided in commercials and formal
              communications, should be expressed both in nominal as well as annual effective
              terms. Art. 5.7 on the costs and interest rates of credit also mandates under
              provision i, that members of cooperatives should be informed about all costs and
              commission of credits at any time, without being specific on the form of this
              disclosure.


              Information gathered during the mission indicates that the client is not provided
              with the full costs when signing up for a product, and information on interest rates
              and commissions is not readily available or easy to find on entities’ websites, in
              product flyers or in the branches. This makes it difficult for the member to get an
              adequate overview over available products and their conditions, and to choose the
              most appropriate product.
                    c. The regulations do not specifically contemplate the case in which a financial
                    cooperative offers an additional credit to a client, which significantly increases the
                    level of debt of a client. However, as highlighted under a, provisions are in place
                    for determining the repayment capacity of a member, assess all available
                    information related to outstanding credits and guarantees, credit history and credit
                    profile. Furthermore, specific provisions are in place for more risky credits (Art.
                    5.2).
Recommendation      The legal and regulatory framework for financial cooperatives should be amended
                    to establish provisions on the timing and form of disclosure of product related
                    information, including pricing information:
                      The latter should ideally mandate disclosure of total costs of credit,
                       standardized pricing and annual effective interest rate information.
                      Consideration should be given to establish a pricing list to be visibly displayed
                       in the branches of financial cooperatives, and to mandate the introduction of a
                       factsheet for financial service contracts.
Good Practice B.3   Cooling-off Period
                        a. Unless explicitly waived by the consumer in writing, a non-bank
                           credit institutions should provide the consumer a cooling-off period
                           of a reasonable number of days immediately following the signing of
                           an agreement between the institution and the consumer.
                        b. On his or her written notice to the non-bank credit institution during
                           the cooling- off period, the consumer should be permitted to cancel
                           or treat the agreement as null and void without penalty to the
                           consumer of any kind.
Description         Art. 30 of the Consumer Protection Law 1334/98 gives the consumer the right of
                    early repayment of the full credit amount, with the respective proportional
                    reduction of the interest. This applies for all credits linked with the purchase of a
                    good or service, and thus could be interpreted to also cover financial
                    intermediation services. However, this provision does not cover partial early
                    repayment, and does not prohibit the levying of penalty fees for early repayments.


                    The specific regulatory framework for financial cooperatives also does not include
                    a cooling off period for credit or for term savings products, but instead refer to the
                    internal policies from each institution to allow or not for these. There are no
                    dispositions preventing the cooperatives from charging a fee for early repayment
                    or withdrawal.


                    In practice, financial cooperatives (similar to practices observed in banks and
                    finance companies) levy charges for early cancellation of loans or term deposits.
                    The information on applicable penalty fees / impact on the interest rate for early
                    cancellation of term deposits was not included in contracts reviewed during the
                    mission.
Recommendation      1. INCOOP should incorporate into the regulatory framework for financial
                       cooperatives a requirement to provide a cooling off period to clients. The
                       actual cooling off period should ideally be coordinated with the period to be
                        established for banks and finance companies in order to ascertain a level
                        playing field between the various market participants.
                    2. Furthermore, cooperatives should be obliged to provide their clients with
                       information on fees and costs for early cancelation of loans and term deposits.
                       The information should be included both in the general product information, as
                       well as in the contract to be signed in an easily understandable language.
                    3. Similar to the framework in place for banks and finance companies, limits
                       should be established (as a proportion of the interest to be charged) on the
                       commission for anticipated cancellation of loans.
Good Practice B.4   Bundling and Tying Clauses
                        a. As much as possible, non-bank credit institutions should avoid the
                           use of tying clauses in contracts that restrict the choice of
                           consumers.
                        b. In particular, whenever a borrower is required by a non-bank credit
                           institution to purchase any product, including an insurance policy,
                           as a pre-condition for receiving a loan, the borrower should be free
                           to choose the provider of the product and this information should be
                           made known to the borrower.
                        c. Also, whenever a non-bank credit institution contracts with a
                           merchant as a distribution channel for its credit contracts, no
                           exclusionary dealings should be permitted.
Description         a. Art. 14 of the Consumer Protection Law prohibits bundling of products, unless
                    the products are by nature or custom used together. This leaves room for
                    interpretation, e.g. whether the tying of financial services with the obligatory
                    signing of an insurance product is permissible.
                    The legal and regulatory framework for cooperatives also does not explicitly
                    prohibit the use of bundling. On the contrary, Art. 5.12 for example mentions that
                    the insurance policy covering the provided guarantee should be included in the
                    documentation if applicable.
                    In practice, financial cooperatives bundle products, especially credit products with
                    insurance policies to guarantee repayment of the credit in case of death. This
                    bundling of product is not necessarily done in the form of a separate contract, but
                    in some observed cases is part of the savings or credit product, and thus already
                    directly included in the price of the product.


                    b. There are no general regulations that mandate cooperatives to offer to the
                    respective member information and alternative choices of provider for the bundled
                    product, if it is not an integrated part of the originally offered product and has to be
                    signed / paid for separately. Each institution can set its own policies regarding the
                    offered insurance for credits.
                    There is not an explicit disposition on the use of agents, and the use of exclusivity
                    contracts.
Recommendation      INCOOP should introduce into the regulatory framework for financial cooperatives
                    provisions that limit the use of bundling of products (unless directly included in the
                    product with no additional charges). Where bundling is deemed necessary for
                    service provision, the financial cooperative should be required to offer the client a
                    choice of provider for the bundled product together with a cooling off period.
                    Adequate information on the cost and terms of the provided products should be
                    provided to the client. Ideally, the provisions should be coordinated with the BCP
                    to establish a level playing field between the market participants.
Good Practice B.5   Key Facts Statement
                        a. Non-bank credit institutions should have a Key Facts Statement for
                           each type of account, loan or other products or services.
                        b. The Key Facts Statement should be written in plain language,
                           summarizing in a page or two the key terms and conditions of the
                           specific financial product or service, and allowing consumers the
                           possibility of easily comparing products offered by different
                           institutions.
Description         a. There is no requirement to have key fact statements on offered financial
                    products. Furthermore, the applicable rules on information transparency are not
                    sufficient to provide the clients with easily understandable and clear information:
                    The Consumer Protection Law No 1334/98 mandates in Art. 29 that credit
                    contracts should include information on (i) the applicable monthly or annual
                    interest rate, (ii) the interest rates for overdue payments, (iii) any additional
                    charges for commissions and fees, (iv) the number of payments to be made under
                    the contract, and the timing, (v) the total costs to be paid for the product, which is
                    not to be higher than the price of the product plus interest rate, and (vi) right and
                    obligations of the contract parties in case of non-compliance / non-fulfillment. If in
                    violation of the above, the contract can be claimed as null and void. However, Art.
                    29 only applies to credits linked to the purchase of products and services. This
                    leaves room for interpretation whether stand-alone financial credits not linked to
                    any purchase are covered by this provision.
                    INCOOP refers to the Art. 29 of the Consumer Protection Law in Resolution
                    3571/10 as a general requirement for all credits, and mandates that cooperatives
                    keep INCOOP updated on change made in their credit manuals to allow INCOOP
                    to verify compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. The provisions under
                    Art. 29 are however not formally introduced in Art. 5.13 (see below), or cross-
                    references in the compiled regulatory framework for cooperatives.
                    Furthermore, Art. 5.9 i of the compiled regulatory framework for financial
                    cooperatives specifies that each cooperative should inform their members about
                    nominal and effective interest rates, as well as interest rates and fees for late
                    payments, penalties and other applicable charges. However, neither the form nor
                    the frequency in which the information is to be made available is specified. This is
                    also not covered by other applicable regulations and provisions:
                      On the contract itself, Art. 5.9 h only specifies that the borrower has to sign a
                       provision allowing (i) the periodic review and verification of the investment
                       plans and the destiny of the credit, and (ii) the selling of the debt to a third
                       party.
                      Art. 5.13 specifies that the Board is to approve and regularly update the Credit
                       Manual. The latter is to include interest rates, commissions and general terms
                       and conditions of offered credits products. While in some countries the manual
                    and the conditions are approved by the members in the General Assembly,
                    thus automatically providing members with the information and a right to
                    interfere if not deemed acceptable, this is not mandated in Paraguay. There
                    are also no provisions to make the handbook or the included terms and
                    conditions publicly available in the branches or provide it to the member upon
                    request. The same holds for savings products, where the Board approves and
                    regularly updates the manual.
                 If using promissory notes to establish a credit obligation, Art. 1535 of the Civil
                 Code sets generally applicable minimum standards. The promissory note is to
                 include information on the outstanding debt, the promise of the debtor to repay, as
                 well as information on the amount to be repaid, repayment date(s) and location.
                 There is no requirement to make e.g. the interest rates and commissions
                 transparent, nor fees and procedures in case of late payment. This leaves the
                 client with very limited information on the credit itself, and falls way short of
                 international best practice. For unregulated non-bank financial intermediaries such
                 as pawnshops and moneylenders, who mostly use promissory notes to establish
                 the contractual relationship with the borrower, this very deficient information
                 standards are the only applicable legal framework,
                 For cooperatives, Resolution 6587/10 issued by INCOOP complements the
                 provisions of Art.1535 of the Civil Code on promissory notes. The latter appear to
                 be widely used by cooperatives when issuing credit. According to the resolution,
                 the promissory note is to include information on the due date of each payment, the
                 denomination and amount, the client’s promise to pay, the payment location as
                 well as the name of the cooperative, the place and date where the promise of
                 payment is signed, and the nominal and moratorium interest rate. While including
                 some of the information that the key fact statement should include, the information
                 is however provided to the client after the credit has been signed, thus too late in
                 the process to establish the transparency sought under this good practice.
                 Furthermore, the compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives does
                 not provide a reference to this resolution.


                 b. not applicable.
Recommendation   1. A key fact statement summarizing the core features of the financial product
                    should be made mandatory, both for financial cooperatives as well as for
                    unregulated non-bank financial intermediaries. This could be done by
                    SEDECO to cover all financial intermediaries and help create a level playing
                    field, but should also be incorporated into the legal and regulatory framework
                    by INCOOP to facilitate actual enforcement and adherence.
                 2. The key fact statement should be provided to the client as part of the contract
                    to be signed, and include at a minimum information on the nominal amount of
                    the credit, annual effective interest rates, total costs of the credit and the
                    repayment schedule in nominal terms. For savings products, commissions and
                    charges for maintenance of an account should be provided. Furthermore,
                    penalty fees for early repayment / withdrawal, and information on available
                    dispute resolution mechanisms should be included.
                 3. The key fact statements should be written in a clear and easily understandable
                    language, and tested with a focus group to ascertain that the information
                        included is understandable for the target group.
Good Practice B.6   Advertising and Sales Materials
                        a. Non-bank credit institutions should ensure that their advertising and
                           sales materials and procedures do not mislead customers.
                        b. All advertising and sales materials should be easily readable and
                           understandable by the general public.
                        c. Non-bank credit institutions should be legally responsible for all
                           statements made in advertising and sales materials (i.e. be subject to
                           the penalties under the law for making any false or misleading
                           statements).
Description         a. The Consumer Protection Law establishes in Art. 6 e) as a basic right of a
                    consumer to be protected against misleading sales practices and advertisement.
                    Art. 35 -37 prohibit any misleading, abusive or comparative information.
                    Furthermore, the compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives
                    establishes in Art. 2.6 as basic rules for official communications and advertisement
                    that (i) the date of the displayed financial and institutional information and the
                    official name of the cooperative should be provided, (ii) annual nominal and
                    effective interest rates should be used when providing this information, and (iii) the
                    official communications and advertisement material should not be in violation of
                    provisions of the Consumer Protection Law and – once issued by INCOOP – on
                    Deposit Insurance.
                    While these provisions establish the basis, they are not sufficient to establish that
                    the consumer is provided with adequate and holistic information on a product (see
                    also B2 and B5).


                    b. None of the laws and regulations provide as requirement that advertising and
                    sales materials should be easily readable and understandable. The only indication
                    in this direction derives from Art. 6 of the Consumer Protection Law, according to
                    which the consumer has the right to receive “adequate” education and information
                    about the features of the products and services offered, ensuring the liberty to
                    decide and fairness in the contracts.


                    c. The Consumer Protection Law includes a section on sanctions to be issued for
                    non-compliance with the provisions of the law. The sanctions can be issued by the
                    judge / court to whose attention the infraction was brought. The sanctions
                    specified in the Consumer Protection Law range from fines to be paid by the non-
                    compliant entity, to prohibiting the sales of the product and finally to the temporary
                    closing of a business. There is no explicit mention or referral to other laws that
                    would allow the client to get indemnified for any negative consequences of the
                    misleading information.
                    Furthermore, Art. 2.6 c of the compiled regulatory framework for financial
                    cooperatives mandates that a financial cooperatives needs to rectify in the same
                    communication media any erroneous information that it provided. The provision
                    also fails to make the cooperative accountable for any damages caused by the
                    misleading/false information and does not provide a timeframe for this rectification.
                    The actual implementation and enforcement of these rules is questionable. As
                    mentioned in Section A, both INCOOP and SEDECO have limited capacity to
                    actively supervise and address consumer protection regulations and issues. The
                    imposition of sanctions and mandating of remedial action thus mostly hinges on
                    information on malpractices brought forward by clients. The mission did not learn
                    of any cases of sanctions or court decisions taken to remedy misleading or false
                    advertisement.
Recommendation      1. INCOOP should incorporate into its regulatory framework (i) a clear prohibition
                       of issuing misleading/false information, (ii) a timeframe for rectifying
                       mistakenly issued misleading/false information, (iii) a requirement to use of
                       easily understandable language in sales material and public communication
                       on products, and (iv) a right for members of cooperatives to get indemnified /
                       withdraw from the contract if the decision was based on misleading or
                       incomplete information. When using agents to distribute financial products, the
                       financial cooperative should also be accountable for misleading information on
                       the product provided by the agent.
                    2. SEDECO and INCOOP need to step up the supervision of sales and
                       advertising material to actively prevent misleading and incomplete information.
                       To be cost effective, INCOOP and SEDECO should coordinate their efforts,
                       and use, where appropriate, tools such as mystery shopping and sampling to
                       monitor actual compliance.
                    3. As part of financial education campaigns, SEDECO and INCOOP should
                       communicate to consumers that (i) they have the right to receive clear and
                       understandable information on products and their core features prior to the
                       purchase / signing of the contract, and (ii) where they can file a complaint
                       /report non-compliance.
Good Practice B.7   General Practices
                    Specific rules on disclosure and sales practices should be included in the
                    non-bank credit institutions’ code of conduct and monitored by the relevant
                    supervisory authority.
Description         As discussed under Good Practice A.2., no sector wide code of conduct is in
                    place, and only a few cooperatives have issued such as code.
Recommendation      In case a code of conduct will be introduced by the sector, consideration should be
                    given to incorporate specific rules for the disclosure and sales practices. The rules
                    should establish as guiding principle the provision of honest, clear and
                    understandable information in public information material, and to abstain from
                    abusive sales practices.
Good Practice B.8   Disclosure of Financial Situation
                        a. The relevant supervisory authority should publish annual public
                           reports on the development, health, strength and penetration of the
                           non-bank credit institutions, either as a special report or as part of
                           the disclosure and accountability requirements under the law that
                           governs these.
                        b. Non-bank credit institutions should be required to disclose their
                           financial information to enable the general public to form an opinion
                         regarding the financial viability of the institution.

Description      a. Art. 117 (General Law on Cooperatives) and Art. 5 q (Law 2157 on INCOOP)
                 assign INCOOP as entity in charge of regularly organizing and publishing statistics
                 and information on the sector. Furthermore, the compiled regulatory framework for
                 financial cooperatives introduced via Resolution 11323/13 the requirement to have
                 the financial accounts audited on an annual basis, and as periodicity for sharing
                 financial information mandates that Type A entities report monthly, Type B
                 quarterly, and small Type C entities once a year. Prior to this, the available
                 information, in particular from the smaller entities, was mostly self-reported
                 information. Art. 12.10 of the compiled framework states that INCOOP will
                 publicize financial indicators on the sector on its webpage.
                 In practice, publicly available information on the sector continues to be scarce.
                 INCOOP has some data on the larger entities for 2011 and earlier on its website,
                 but more recent information is only available upon request. Although INCOOP
                 does have the statistical information, they currently do not publicly release it. Even
                 CONPACOOP, the only confederation of the sector, has no access to updated
                 information from INCOOP.
                 To bridge the information gap, CONPACOOP carried out a census of the sector in
                 2012, which has become the main and most reliable public source of information
                 on the sector. CONPACOOP is also considering putting in place a voluntary data
                 platform into which the sector entities can report, and which it will make regularly
                 available to alleviate the current dearth of publicly available information.


                 b. Art. 12.10 of the compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives
                 regulates the publication of the financial statements and the audit reports. The
                 publication is differentiated by size of entity. Type A entities having to publish their
                 financial statements in a national newspaper or written media for at least one day,
                 and also have to make the information available in the branches for at least 30
                 days. For Type B and C cooperatives, only the publication in branches is required.
                 Adherence to this publication requirement was observed during the mission.
Recommendation   1. It is paramount that INCOOP adheres to the legal requirement to provide the
                    general public with updated and relevant financial and statistical data of the
                    financial and economic situation of the cooperative sector in Paraguay.
                    Special attention should be placed in the publication on cooperatives involved
                    in financial intermediation, and in particular on Type A cooperatives, which
                    due to their assets and number of members are of systemic importance.
                 2. INCOOP should also consider issuing an annual report on financial
                    cooperatives, in which it analyzes the overall evolution and financial situation
                    of the financial cooperative sector. Furthermore, BCP and INCOOP should
                    strengthen their collaboration to ascertain that the activities of financial
                    cooperatives are regularly reflected in BCP’s reports on the financial sector in
                    Paraguay.
                 3. Consideration should also be given to mandate at a minimum Type A and B
                    cooperatives to have their audited financial statements available on their
                    websites.
SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE


Good Practice C.1   Statements
                       a. Unless a non-bank credit institution receives a customer’s prior
                          signed authorization to the contrary, the non-bank credit institution
                          should issue, and provide the customer with, a monthly statement
                          regarding every account the non-bank credit institution operates for
                          the customer.
                       b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions concerning
                          the account during the period covered by the statement; and (ii)
                          provide details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during
                          the period covered by the statement.
                       c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment
                          required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder
                          makes only the required minimum payment.
                       d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly
                          indicate the amount paid during the period covered by the statement,
                          the total outstanding amount still owing, the allocation of payment to
                          the principal and interest and, if applicable, the up-to-date accrual of
                          taxes paid.
                       e. A non-bank credit institution should notify a customer of long
                          periods of inactivity of any account of the customer and provide
                          reasonable final notice in writing to the customer if the funds are to
                          be transferred to the government.
                       f.   When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such
                            statements should be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable
                            format.
Description         a, b, d, and f. There is no requirement to provide members with monthly or
                    periodic account statements for deposits or credits, whether in paper or
                    electronically.
                    The Civil Code only covers bank deposits, so does not formally apply to
                    cooperatives.
                    The regulatory framework applicable to cooperatives does not include any
                    provisions pertaining to account statements:
                      Art. 9.1 of the compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives gives
                       cooperatives the right to independently determine the type of documentation
                       they want to provide to their members. Type A and B entities should determine
                       in their Manual on savings products the form of documentation to be used,
                       while Type C cooperatives only need to determine the basic conditions and
                       characteristics of savings products, and put in place schemes to ascertain the
                       security of the information of the deposit accounts. Art. 9.1. d. also mandates
                       that a contract has to be signed for term deposits, and Art. 9.1. c. states that for
                       savings written documentation on the available balance and undertaken
                       transactions has to be provided to the member. Furthermore, the cooperative is
                       required through Art. 9.1 f to provide the member “at any moment” with the
                    account statement or other account information that it deems adequate. These
                    provisions appear sufficient for simple savings products that require physical
                    presence for each transaction. In those cases, a savings book would be for
                    example sufficient to record all the undertaken transactions and balances and
                    no periodic additional information would be needed. However, for savings
                    products such as current accounts, which are linked to a debit card or other
                    forms of electronic payments and which are offered by a number of
                    cooperatives, the lack of specificity of information to be included as well as the
                    frequency in which the statements are to be provided to the account holder is
                    limiting. This leaves INCOOP with limited power to mandate changes if the
                    cooperative’s savings manual does not foresee adequate transparency
                    towards the member.
                   The regulations also do not cover any form of account statement to be
                    provided to the member for credit products. Art. 5.7 n of the compiled
                    regulator y framework only establishes that the cooperative’s internal files
                    should reflect repayments made and the distribution of the payment towards
                    outstanding debt, interest as well as other charges. Payments are first to be
                    credited towards costs for extrajudicial enforcement, penalty interest rates, fees
                    and other outstanding interest payments, with only the remaining funds to be
                    credited towards the outstanding principle (Art. 5.7 m). If the cooperative is to
                    work with promissory notes to establish the credit obligation (which seems to
                    be standard practice), resolution 6587/10 mandates that the note is to include
                    basic information on the nominal amount, due date and location of payment
                    (see also B5). This practice, together with the absence of a requirement to
                    provide written documentation or periodic account statement to the client,
                    leaves the client however with limited proof of payments made, and limits his
                    possibility to verify adequate crediting towards outstanding balances as well as
                    costs levied on the credit over time.


                 c. According to the compiled legal framework for financial cooperatives, Type A
                 and B cooperatives can issue credit cards. Cooperatives are among the largest
                 issuer of these instruments in the market, with over 3 million debit and credit cards
                 provided by the sector (INCOOP data as of 2013). Despite the size of the market,
                 the regulatory framework does not detail any particular provisions on credit cards,
                 including on the issuance of periodic account statements.


                 SEDECO, in its function of regulating and supervising implementation of the
                 Consumer Protection Law, has recently initiated work on a law on credit cards,
                 with the aim of introducing a number of provisions to protect the consumer and
                 increase transparency in the market. The project is currently debated in a working
                 group in Congress and with stakeholders. The law would apply to all financial
                 entities that provide credit cards to their clients, so also apply to cooperatives. It is
                 contemplated to include a provision to grant the account holder online access in
                 real time to verify the utilization of the card and outstanding balances.


                 e. The applicable regulations do not cover inactive accounts.
Recommendation   1. INCOOP should introduce a firm requirement for cooperatives to provide
                        periodic account statements, ideally free of charge, to members with deposit
                        accounts and outstanding loans, and should regulate minimum information
                        requirements for those statements.
                    2. With respect to credit cards, rules for the issuance of a periodic statement
                       should be established for cooperatives (as for banks and other financial
                       intermediaries). They should (i) cover the periodicity and form in which the
                       statements are to be provided to the user, and also include a choice for the
                       client to receive the statement in paper format, as not all clients have access
                       to the internet, (ii) mandate inclusion of all transactions concerning the
                       account during the period covered by the statement; (iii) the incorporation of
                       details on the interest rate(s) applied to the account during the period covered
                       by the statement; as well as (iv) information on minimum payment required
                       and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder makes only the
                       required minimum payment.
Good Practice C.2   Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-Interest Charges
                        a. A customer of a non-bank credit institution should be notified in
                           writing by the non-bank credit institution of any change in:
                                 (i) the interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the
                                     customer as soon as possible; and
                                 (ii) a non-interest charge on any account of the customer a
                                      reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the
                                      change.
                        b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she
                           should have the right to exit the contract without penalty, provided
                           such right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                        c. The non-bank credit institution should inform the customer of the
                           foregoing right whenever a notice of change under paragraph a. is
                           made by the institution.
Description         a. According to the applicable framework, no changes in interest rate are
                    permissible during an ongoing and current credit contract. The Board of each
                    cooperative is in charge of determining and updating the interest rates and
                    commissions for both passive and active side transactions. For credit transactions,
                    Art. 5.7 i of the compiled regulatory framework mandates that the financial
                    cooperative must keep their members informed about the currently applicable
                    annual nominal and effective interest rate charged for credit transactions, as well
                    as applicable interest rates and charges for overdue payments and other punitive
                    fees. The interest rates, commissions and fees are to apply to all members alike.
                    Art. 5.7 c, clarifies that the applicable interest rate for credit products is the official
                    interest rate in force when the member applied for the credit. No interest on
                    interest can be levied (Art. 5.7 d). Resolution 2212/06, Art. 2 further clarifies that
                    the interest rates for a loan is the rate agreed upon at initiation of the credit, and is
                    to be levied on the loan amount alone. The resolution also establishes limits for
                    interest rates on overdue payments.
                    The compiled regulatory framework also establishes procedures and rules for the
                    extension, consolidation and refinancing of an existing credit. The rules are not
                    explicit on permissible changes in interest rates. According to Art. 5.10 on
                    changes in terms and conditions of existing credit contracts, the Board is to
                    establish the procedures, subject to a number of provisions. These include,
                    amongst others
                    - Deferral of a tranche repayment: If a borrower, due to special circumstances,
                    cannot repay an upcoming tranche, he/she must request an extension in writing,
                    explaining the reasons. The credit in question must have had a solid prior
                    repayment history, and the borrower has to pay at a minimum the overdue interest
                    to get the extension approved. Only two extensions can be granted.
                    - Extension of the maturity of the credit: Up to two rounds of changes of original
                    the original contract can be accepted by the cooperative, if the request is made by
                    the borrower in written at least two weeks prior the maturity of the next tranche,
                    and the borrower is current in its obligation.
                    - Two or more loans with sound repayment history can be consolidated into one
                    credit operation with a new repayment plan.
                    - for credits with overdue payments, a refinancing can be considered. For a
                    refinancing, the borrower has to present a written request to the cooperative, and
                    the cooperative has to base the decision on a fresh assessment of the repayment
                    capacity of the client, the updating of all relevant information on the borrower, as
                    well as were deemed necessary the provision of additional collateral.
                    For deposits, no provisions on changes in interest rates and fess are incorporated
                    in the regulatory framework.


                    b, and c. not applicable
Recommendation      1. In tandem with recommendations made under B.1 (information on products)
                       and B.5 (key fact statements), INCOOP should regulate supply side driven
                       changes of interest rates during contract implementation. This should include
                       the borrower’s and depositor’s explicit right to receive timely and easily
                       understandable information on the upcoming changes, and an explicit right for
                       the members to exit the contract without penalty within a reasonable period
                       after introduction of the changes in terms and conditions.
                    2. If a sector-wide code of conduct is to be introduced, the obligation to inform
                       the customer of any change in the terms and conditions should be included.
Good Practice C.3   Customer Records
                        a. A non-bank credit institution should maintain up-to-date records in
                           respect of each customer of the non-bank credit institution that
                           contain the following:
                         (i)     a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and
                                 provide the customer’s profile;
                         (ii)    the customer’s address, telephone number and all other customer
                                 contact details;
                         (iii)   any information or document in connection with the customer
                                 that has been prepared in compliance with any statute, regulation
                                 or code of conduct;
                         (iv)    details of all products and services provided by the non-bank
                                 credit institution to the customer;
                   (v)     a copy of all correspondence from the customer to the non-bank
                           credit institution and vice-versa and details of any other
                           information provided to the customer in relation to any product or
                           service offered or provided to the customer;
                   (vi)    all documents and applications of the non-bank credit institution
                           completed, signed and submitted to the non-bank credit
                           institution by the customer;
                   (vii)   a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in
                           support of an application by the customer for the provision of a
                           product or service by the non-bank credit institution; and
                   (viii) any other relevant information concerning the customer.
                  b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period
                     for retaining all such records and, throughout this period, the
                     customer should be provided ready free access to all such records.
Description   a. The compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives establishes clear
              rules and minimum standards for member records to be kept.
              Art. 5.12 states that cooperatives should maintain a credit file on each borrower,
              which is to include at a minimum:
                  A formal ID or document to establish the identity of the applicant, and if
                   applicable, those of the co-borrowers and providers of guarantees.
                  the (written) credit application.
                  documents and proof of income used to establish the income of a borrower
                   (wage settlement, tax return, among other).
                  report or document that reflects the analysis of the client’s repayment
                   capacity and decision on the approval or rejection of the credit application.
                  report issued by the Credit Register (Central de Riesgos) of INCOOP and/or
                   other agencies providing credit risk information, with which the cooperative
                   has a contract.
                  Invoice or proof of basic service (water or electricity) for the provided address
                   of each signer, or a certificate of residence or equivalent document.
                  Appraisal of the collateral, if applicable.
                  Insurance coverage for the collateral provided to the cooperative or central
                   cooperative, if requested.
                  Copy of the document that establishes or registers the guarantee, if
                   applicable.
                  The article also permits the digitalization, with each cooperative having the
                   possibility to use the of digitalization method it has at its disposition.


              For savings, no specific documentation requirements other than the availability of
              a written contract (Art. 9.1. d) are provided. Art. 9.1 h clarifies that each savings
              product should have the documentation determined in the savings manual (Art.
              9.1a) and be in line with the general provisions of the Law on Cooperatives (Law
              438/94) and its regulation No 14052/96. For the largest depositors, Art. 9.3. of the
              compiled regulatory framework required that the financial cooperative
                        can identify the member, including his membership number and length of
                         affiliation with the cooperative
                        the number on the formal ID of the member
                        actual information on the members’ address, and available telephone
                         numbers
                        the RUC (tax identification number), if the member is registered
                        as well as the amount of savings held at the cooperative.
                    The requirement is applicable to the 50 largest depositors for Type A
                    cooperatives, the 20 largest for Type B cooperatives, and the 10 largest for Type
                    C cooperatives.


                    Furthermore, the cooperatives have to adhere to the anti-money laundering
                    reporting limits established by SEPRELAD, implying that the cooperative has to be
                    in compliance with the know your customer information requirements of
                    SEPRELAD. The established threshold for reporting is higher for cooperatives,
                    leaving them with a comparative administrative advantage compared to their
                    competitors (banks and finance companies).
                    With regard to membership records, Art. 24 of the Law on cooperatives (Law
                    438/94) establishes for individuals to be at least 18 years old, providing the
                    required membership contribution (as stipulated in the cooperatives statutes), and
                    fulfill additional requirements as specified in the social statutes of each
                    cooperatives. This has to be documented in the records. For legal entities as
                    members, Art. 25 of the general cooperative law also mandates that they are to be
                    non-profit and with a social mandate. Art. 20 of the regulation of the Law (No
                    14052/96) specifies that INCOOP is to be provided with (i) a genuine copy of the
                    decree or resolution that establishes the legal entity, (ii) a copy of the social
                    statutes, as well as (iii) a copy reflecting the decision taken by the general
                    assembly or other relevant organ to apply for membership in the cooperative.


                    b. Article 12. 11 of the compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives
                    set the minimum standards for the conservation of savings, credit and
                    membership files. At a minimum, the files are to be stored for 5 years, and all
                    cooperatives should at least have two different backups (written or digitalized) for
                    each savings, credit and membership file, with adequate safety measures in place.
                    There is no legal provision that gives the member access to the files.
Recommendation      The applicable legal framework largely follows good practice. However, the
                    member should be given a periodic right to access his files to allow him / her to
                    verify the included information.
Good Practice C.4   Credit Cards
                        a. There should be clear rules on the issuance of credit cards and
                           related customer disclosure requirements.
                        b. Non-bank credit institutions, as credit card issuers, should ensure
                           that personalized disclosure requirements are made in all credit card
                           offers, including fees and charges (including finance charges), credit
                       limit, penalty interest rates and method of calculating the minimum
                       monthly payment.
                  c. Non-bank credit institutions should not be permitted to impose
                     charges or fees on pre-approved credit cards that have not been
                     accepted by the customer.
                  d. Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment
                     warnings on each monthly statement and the total interest costs that
                     will accrue if the cardholder makes only the requested minimum
                     payment.
                  e. Among other things, the rules should also:
                          (i)   restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing
                                of credit cards to young adults (below age of 21) who have
                                no independent means of income;
                          (ii) require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest
                               rates increase;
                          (iii) prevent the application of new higher penalty interest rates
                                to the entire existing balance, including past purchases
                                made at a lower interest rate;
                          (iv) limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
                               consumers exceed their credit limits;
                          (v) prohibit a practice called ―double-cycle billing‖ by which
                              card issuers charge interest over two billing cycles rather
                              than one;
                          (vi) prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly
                               payments in ways that maximize interest charges to
                               consumers; and
                          (vii) limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards issued
                                to individuals with bad credit.
                  f.   There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of
                       unauthorized transactions and of stolen cards, with the ensuing
                       liability of the customer being made clear to the customer prior to his
                       or her acceptance of the credit card.
                  g. Non-bank credit institutions and issuers should conduct consumer
                     awareness programs on the misuse of credit cards, credit card over-
                     indebtedness and prevention of fraud.
Description   The compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives permits Type A and
              B cooperatives to issue credit cards (Art. 2.2 k), after they have provided INCOOP
              with the respective bylaws. Furthermore, Resolution 1352/06 mandates that credit
              card issuing cooperatives report every two month to INCOOP updated information
              on charges and interest rates levied on each type of credit card they offer. The
              regulatory framework does not include other provisions pertaining to credit cards,
              and thus does not cover any of the above aspects. The absence of more
              specificity in the regulations limits INCOOP’s capacity to mandate changes and
              ascertain a minimum level of transparency and business conduct in the area of
              credit cards. It also leaves cooperatives without formal guidance on standards to
                 follow.


                 It is worth mentioning that Cooperatives have a considerable share in the
                 Paraguayan credit card market. Cooperativa Binacional de Servicios Cabal LTD
                 and Cooperativa Universitaria, two of the largest cooperatives in Paraguay share a
                 credit card administrator and processor called Sistema Cabal de Tarjetas de
                 Credito with more than 45 cooperative issuer entities and a network of more than
                 7,500 commercial retailers. Overall, over 3 million debit and credit cards are
                 issued by cooperatives.
                 There are some concerns nationwide on the lack of transparency and on abusive
                 practices in the area of credit cards, including concerns about increasing over-
                 indebtedness of clients due to credit cards. These concerns also involve
                 cooperatives. One cooperative for example informed the client in the contract
                 about applicable costs and fees, explains the information to be provided in the
                 monthly statements, the minimum payment and its calculation, as well as
                 procedures of notification in case of change in costs and fees. It also specifies that
                 the place of residence of the account holder will determine the court in case of
                 dispute. The fees and interest rates are displayed on the webpage, as is the
                 model contract. However, the multitude of commissions and interest rates, as well
                 as the fact that the interest rate is provided in monthly nominal terms, makes it
                 difficult for the client to calculate the total costs for the credit card debt. Two other
                 cooperatives, that offer credit cards, have no information on costs and
                 commissions on their website, and only mention the percentage of the outstanding
                 debt that needs to be paid as a minimum. The provided information is limited to
                 the benefits, and minimum income requirements, without giving core information
                 on costs and fees involved.


                 As discussed under Good Practice C.1, SEDECO has recently initiated work on a
                 law on credit cards, with the aim to increase transparency in the market and
                 introduce core consumer protection provisions. The law would apply to all financial
                 entities that provide credit cards to their clients, so also apply to financial
                 cooperatives. As part of the law, considerations are given to include, for example,
                 (i) a right of the client to disclosure and information; (ii) right to verify the account
                 balance and account movements online; (iii) requirement to highlight in bold those
                 contract clauses that implicate obligations for the client; (iv) limits on the debt
                 collection (v) prohibition to make the blocking of a credit card contingent on the
                 client’s ability to demonstrate that the card had been stolen or lost. The BCP,
                 which houses the payment system group, will likely be the authority empowered to
                 issue the necessary rules for the implementation of this law. The project is
                 currently debated in a working group in Congress, and with stakeholders.
Recommendation   1. Given the existing deficiencies in the legal and regulatory framework
                    pertaining to credit cards, the initiative of SEDECO to introduce a law on credit
                    cards and cover core consumer protection and transparency issues, is a
                    welcome step in the right direction and applying to all financial intermediaries
                    authorized to issue credit cards will help to establish market-wide
                    transparency and a level playing field. For detailed recommendation on
                    modifications of the suggested draft provisions see the banking assessment
                        under C.5. Particular attention has to be place on the division of labor in actual
                        oversight of the implementation of the law, to ascertain that BCP has the
                        adequate power to also supervise cooperatives in the area of credit cards, or
                        to clarify collaboration in this area. The human and technical capacity in the
                        supervisory agency would have to be adjusted accordingly.
                    2. Once the law has been passed, INCOOP should assess whether additional
                       provisions should be introduced in the dedicated legal framework for financial
                       cooperatives to ascertain a solid level of transparency of fees, interest rates
                       and procedures, and undermine abusive practices that emerge.
                    3. INCOOP should also start disclosing more information on the market of the
                       cooperative’s credit cards. This should be facilitated by INCOOP’s new credit
                       registry, which it recently launched.
Good Practice C.5   Debt Recovery
                        a. All non-bank credit institutions, agents of a non-bank credit
                           institutions and third parties should be prohibited from employing
                           any abusive debt collection practice against any customer of the
                           non-bank credit institution, including the use of any false statement,
                           any unfair practice or the giving of false credit information to others.
                        b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a non-bank credit
                           institution, the person who can collect any such debt and the manner
                           in which that debt can be collected should be indicated to the
                           customer of the non-bank credit institution when the credit
                           agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into between the non-
                           bank credit institution and the customer.
                        c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a non-bank
                           credit institution customer’s debt without informing that party of the
                           debt collector’s right to do so; and (ii) the type of information that the
                           debt collector is seeking.
                        d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed
                           by law, the borrower should be:
                                (i) notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of
                                    days;
                                (ii) informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt;
                                     and
                                (iii) provided with information as to where to make payment, as
                                      well as the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact information.
Description         a, to c. The legal framework is deficient with regard to setting minimum standards
                    and dispositions in the area of debt collection:


                    The Consumer Protection Law does not have an explicit disposition on practices
                    that are allowed or forbidden when collecting debt. However, Art. 29 on credit
                    mandates that each credit contract should include information on the rights and
                    obligations of each party in case of non-compliance with contract provisions. This
                    would have to include information on procedures to be taken when the credit
                    becomes overdue.
A number of provisions of the compiled regulatory framework for financial
cooperatives also pertain to debt collection. They focus more on informing the
client about debt collection practices, but similar to above do not specify rules for
debt collection practices:
  Art. 5.9.h mandates that the credit contract includes a paragraph which gives
   the cooperative the right to sell the promissory note to a third party. The
   signature of the borrower thus pre-approves the sale.
  Art. 5.13 on the availability of internal credit manuals requires that each
   cooperative has policies on the monitoring and recovery of outstanding debt in
   place. As mentioned above, it is not clear to what extend this information is
   being openly available to the member of a cooperative.
  Finally, Art. 5.15 covers debt recovery in more depth. It establishes that
   financial cooperatives and central cooperative unions should perform all
   necessary administrative, judicial and legal procedure to recover loans through
   any lawful means and within the limits and the conditions stipulated by law. No
   further reference is provided to guide the reader to norms and regulations in
   this area, and the mission did not learn of any other relevant laws and
   regulations in place that establish rules for debt collection. Art. 5.15 explicitly
   allows the contracting of third parties for the recovery of debt, provided that
   they are not members or relatives of management, the Board, of any other
   committee of the cooperative, or are in any other formal economically related
   with the cooperative. While the regulation stipulates that the third party should
   render account at least every three month, there is not requirement to report on
   the methods used for recovery of debt by the third party. There is also not
   requirement to notify the borrower of the delegation of debt collection to a third
   party.


d. Art. 524 of the Civil Code explicitly allows the sale of a debt to a third party,
even without knowledge of the borrower. The Civil code however mandates
notification of the borrower, specifying in Art. The forms of notification are
specified in Art. 528, and include via notary, telegram and other “authentic” forms
of notification.
The compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives covers the sale of a
loan portfolio in Art. 5.16, setting separate rules for the sale of loans that are
current, and the sale of non-performing loans:
    Financial cooperatives can sell performing loans in situations of illiquidity, but
     this requires prior authorization by INCOOP. The borrower has to be notified
     by the Board of this sale. For non-performing loans, no prior authorization of
     INCOOP is required, but the overdue amount has to be fully provisioned for.
     The sales price can also not be lower than the original loan amount net of
     provisions.
    For the sale of non-performing loans, there is no explicit requirement to
     inform the borrower of the sale of his loan. However, the sale of the loan
     portfolio has to be reported as part of the financial statement, so that the
     General Assembly can take note of it. Bringing the sale of loans to the
                         attention of the General Assembly allow this gremium to become a forum for
                         discussion of observed practices of third parties, and thus introduces a first
                         (but insufficient) element of consumer protection.
                    According to information received in the field, the use of third party debt collectors
                    and sale of loan portfolio is not yet widely used amongst cooperatives. Being
                    member based, cooperatives are usually more reluctant to aggressively enforce
                    debt, which is also reflected also in higher non-performing loans and limited write-
                    offs undertaken. Also, there are no indication that cooperatives levy excessive
                    fees for phone calls, overdue interest etc. as reporting in the assessment of banks
                    and finance companies (see Good Practice C.8 of the banking sector
                    assessment). However, with increasing competition from other formal financial
                    institutions, there now seems to be more interest amongst cooperatives in working
                    with third parties to recover or sell debt. There is some indication that existing third
                    parties are using abusive enforcement practices, which would warrant to be
                    brought under control.
Recommendation      1. SEDECO, INCOOP, and BCP, should collaborate to assess options and
                       introduce regulations that establishing rules on what constitutes abusive debt
                       collection practices and set standards for permissible actions. This could e.g.
                       include setting limits with regards to days and hours that a call or visit for
                       collection purposes can be made, and the use of any false statement.
                    2. Furthermore, INCOOP should introduce into Art. 5.15. and 5.16 of the
                       compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives a requirement to
                       inform the borrower of the sale of the loan or the use of a third party for debt
                       collection. Information on debt collection procedures should also be included
                       in the contract, or - if introduced - in the key facts statement.
                    3. When working with third parties for debt collection, cooperatives should
                       ascertain that the third party adheres to the debt collection practices
                       established under recommendation 1.
                    4. In case a code of conduct is being introduced for the sector, CONPACOOP or
                       the party supervising the adherence to the code should include in their general
                       code of conduct an explicit section on debt collecting practices, and clarify
                       applicable sanctions in case of non-compliance.



SECTION D           PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                        a. The financial transactions of any customer of a non-bank credit
                           institution should be kept confidential by the institution.
                        b. The law should require non-bank credit institutions to ensure that
                           they protect the confidentiality and security of personal data of their
                           customers against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security
                           or integrity of such information, and against unauthorized access.
Description         The compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives contemplates the
                    confidentiality of the information of their members and clients:
                    Disposition 2.5 “On the Confidentiality of Information” states that the cooperatives,
                    cooperative central union, their leaders / managers, legal representatives,
                    advisors and employees cannot provide information to third parties about savings
                    and/or credit operations and its holders or beneficiaries, except
                      to the account holder / member himself and/or his/her legal representative,
                      INCOOP’s credit registry, or the entity in charge of operating it,
                      the external auditors hired by the cooperative, who are subject to the same
                       confidentiality of information;
                      for statistical purposes, studies or academic information, with the requisite that
                       only global and non-personalized information is passed on; and
                      to INCOOP, SEPRELAD and/or any other judicial authorities which explicitly
                       request information under their legal jurisdiction, directly or through INCOOP.
                    Furthermore, the general disposition of Art. 5.8 ‘On general norms for the Credit
                    Committee” mandates that the credit committee respects and adheres to the rules
                    on the confidentiality of information. For savings, Art. 9.1 establishes that
                    cooperatives have to have adequate procedures and systems in place to ascertain
                    the confidentiality of information. This is reconfirmed in Art. 12.11 on the keeping
                    of records, which also contemplates that adequate measures to ascertain the
                    confidentiality and security of the information are to be in place. Art. 12.8 sets the
                    minimum standards for the operational systems used in Type A, B and C
                    cooperatives.
                    In addition, resolution 11859/14 on INCOOP’s Credit Registry refers to data
                    privacy rules established by Laws 1682/01 and 1969/02, which cover general data
                    privacy standards in Paraguay.
                    However, there are no formal provision that cooperatives are to be held
                    accountable for damages incurred to their members through a breach of security
                    that is in the responsibility of the cooperative.
Recommendation      Provisions should be introduced in Art. 2.5 and 12.11 of the compiled regulatory
                    framework for financial cooperatives, which stipulate that cooperatives are to be
                    held accountable for damages incurred to a breach of security in their systems or
                    for information passed on to parties other than those specified in Art. 2.5.
Good Practice D.2   Credit Reporting
                       i.   Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with
                            sufficient enforcement authority.
                      ii.   The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and
                            sufficient data. The system should also maintain rigorous standards
                            of security and reliability.
                     iii.   The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting
                            system should be: (i) clear, predictable, non-discriminatory,
                            proportionate and supportive of consumer rights; and (ii) supported
                            by effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.
                     iv.    Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the
                            right of the consumer
                            (i)   to consent to information-sharing based upon the knowledge of
                                  the institution’s information-sharing practices;
                         (ii) to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once a
                              year), subject to proper identification;
                         (iii) to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-
                               optimal conditions/prices due to credit report information;
                         (iv) to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such
                              as six months;
                         (v) to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted
                             and to mark (flag) information that is in dispute;
                         (vi) to reasonable retention periods of credit history; and
                         (vii) to have information kept confidential and with sufficient security
                               measures in place to prevent unauthorized access, misuse of
                               data, or loss or destruction of data.
                   v.    The credit registers, regulator and associations of non-bank credit
                         institutions should undertake campaigns to inform and educate the
                         public on the rights of consumers in the above respects, as well as
                         the consequences of a negative personal credit history.
Description      As of June 2014, Type A cooperatives are mandated to report credit information to
                 the newly established Credit Registry in INCOOP (Resolution 11859/14). For Type
                 B cooperatives, reporting will be compulsory as of January 2015, while no such
                 provisions are yet in place for Type C cooperatives.
                 In 2009 INCOOP issued the resolution for the Credit Registry Resolution 4238/09,
                 which established the general framework for the development of a Credit Register.
                 The resolution 11859/14 complements and modifies some of these guidelines.
                 The new resolution mandates that all the cooperatives subject to the resolution
                 implement the technological and procedural mechanisms to protect and secure
                 the client’s information. They have to create clear rules and procedures for t he
                 management and report to the new Credit Registry, including: (i) getting written
                 consent of the borrower to have the information included in the credit registry, (ii)
                 to safeguard the privacy of information, and (iii) to report on a monthly basis (five
                 days after the end of each month) the credits to INCOOP. The resolution does not
                 establish a mandate to provide the client access to his/her information to verify
                 correctness or discusses procedures to rectify incorrect information. Procedures
                 for correcting errors in the Credit Registry remain to be tested.
                 For an assessment of private credit bureaus and their legal framework, see Good
                 Practice D.4.
Recommendation   1. INCOOP should also establish a deadline by which Type C cooperatives are
                    to report to and use the Credit Registry, and set basic standards for reporting
                    of Type C entities attuned to the size and technical capacities of these small
                    entities. According to information received during the mission, the Credit
                    Registry’s IT system would already have the capacity to handle this larger
                    amount of information. Counting with holistic information on credit provided
                    within the cooperative system would be important to get a better market
                    overview and help reduce the currently elevated costs for establishing
                    outstanding debt of a prospective borrower.
                 2. As recommended in Section B1 for banks, efforts should be made to facilitate
                    exchange of information and collaboration between the Credit Registry of the
                       BCP, into which banks and finance companies report, and the new Credit
                       Registry of Cooperatives. This would greatly reduce fragmentation in market
                       information, and help prevent over-indebtedness of clients..
                    3. Once first experiences with the data correction processes in the Credit
                       Registry have been made, INCOOP should assess the processes for
                       effectiveness and efficiency, and ascertain that members have easy access to
                       the registry to verify the correctness of the information.



SECTION E           DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM

Good Practice E.1   Internal Complaints Procedure
                    Complaint resolution procedures should be included in the non-bank credit
                    institutions’ code of conduct and monitored by the supervisory authority.
Description         The compiled regulatory framework for financial cooperatives contemplates a
                    number of general clauses on dispute resolution:
                      Under Art. 5.8, the Credit Committee is responsible for addressing complaints
                       and comments submitted in the area of credits, which were presented by
                       members.
                      General complaints, or credit related issue that were not satisfactorily
                       addressed by the Credit Committee, can be presented to the Board (Resolution
                       14052/96, Art. 79) or to the Supervisory Board (General Law of Cooperatives
                       438/94, Art. 29 e and 76 h).
                    While these regulations establish internal channels for voicing complaints, there
                    are no clear guidelines or minimum standards in place for receiving and
                    processing member complaints, or periodically informing management or the
                    Board of the complaints and to keep statistics on them. As a result, there are
                    usually no records and reports of these complaints available in the cooperatives.
                    As mentioned before, few cooperatives have a code of conduct in place, and there
                    is no sector wide code. One of the visited cooperatives has established minimum
                    procedures for collecting claims, attending them on a timely basis, and recording
                    and reporting them to the Supervisory Board. Information received during the
                    missions however indicates that this is not a generalized standard in the sector.
Recommendation      1. INCOOP should introduce a requirement into the regulatory framework to
                       have internal complaints mechanism in place. This should cover (i) formal
                       procedures and channels for receiving and processing complaints, (ii)
                       maximum timelines for processing and resolving complaints, (iii) the keeping
                       of records on them. The management and Board of a cooperative should
                       regularly receive and analyze this information, and INCOOP should also
                       receive basic information on the areas and number of complaints received.
                       INCOOP and CONPACOOP could establish a working group to determine
                       these basic guidelines or codes of conduct for a minimum standard on claim
                       management of the cooperative sector, and determine broad categories of
                       classification of complaints to facilitate compilation of statistics.
                    2. Members should be informed about available internal complaints mechanisms
                       and procedures. This could be established e.g. by introducing information in
                        the contract or key fact statement for each product, and displaying visibly the
                        information on dispute resolution mechanisms in the branches. Members
                        should be informed about the main areas of complaints and number of
                        complaints received as well as resolved during the General Assembly.
Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                        a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek
                           affordable and efficient third-party recourse, such as an
                           ombudsman, in the event the complaint with the non-bank credit
                           institution is not resolved to the consumer’s satisfaction in
                           accordance with internal procedures.
                        b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution in dealing with
                           consumer disputes should be made known to the public.
                        c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial and act
                           independently from the appointing authority, the industry and the
                           parties to the dispute.
                        d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                           binding upon non-bank credit institutions. The mechanisms to
                           ensure the enforcement of these decisions should be established
                           and publicized.
Description         The legal framework establishes two external dispute resolution mechanisms for
                    members of cooperatives:
                      General violations of the Consumer Protection Law can be brought to the
                       attention of SEDECO. However, SEDECO is only initiating its operation, so
                       does currently not have the capacity to handle many complaints. It also has no
                       dedicated financial sector specialist in place. A similar situation occurred under
                       its predecessor, the department within the MIC that was in charge of consumer
                       protection and which lacked capacity to actually enforce the law and handle
                       complaints.
                      The General Law on Cooperatives, in its Art. 29e, also contemplates that
                       members can bring their complaint to the attention of INCOOP, if the
                       cooperatives has been in breach with the legal and regulatory framework as
                       well as the applicable social statutes of the respective cooperative.


                    Some members make use of this mechanism, but in general this option is not
                    widely advertised. Complaints received from individual members or from the
                    management / Board of cooperatives are distributed to various departments within
                    INCOOP, and not systemically tracked. As a result, no information on the
                    complaints received, areas of concern and the suggested resolution is available as
                    will be discussed below.
                    The cooperative sector also does not have a system in place within the network or
                    through their confederation or federations to provide in systematic way affordable
                    and efficient third party recourse.
                    Another instance could be from the consumer associations, but the mission did not
                    learn of any successful broader initiative being in place. No Financial Ombudsman
                    scheme operates in Paraguay.
Recommendation   It is paramount that a system is in place where members can seek affordable and
                 efficient third-party recourse. Financial authorities and sector stakeholders should
                 therefore jointly explore options for introducing a formal out of court dispute
                 resolution mechanism. International experience suggests that an efficient
                 mechanism for this could be an ombudsman scheme, whether launched as part of
                 a public initiative or from within the sector.
SECTION A                CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS


Good Practice A.1        Consumer Protection Regime
                         The law should provide for clear rules on consumer protection in all
                         matters of insurance and there should be adequate institutional
                         arrangements for implementation and enforcement of consumer protection
                         rules.
                         a. There should be specific provisions in the law, which create an
                            effective regime for the protection of retail consumers of insurance.
                         b. The rules should prioritize a role for the private sector, including
                            voluntary consumer organizations and self-regulatory organizations.
Description              Comprehensive protection of consumers in relation to insurance generally
                         involves fair competition, prudential supervision and conduct of business rules.
                         Fair competition requires a level playing field among insurance providers and
                         choice for consumers. The main prudential issues include the solvency of the
                         insurance company, the character of those who control it and the training of its
                         staff. Conduct of business issues relate to how individual consumers are dealt
                         with.


                         (a) Legal framework
                         In Paraguay, prudential and to a limited extent business conduct regulations are
                         included in the Law of Insurance (ley 827/96). Conduct of business regulations
                         are furthermore dealt with by general provisions in the Civil Code (Law 1183/85)
                         and the Law of Defense of the Consumer and the User (Law 1334/98). These
                         three laws are relatively general, e.g. they mandate that the text of the contracts
                         be clear, readable and understandable for the client and that advertising should
                         not be misleading. The only reference to the “needs and interest” of the insured
                         is in Article 10 of the Resolution14/96 that creates the registry for agents, and
                         mentions that agents must advise the individuals that seek insurance through
                         them by offering the most convenient cover to their needs and interest. But there
                         is no further regulation on what is meant by those very general terms, or the
                         minimum content of any document that would give testimony of such procedures
                         having taken place.


                         The provisions of the laws do not present overlaps or conflicts with regard to their
                         content, but lead to a certain duplication of offices in charge of consumer
                         protection. The Law of Insurance (Article 61 e) establishes that the BCP-SIS is
                         the supervisory authority for Insurers in all aspects of their activities, while the
                         Law of Defense of the Consumer and the User (Article 40) establishes that the


9
  This Section was prepared by Manuel Pereira. It covers those insurance companies that are formally under the
supervision of the BCP-SIS.
authorities to supervise actual implementation of the law are the Ministry of
Industry and Commerce (MIC) and the Municipalities at the local level. The latter
function has been recently transferred to the Secretary of Defense of the
Consumer and User, SEDECO, which is an autonomous body linked to the MIC.


Within the BCP-SIS, there is the Division for the Defense of the User of
Insurance (DDUS) with a staff of four persons. The Resolution SS.SG. Nº 127/09
authorizes DDUS to request the collaboration of the MIC, but in practice this
doesn’t seem to have led yet to any fluid coordination between both offices.


Law of Insurance (Law 827)
The Law of Insurance was enacted in December 1995. Articles 56 and 61
provide for the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP), through the Superintendence of
Insurance (SIS), to license and supervise insurers, insurance intermediaries
(agents and brokers) and claim appraisers and settlers. Insurers operating in
Paraguay must be either a corporation or a branch of a foreign insurer (Article 3).
There are two types of licenses (Article 16): on one side those that cover losses
from goods, provide guarantees and cover persons for short periods (basic and
property or “non-life”) and on the other side life assurance companies (“life”).
“Mixed insurers (insurers holding both licenses) are allowed. Furthermore, under
a non-life license any insurer could offer life insurance products (individual or
group) under the condition that the product does not require to hold
mathematical reserves. This is the case when the cover period is one year or
shorter (article 16.a).


The minimum capital requirement amounts to 500.000 US$ per license on each
of both groups of business (Article 17). The insurers can freely determine
insurance premiums although the BCP-SIS controls if those premiums would be
insufficient, abusive or arbitrarily discriminatory (Article 15). All the contracts and
special clauses together with the corresponding rates, or their changes, must be
filed at the SIS. Access to the registry of insurance contracts is open to the public
(Article 61 h), but the information accessible through the Internet only provides
the name of the insurance plans filed by each Insurer and the date it was
approved.


Certain types of insurance (like products involving lottery and those products
providing pure financial guarantees) and tontine societies are prohibited (Article
13). In that regard, the insurance legislation in Paraguay is not different from
what is established in many other countries.


However, there are two types of services that in most countries are regulated
and supervised by the respective Insurance Supervisor (at least on their financial
and solvency aspects) and that are not covered in Paraguay by the BCP-SIS or
any other supervisor of the financial sector (in that regard there are very few
Countries, one of them being Argentina, with the same situation regarding these
services). These are
       Providers of funeral and burial services: in most of the cases they offer
        “pre-paid plans”, that imply collecting regular payments during a certain
        period, or while the “client” is alive. Upon the death of the person, the
        provider of funeral services takes care of the services defined in the
        contract. The amount of the payments frequently depends on the age of
        the “client”. This type of company doesn’t pay any indemnity but instead
        provides a service that is not necessarily based on a pre-paid
        arrangement. It seems that it has not been discussed whether the pre-
        paid contracts should be considered insurance and, consequently,
        should be regulated and supervised as such, or not. It is important to
        note however that the Law of Insurance in Paraguay establishes that
        Insurers should be dedicated to the insurance activity exclusively, and
        the main activity of this type of companies is not their pre-paid plans.
       Providers of health care: these are entities that offer to their clients
        health care services in exchange of receiving a regular payment. There
        are different plans with different prices giving access to a larger or
        shorter list of diagnosis tests, treatments and other health care services.
        On October 26th 1999, the SIS issued the Resolution SS.RG Nº 008/99
        creating the registry of the companies offering in Paraguay these
        services (the are known locally as “entidades de medicina pre-paga”) as
        it understood that these services are, on their financial aspects, similar to
        insurance. This Resolution was challenged at the Court and it is still
        pending a judicial decision. These entities still report exclusively to the
        Superintendency of Health.


The BCP-SIS has the power to impose gradual sanctions that can even reach
suspension for one year or withdrawal of license, but these sanctions relate to
the obligations and conduct as defined in the Law of Insurance. The sanctions
refer mainly to financial aspects or the use of contracts or premiums that have
not been previously filed at the BCP-SIS (Article 112). The SIS main control
activity is to make sure that the insurers’ solvency ratio is above the minimum
required and that insurers are using contracts and premium rates that were
previously filed and not objected by the BCP-SIS.


Overall, the Law doesn’t cover a wide range of consumer protection issues. The
only two main consumer protection issues that are explicitly mentioned in the law
of Insurance refer to the insurance contracts (they must be clear, readable and
understandable, Article 14) and the information provided in advertising material
should be true and complete, and not be misleading (Article 129). The Law of
Defense of the Consumer and User also refers to these two aspects in its
chapters V and VIII.


Insurance intermediaries (agents and brokers) must be registered at the SIS. To
get registered, they must obtain a specific university degree and fulfill certain
preconditions set by law (Article 74). Every two years, the registration has to be
renewed, and the agent is required to have dedicated at least 20 hours to
courses or sessions of professional development. Claim settlers are also
required to register at the SIS, but no special qualifications are mentioned
specifically for that purpose.


Civil Code (Law 1183/85)
The Civil Code contains general provisions on contracts and in Chapter XXIV
and XXV (Articles 1546 to 1695) also specific provisions for insurance contracts.
Insurance has to take the form of a contract between the parties. As in most
jurisdictions with a special section of the Civil Code dedicated to insurance
contracts, in Paraguay the Civil Code provisions tend to regulate when an
insurance contract is valid and under which circumstances it could be cancelled
by each party, or claimed as null and void. It does not regulate transparency,
disclosure or other matters related to consumer protection.


Law of Defense of the Consumer and the User (Law 1334/98)
This Law was adopted in 1998. It establishes the basic rights of the Consumer
regarding services as well as goods and works. This Law doesn’t explicitly
mention insurance but rules in chapter V (contracts) and chapter VIII
(advertising) are directly applicable to these types of services.


The rights of the consumer recognized by that law cannot be rejected, traded or
limited, and they are recognized to be above any other legal rule, custom,
practice or statement that may contradict them Article 2).


Consumers are entitled to freedom of choice and to receive education on the
characteristics of the products and services offered in the market.


(b) Role of the Private Sector
Consumers are entitled to form consumers associations. The right to form
associations is a universal right recognized in the Constitution of Paraguay and
in several other laws. The legislation on consumer protection explicitly mentions
that one of the “fundamental rights” of the consumer in Paraguay is the right to
create consumer associations to defend and represent the rights of consumers.


There are several associations of consumers, but none of these associations is
active in the field of insurance or in the financial sector per se. The most active is
ASUCOP (“Asociación de Usuarios y Consumidores del Paraguay ”), which was
created in 1998 (via Decree 7213/00) to promote sustainable consumption and
protect and defend of the rights of consumers. It operates mainly through
facilitation of information and launching consciousness campaigns.


There is one insurers’ association (“Asociación Paraguaya de Compañías de
Seguros”) and two associations of insurance brokers and agents (“Asociación
de Productores de Seguros del Paraguay” and “Federación Paraguaya de
Productores y Corredores de Seguros ”) and one association of insurance claims
settlers (“Asociación de Liquidadores de Siniestros”).
                 None of these organizations are acting as self-regulatory bodies in their
                 respective field within the insurance sector. They possibly have the technical
                 capacity, with the assistance of the SIS, to create their own codes of conduct, but
                 it is questionable whether they would be legally empowered to enforce them.


                 The Law of Insurance establishes in its Article 62 the “ Consejo Consultivo del
                 Seguro” as an advisory body on the draft regulation and other matters that the
                 BCP-SIS could decide. The associations of insurers, agents and claim settlers
                 are all represented in this consultative group.
Recommendation   1. The BCP-SIS counts with the necessary legal powers to set conduct-of-
                 business rules, but does not have a formal mandate to regulate and supervise
                 consumer protection issues. Consideration should be given to introduce this
                 formal mandate for insurance companies via the Consumer Protection Law and /
                 or the BCP’s organic law.


                 2. The BCP-SIS should develop a more detailed and comprehensive framework
                 for business conduct, which should include rules on complaint handling, “Know
                 Your Client” processes, mis-selling of products, etc. The rules should apply to
                 insurers, intermediaries (agents and brokers) and other professionals within the
                 insurance sector. For this task, the BCP-SIS should seek participation of the
                 insurance industry through the insurers association as well as all the professional
                 bodies related to the insurance sector (agents, brokers and claim appraisers and
                 settlers), but they should take into account also the opinion of the consumers’
                 associations. Information on this framework should be incorporated automatically
                 into every insurance contract to raise consumers’ awareness of it s existence and
                 their rights and, at the same time, to reinforce the legal application of these
                 provisions as they would become also a “contractual condition”.


                 3. SIS should monitor compliance with the conduct of business rules and impose
                 sanctions in the event of non-compliance. For this, a standardized approach
                 should be developed, adequate resources allocated for actual supervision and
                 enforcements, and capacity building provided to staff.


                 4. Sector stakeholders like the Paraguayan Association of Insurance Companies
                 (APCS) should develop self-regulations on different matters of the activities of its
                 members in order to raise the profile of insurance activity in Paraguay and
                 promote the adherence to good practices of consumer protection from within the
                 sector. The self-regulations should be in line with the regulations established by
                 BCP-SIS.


                 5. Paraguayan authorities should take a clear decision on what is considered an
                 insurance service to be subject to the financial and solvency supervision by the
                 SIS. This affects mainly the services offered by the health care institutions under
                 the name of “medicina pre-paga” which is pending a Court decision since many
                 years ago (1999) and by the providers of funeral and burial services when the
                 offer plans for the pre-payment of their services.
Good Practice A.2   Contracts
                    There should be a specialized insurance contracts section in the general
                    insurance or contracts law, or ideally a separate Insurance Contracts Act.
                    This should specify the information exchange and disclosure requirements
                    specific to the insurance sector, the basic rights and obligations of the
                    insurer and the retail policyholder and allow for any asymmetries of
                    negotiating power or access to information.
Description         Ideally, “Business to Consumer” (B2C) contract regulation should specify clearly:
                    (i) the minimal contents of an insurance contract, differentiated by the
                    fundamental nature of the cover (long term, liability, property, etc.), (ii) when the
                    contract goes into force, (iii) when underinsurance justifies the application of the
                    reduction through the “proportional rule”, (iv) notifications requirements when an
                    insurer wishes to cancel or alter a contract, (v) how contracts will be interpreted
                    in the event of dispute, (vi) minimal requirements regarding the use of plain
                    words, typeface, etc., and (vii) what clauses may not be included (for example
                    compulsory arbitration on the insurer’s terms, etc.).


                    As in some other Countries (e.g. Turkey, Italy), Paraguay does not have a
                    specialized insurance contracts section in the general insurance or contracts law,
                    nor a separate Insurance Contracts Act that determines the information
                    exchange and disclosure requirements specific to the insurance sector.
                    Paraguay is among the Countries where the development of the commercial and
                    industrial insurance preceded the development of the consumer (retail) insurance
                    market. As a result, the corpus of the insurance law doesn’t yet adequately cover
                    B2C. However, there is a separate section of the Civil Code that specifically
                    regulates the basic rights and obligations of the insurer and the retail
                    policyholder, and to which the Law on Insurances directly refers. Furthermore,
                    the Law of Insurance, in its Article 61, empowers the BCP-SIS to establish the
                    minimum content of the insurance contracts (paragraph h) and the disclosure of
                    information from financial statements of assets and liabilities (paragraph k).


                    While the regulatory framework for insurance contracts in Paraguay touches
                    upon some of these issues, the regulations continue to be deficient. One
                    example is the case of Group Life Insurance Contracts linked to loans, which
                    have become very frequent in Paraguay. The Contract is signed between the
                    Insurance Company and the Bank (or the financial institution providing the loan),
                    so does not directly involve the insured, which is the client of the financial
                    institution receiving the loan. Regardless of the content and completeness of that
                    insurance contract which affects the two parties that sign it (the Insurer and the
                    financial institution), the important matter is that the insured is neither properly
                    informed about the terms of this insurance contract (often he is not even aware
                    of its existence) nor about the cost that he is being charged for it. To remedy this
                    gap in information and transparency, the BCP recently issued minimal
                    information requirements for credit card loans, mandating that the credit card
                    holder should receive information on the cost of insurance through the monthly
                    statements. No such regulation exists for the other loans.
                    Other provisions, which are included in the Consumer Protection Law or in the
                    Civil Code, (e.g. prohibiting bundling of products, and mandating contracts to be
                    in clear language) are too general in nature and would have to be specified and
                    incorporated into the legal and regulatory framework issued by BCP-SIS to be
                    applicable and enforceable.


                    Finally, the established rules and regulations also do not achieve their desired
                    effect, as there is limited consumer awareness of the restrictions and special
                    clauses established in their insurance contracts.
Recommendation      1. The BCP-SIS should use the mandate given to it by the Article 61 (especially
                    paragraphs h and k) to set minimum standards for insurance contracts, and
                    regulate further the information exchange and disclosure requirements specific to
                    the insurance sector.
                    2. It is also important to revise Article 14, which stipulates that insurance
                    contracts should be written in a clear form and printed in an easily readable
                    format. The interpretation of this “clear and understandable” stat ement should
                    factor in the capacity of the consumer to read and understand the contract that
                    he is signing.
Good Practice A.3   Codes of Conduct for Insurers
                    a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for insurers that is
                       devised in consultation with the insurance industry and with relevant
                       consumer associations, and that is monitored and enforced by a
                       statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory agency.
                    b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, insurers should publicize
                       and disseminate it to the general public through appropriate means.
                    c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes
                       for insurers on such matters specific to insurance products or
                       channels.
                    d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                       disseminated.
Description         There is no insurance code of conduct in Paraguay.
Recommendation      A Code of Conduct should be developed in broad consultations with the industry.
                    It should include:
                       For sales and distribution of insurance products: fairness, completeness and
                        clarity of promotional material, pre-contractual information and ”key facts”.
                       Measures to control insurance intermediation arrangements and the use,
                        training, remuneration and control of agents. This should also include
                        disclosure to the consumer of the status of any intermediary and related
                        information (e.g. Amount of commission paid, checking the appropriateness
                        of the policy, giving a ‘cooling-off’ period, etc.).
                       Information on renewal and changes in the contract.
                       For insurance claims: provision of clear written details on the procedures to
                        be followed in the event of an insurance claim, prohibiting rejection of a claim
                        for non-disclosure that is not material, or which arose from lack of clarity in
                        the insurer’s questions for the underwriting process.
                       With regard to complaints (including any dissatisfaction with the handling of a
                        claim): provision of clear written details on the processes to be used, the
                        obligation for insurers to deal fairly, effectively and promptly with any
                        complaint, adequate notice to consumers of the existence of the complaints
                        process and how to access it, appointment of a suitable person/department
                        to deal independently with complaints and to keep records of this, as well as
                        time limits for giving the consumer a full written response.
Good Practice A.4   Other Institutional Arrangements
                    a. Prudential supervision and consumer protection can be placed in
                       separate agencies or lodged in a single institution, but allocation of
                       resources between prudential supervision and consumer protection
                       should be adequate to enable the effective implementation of
                       consumer protection rules.
                    b. The judicial system should provide credibility to the enforcement of the
                       rules on financial consumer protection.
                    c. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in
                       promoting consumer protection in the area of insurance.
Description         a. Prudential Supervision and Consumer Protection


                    Prudential supervision and market conduct regulations are assigned to the BCP-
                    SIS. The BCP-SIS has a Division for the Defense of the User of Insurance
                    (División de Defensa al Usuario de Seguros). This office counts with a staff of
                    four persons formally mapped to it and provides some technical and legal advice
                    to the users that approach it as well as supports the BCP-SIS in its general
                    supervision process. It has no authority to also verify adherence to the
                    framework of the Consumer Protection Law (Law 1334/98).


                    The on-site inspection of insurance companies can include the assistance of the
                    DDUS but there are no clear written processes of what that verification should
                    comprehend in the area of consumer protection / business conduct.


                    The BCP-SIS issued on October 28th 2009 the Regulation SS.SG. Nº 127/09,
                    which includes a standard form to submit to the SIS any complaint in the cases
                    where an insurer doesn’t attend properly a claim. This however doesn’t seem to
                    be fully implemented:
                           The standard form to file complaints is not easily accessible to the
                            consumers (it cannot be found on the BCP web site, nor on the internet,
                            the insurer’s websites nor in the site of any association related to the
                            insurance sector).
                           Even though the regulation establishes that the DDUS has to submit a
                            report of its actions every six months, there are no statistics on the
                            complaints submitted to the DDUS.
                           For different causes, there is no fluid and effective coordination between
                            the DDUS and the MIC (now SEDECO).
                           On the premises of visited insurers, no poster or signs were visible that
                            explained the process to follow to submit complaints to the DDUS and
                            referring to the official form to fill for that purpose.


                    The Secretariat for Consumer Protection (SEDECO) has the authority in the
                    areas of consumer protection defined by the Law 1334/98. This includes
                    insurance, but SEDECO doesn’t have the resources nor the expertise to deal
                    with financial product related complaints. However, if it observes a breach of the
                    law on consumer protection by any insurer it would have the power to impose a
                    penalty.


                    b. Judicial system
                    Final decisions on disputes relating to insurance issues are to be resolved in the
                    Courts, but these don’t consider yet concepts such as “mis -selling” of an
                    insurance product. This concept is not clearly defined in any of the laws
                    regulating insurance. The only reference that the mission team found was
                    Resolution 14/96, Article 10 that includes among the obligations of agents and
                    brokers to provide advice to their clients, and to offer them the most convenient
                    coverage for their needs and interest.


                    c. Media and consumer associations
                    Printed media report from time to time cases regarding different types of
                    consumer protection issues, but these seldom involve insurance, except for a
                    recent conflict involving group life insurance bundled with credit cards and
                    consumer loans.


                    The consumer association ASUCOP was involved in the campaign against
                    abusive group life premium rates applied for some group life insurance linked to
                    consumer loans.
Recommendation      1. As a first step, the BCP-SIS, in coordination with SEDECO, should fully
                       implement Regulation SS.SG. Nº 127/009 and ascertain that the information
                       on the complaints process at the BCP-SIS is made publicly available.
                    2. A comprehensive program of on-site inspection specific for the verification of
                       the consumer protection measures adopted by insurers, agents and brokers
                       should be defined, formally documented and executed. SEDECO’s
                       participation would also be advisable in the process, at least in its definition
                       phase.
Good Practice A.5   Bundling and Tying Clauses
                    Whenever an insurer contracts with a merchant or credit grantor (including
                    banks and leasing companies) as a distribution channel for its contracts,
                    no bundling (including enforcing adhesion to what is legally a single
                    contract), tying or other exclusionary dealings should take place without
                    the consumer being advised and able to opt out
Description         Bundling and tying of insurance cover to other contracts is not clearly prohibited.
                    Article 14 of the Law on Defense of the Consumer and User establishes that the
                 sale of a product or service cannot be conditional to the purchase of another
                 product or service, unless the usage or the nature of the product or service make
                 that they are offered as a “package”. This wording leaves room for interpretation.
                            th
                 On April 27 , 2000 the BCP authorized banks and finance companies to act as
                 insurance brokers, subject to the Law of Insurance (Act 49, Resolution Nº 9 of
                                                          th
                 the Board of the BCP). On October 10 , 2000 the BCP-SIS Regulation SS.RG.
                 Nº 03/00 opened the register to banks and finance companies that wished to
                 become registered as insurance brokers. These entities have the obligation to
                 create a department specialized as “insurance broker”, staffed with personnel
                 that should pass the same type of examinations on knowledge and technical
                 training than those required to register as an insurance agent. This regulation
                 specifically forbids banks and finance companies to use exclusively one
                 insurance company, or not to respect the right of their clients to freely choose
                 their agent or broker. Banks and finance companies are obliged to include in the
                 written insurance proposals to their clients a note referring to their freedom of
                 choice of insurance agent and of insurer, in accordance with Article 6 of the law
                 of Defense of the Consumer and the User. Finally, this regulation bans any
                 clause that may imply a tacit acceptance of the proposed insurance, as well as
                 conditioning the sale of a product or service to the purchase of another product
                 or service. However, it also introduces the same exception as specified in Article
                 14 of the law on Defense of the Consumer and User, namely that they are
                 offered as a package due to custom, usage or nature of the product or service.
                 In practice, bundling of life insurance (using group life contracts) with loans has
                 been and still is standard practice. This creates clear situations of conflict of
                 interest. Banks and finance companies receive very high commissions for their
                 brokerage services, which are passed on through very high premiums to their
                 client. The client has no freedom of choice of the insurance contract when
                 applying for a loan, so cannot choose the insurance that best suits him and is the
                 most affordable. To stem this widespread practice, the BCP introduced detailed
                 transparency rules on the cost of insurance to be disclosed to the consumers,
                 and the BCP-SIS issued a specific regulation (Regulation SS.SG. N° 45/13)
                 introducing a maximum commission of 30% on the premium in the case of life
                 insurance. This maximum commission was introduced to mitigate the observed
                 market abuses in the case of group life insurance linked to consumer and credit
                 card loans. It seems however that full control of the high prices paid for these
                 insurances has not yet been reached. Administrative charges do not count as
                 commissions, so are not covered by this 30 percent cap. Thus, banks or finance
                 companies could be assigned part of that administrative charge to compensate it
                 for its provided administrative support.
Recommendation   1. SEDECO and BCP-SIS should jointly clarify whether the bundling of insurance
                 products with loans or other financial services is allowed under Art. 14 of the
                 Consumer Protection Law. The regulatory framework of BCP-SIS should then be
                 adjusted accordingly to clarify if and under which conditions this is allowed.
                 2. To prevent situations of conflict of interest, the regulations should clearly
                 specify transparency and disclosure requirements, including providing the
                 customer with a choice of at least 2 or three insurance options, and mandating a
                 clearer description of what the insurance cover is (events insured, amount
                    covered and exclusions). Furthermore, it is important to define which situations
                    should give to the consumers the possibility to opt out.



SECTION B           DISCLOSURE & SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   Sales Practices
                    a. Insurers should be held responsible for product-related information
                       provided to consumers by their agents (i.e. those intermediaries acting
                       for the insurer).
                    b. Consumers should be informed whether the intermediary selling them
                       an insurance contract (known as a policy) is acting for them or for the
                       insurer (i.e. in the latter case the intermediary has an agency
                       agreement with the insurer).
                    c. If the intermediary is a broker (i.e. acting on behalf of the consumer)
                       then the consumer should be advised at the time of initial contact with
                       the intermediary if a commission will be paid to the intermediary by the
                       underwriting insurer. The consumer should have the right to require
                       disclosure of the commission and other costs paid to an intermediary
                       for long-term savings contracts. The consumer should always be
                       advised of the amount of any commission and other expenses paid on
                       any single premium investment contract.
                    d. An intermediary should be prohibited from identically filling brokering
                       and agency roles for a given general class of insurance (i.e. life and
                       disability, health, general insurance, credit insurance).
                    e. When a bank is the intermediary, the sales process should ensure that
                       the consumer understands at all times that he or she is not purchasing
                       a bank product or a product guaranteed by the bank.
                    f.   Sanctions, including meaningful fines and, in the case of
                         intermediaries, loss of license, should apply for breach of any of the
                         above provisions.
Description         a. Although Insurers are allowed to sell their contracts to their clients directly
                    (without the intervention of any intermediary), they are in practice dependent on
                    agents (individuals) and brokers (companies) to distribute their products. A
                    limited number of these agents are paid by a combination of salary and
                    commission and could be commercially linked to one insurer. The dominant
                    business model, for individual products, involves the use of “independent” agents
                    paid on a commission basis.
                    Since the year 2000, “Bancassurance” (insurance sold by banks and other
                    financial institutions that in the case of Paraguay should include also
                    Cooperatives) is permitted. The regulation requires that when such institutions
                    sell insurance in their premises they should do it using adequately trained staff
                    that should count with the same examinations that registered agents.
                    Overall, insurers are not held responsible for product related information
                    provided by the agents if the insurer has not produced the information. In
                    general, insurers don’t have a strong control over their agents since a direct
contact between the insurer and the policyholder would be negatively interpreted
by the agent / broker as an interference in the relationship with their clients.
However, some entities exert a stronger control on the agents that sell their
products, while in most cases this is minimal.
There is no specific rule making responsible the insurer for the information
provided by the agent or broker if it was not involved in its elaboration. In that
regard, as a kind of protection (although not directly addressing the problem) it
should be noted that the policyholder has the right to step off the insurance
during a period of 30 days counted from the reception of the contract if the terms
of the insurance policy differ from those of the proposal.
Furthermore, it should be noted that agents and brokers are licensed, and have
to fulfill certain regular training requirements. To a certain extent this could
mitigate some of the noted gap in responsibility of the insurance company over
the information provided by the agent / broker, as long as the insurer has in
place some capacity building and oversight over the quality of the service
provided.
In practice, insurers have not adopted sufficient measures to control the sales
process followed by the agents selling their products like practicing “mystery
shopping” or obtain any feedback from their policyholders.


b. The insurance regulation requires that consumers be given appropriate
information about the nature of the relationship between the agent/broker and
the insurance company. When there is a possible conflict of interest the agent or
broker must disclose how he is being remunerated. Insurance regulation
(Resolution SS.SG. Nº 143/12) establishes that:
   the terms and conditions between them and their clients
   their links with the insurer (just intermediary, or intermediary with legal power
    to represent the Insurer, etc.
   When there is a possible conflict of interest, they must declare on which
    basis they are paid (agreed commissions).


There is no formal control / supervision in place to verify to what extent this rule
is being followed by agents/brokers.


c. The obligation to disclose how the agent is being paid was introduced in 2012
- Regulation SS.SG Nº 143/12 - but in the following year (2013) the SIS issued
the Regulation SS.SG Nº 45/13 waiving the commission disclosure obligation in
those cases where the agent/broker’s commission is equal or below 30% of the
premium. In practice the amount of the commission is never disclosed to the
consumer. In fact, after the reform only commissions above 30% should be
disclosed but, taking into account that 30% is the maximum commission legally
permitted, if it was the case, it would be a non-sense to expect that an
agent/broker would disclose to its client that he is receiving commissions above
the maximum legally permitted.
                    d. The Law of Insurance just mentions that agents/brokers should not present or
                    suggest, any information with the intention of deceiving or misleading the
                    consumer.
                    There is no explicit mention in the regulation about a broker acting for the insured
                    and the insurer in the same transaction. Regulation SS.SG Nº 143/12
                    establishes that agents / brokers should adopt, when applicable, the minimum
                    governance requirements set in the Insurance Core Principle n. 7 of the IAIS (as
                    reproduced in the Regulation SS.SG Nº 92/12). Regulation SS.SG Nº 108/10
                    requires that agents / brokers should give their clients complete and relevant
                    information before the contract is signed and also after the insurance is in force,
                    but these are relatively general statements difficult to interpret in practice, and no
                    formal control have been implemented on the effective interpretation and
                    application of these principles


                    e. Although banks or brokers related to a bank act frequently as intermediaries in
                    group-business, and regulations have been issued regarding maximum
                    commissions and disclosure of the cost of insurance to the consumer, there is no
                    evidence that consumers are aware of who is effectively providing that insurance
                    cover.


                    f. The BCP-SIS has the power to sanction, including issuing larger fines and
                    withdrawing the license of agents and brokers. However, the law and its
                    regulations do not provide clear guidance on the different actions that could be
                    considered as misconducts and the rules to assess the severity of the faults.
Recommendation      1. Establish more detailed disclosure obligations from the Insurers and the
                       agents/brokers to the policyholders (or the insured in the case of group
                       policies) in order to bring awareness to the consumer on the existence of the
                       insurance coverage (with a clear declaration, when applicable, of the
                       exclusions) and the cost of it.
                    2. Introduce some degree of co-responsibility of the insurer on the sales
                       process followed by the agents, specifically on the information provided to
                       the policyholders. International best practice suggests that the insurer should
                       be held accountable for any wrong information provided on their products by
                       the agent.
                    3. Insurance contracts issued should be sent to the policyholders with a “Note”
                       recommending the immediate comparison of the terms of the contract with
                       those of the proposal of insurance
                    4. Finally, the applicable sanctions for agents, which the BCP-SIS can issue,
                       should be assessed and revised to give the BCP-SIS adequate tools to
                       sanction observed misconduct by agents.
Good Practice B.2   Advertising and Sales Materials
                    a. Insurers should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
                       procedures do not mislead customers. Regulatory limits should be
                       placed on investment returns used in life insurance value projections.
                    b. Insurers should be legally responsible for all statements made in
                        marketing and sales materials they produce related to their products.
                    c. All marketing and sales materials should be easily readable and
                       understandable by the general public.
Description         a. The Consumer Protection Law (Law 1334/98) in its Article 35 forbids any
                    misleading advertising. The Law of Insurance (Law 827/96), Article 129, forbids
                    also the publication of any advertisement or information that is false, incomplete
                    or ambiguous on insurance or reinsurance that might lead to wrong
                    interpretations.


                    Regarding investment return used in life insurance projections and illustrations, it
                    must be noted that, presently, there are 34 licensed insurance companies of
                    which only seven have a life assurance license. Out of these 7 only 1 offers life
                    products that are not one year term life. As apparently no savings are offered
                    through insurances, there are no specific rules for these types of products.


                    b. Insurers are held responsible for all the information they provide and the sales
                    material that they produce, but they are not liable for the information that agents
                    might give to their clients outside of the information produced by the insurance
                    company.


                    c. Both the Law of Insurance and the Consumer Protection Law establish that all
                    marketing and sales material should be easily readable and understandable. In
                    some cases, the interpretation of this statement might have a subjective
                    component since this is closely linked with the financial literacy of the
                    consumers.
                    There is no regular or formal control by the SIS that this material complies with
                    that rule.
Recommendation      The DDUS should be given the function to verify that marketing and sales
                    material complies with the requisites of clarity and is understandable. This
                    shouldn’t be interpreted as requiring pre-approval by the BCP-SIS of the
                    marketing material, but rather as a continuous verification task (e.g. through
                    mystery shopping) that should be addressed by the BCP-SIS.
Good Practice B.3   Understanding Customers’ Needs
                    The sales intermediary or officer should be required to obtain sufficient
                    information about the consumer to ensure an appropriate product is
                    offered. Formal ―fact finds‖ should be specified for long -term savings and
                    investment products and they should be retained and be available for
                    inspection for a reasonable number of years.
Description         There is no legally enforceable requirement to obtain sufficient information about
                    the consumer to ensure that an appropriate product is offered. According to the
                    BCP-SIS, no such formal requirement is currently in place for selling insurance
                    products. However, Regulation 14/96 of the BCP-SIS, which creates the registry
                    for agents and brokers and establishes their obligations (Article 10 of Annex 1)
                    mentions that agents must give advice to the persons that wish to get insurance
                    through them and offer the coverage that is suitable to their needs and interests.
                    None of the sales processes described by the insurers interviewed involved any
                    explicit action to verify that the agents understand the consumer needs.
                    However, it is important to note that almost 50% of the insurance market in
                    Paraguay is auto insurance, and 13% is life assurance (of which 97 % are group
                    contracts of one year renewal term insurance). Thus, there is not a wide range of
                    products or choices to be offered, and in most cases the main difference among
                    products is based just on the premium.
Recommendation      1. Conduct of business rules imposed by the BCP-SIS (or a code of practice if
                    ever adopted by the insurance industry) should include:
                           The requirement that the insurer (or its agent or broker) is required to
                            check the appropriateness of the policy and suitability for the client.
                           If no advice is given, the insurer should be required to highlight this, and
                            to provide clarification why this was not given.
                    These processes should be formally documented, with a copy handled to the
                    policyholder or, in the case of group insurance, to the insured. The BCP-SIS
                    should regularly assess the documentation to verify if appropriate products were
                    offered, and sufficient information on the client collected.
                    2. In view of the underdeveloped nature of the insurance market in Paraguay,
                    specific provisions for insurance contracts as vehicles for long-term savings and
                    investment products would be premature. This should however be introduced,
                    once the market develops.
Good Practice B.4   Cooling-off Period
                    There should be a reasonable cooling-off period associated with any
                    traditional investment or long-term life savings contract, after the policy
                    information is delivered, to deal with possible high pressure selling and
                    mis-selling.
Description         Investments and long-term savings are currently not being channeled through
                    insurance products in Paraguay.
                    The Consumer Protection Law (Law 1.334/98) establishes as a general rule,
                    applicable to all contracts, a 7 days cooling-off period from the signing of the
                    contract in certain circumstances (contract signed remotely). In the case of life
                    insurance bundled with a credit, the insurance is a group contract signed
                    between the bank, or financial institution, and the insurer. Furthermore this type
                    of insurance is a short-term cover of the death risk and not an investment or
                    savings contract. This principle would need to be interpreted
                    The Civil Code establishes in its Article 1556 that if the conditions of the
                    insurance contract differ from the proposal of insurance it will be assumed that
                    the policyholder is accepting the new conditions unless he refuses them in the
                    first month of reception of the contract. Again, the fact that the signing parts are
                    the financial institution and the insurer makes that this Article of the Civil Code is
                    not directly applicable.
Recommendation      It is important to clarify and regulate the cooling-off periods of insurance
                    products, especially those that are bundled with another product such as a credit
                    or enclose any investment feature. Given the lack of development of the long-
                    term savings market, the latter is not an immediate need.
Good Practice B.5   Key Facts Statement
                    A Key Facts Statement should be attached to all sales and contractual
                    documents, disclosing the key factors of the insurance product or service
                    in large print.
Description         A key facts statement is not mentioned in any law, regulation, or code of conduct
                    in Paraguay. According to the BCP-SIS, there is currently no such requirement in
                    place. No insurance company visited by the mission provided such a summary of
                    the core conditions of the product to their potential customers. The promotional
                    material of some companies was better than others in highlighting a few key
                    features of the contract, but overall fell short of the above mentioned fact sheet.
Recommendation      1. The regulatory framework should introduce the requirement for insurers to
                    make sure that their agents / brokers provide to their clients a standardized fact
                    sheet which summarizes the main features and costs of the products, as well as
                    information on available dispute resolution mechanisms, both within the
                    insurance and also alternative public and private options available for the client
                    2. The key fact statement should be tested prior to its introduction to ascertain
                    that the provided information is clear and easily understandable for clients. It
                    should also include information on the available dispute resolution mechanisms.
                    3. In the longer term, SEDECO should explore options to also extent the
                    mandate to provide clients with a standardized factsheet for all types of services
                    provided similar to insurance (see A1)
Good Practice B.6   Professional Competence
                    a. Sales personnel and intermediaries selling and advising on insurance
                       contracts should have sufficient qualifications, depending on the
                       complexities of the products they sell.
                    b. Educational requirements for intermediaries selling long-term savings
                       and investment insurance products should be specified, or at least
                       approved, by the regulator or supervisor.
Description         a. The Law of Insurance (Law 827/96) establishes that agents and brokers must
                    be registered at the SIS. In order to register for the first time, the candidates have
                    to obtain first a specific university degree. Registered agents and brokers have to
                    renew their license every two years and are requested to have at least 20 hours
                    of continuous Professional Development during those two years. The content of
                    the courses is approved by the BCP-SIS and the associations of agents/brokers
                    are frequently in charge of proposing the content and organizing the courses.
                    The BCP-SIS keeps regular contacts with the University in order to keep updated
                    the syllabus of the degree that will give access to the register of insurance
                    agents.


                    b. No long term savings or investments products are offered in Paraguay through
                    insurance products. Educational requirements for these products form part of the
                    syllabus to become an agent but, since this type of products are practically not
                    offered in the market, there is no significant culture on these issues among
                    agents. At this stage it is still premature to consider insurance as a possible
                    vehicle for channeling long term savings or investments.
Recommendation      The process and requisites to follow for accessing the profession of insurance
                    agent that are in place seem to guarantee their professional competence.
                    However these requisites don’t cover yet with sufficient depth and specialization
                    issues related to long-term savings and investment since the Paraguayan
                    insurers do not offer such products. Should that market develop in the future, the
                    SIS would have to revise with the academics at the University the content of the
                    programs followed to obtain that degree (“updating and recycling” the agents
                    already registered should also be addressed).
Good Practice B.7   Regulatory Status Disclosure
                    a. In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio or otherwise,
                       an insurer should disclose: (i) that it is regulated, and (ii) the name and
                       address of the regulator.
                    b. All insurance intermediaries should be licensed and proof of licensing
                       should be readily available to the general public, including through the
                       internet.
Description         a. According to BCP-SIS, there is currently no legally enforceable requirement
                    for an insurer to disclose: (i) that it is regulated, or (ii) the name and address of
                    the regulator. In practice, some insurers do include this information in their
                    offices, their promotional material and/or provide a copy of their license on their
                    websites.
                    Every month the BCP-SIS publishes the list of licensed insurers, their rating and
                    some of the financial ratios. At the same time the BCP-SIS publishes a list of
                    entities that have been reported offering insurance services (as carrier or
                    intermediary) and that don’t count with a proper authorization for that.


                    b. Insurance intermediaries who are agents/brokers are required to be licensed
                    and registered at the BCP-SIS. The list of registered agents and brokers is
                    accessible at the website of the SIS. The content of the courses that have to be
                    followed to become an insurance agent, and of the requested Continuous
                    Professional Development courses to renew the license every two years have to
                    approved by the SIS
Recommendation      1. It would be recommendable to introduce a requirement that all providers of
                    insurance and/or services similar to insurance should disclose whether or not
                    they are regulated, and by whom.
                    2. SEDECO and BCP-SIS should collaborate to assess the best option for
                    issuing this requirement to cover those providers of services similar to insurance
                    that are not registered and regulated by BCP-SIS.
Good Practice B.8   Disclosure of Financial Situation
                    a. The regulator or supervisor should publish annual public reports on
                       the development, health, strength and penetration of the insurance
                       sector either as a special report or as part of the disclosure and
                       accountability requirements under the law governing it.
                    b. Insurers should be required to disclose their financial information to
                       enable the general public to form an opinion with regards to the
                       financial viability of the institution.
                    c. If credible claims paying ability ratings are not available, the regulator
                       or supervisor should periodically publish sufficient information on
                       each insurer for an informed commentator or intermediary to form a
                       view of the insurer’s relative financial strength.
Description         a. BCP-SIS doesn’t publish a comprehensive annual public re port on the
                    development, health, strength and penetration of the insurance sector, but it
                    provides in its website detailed statistical and financial information about each
                    insurer.


                    b. The Law on Insurance Activities requires insurance companies to publish their
                    audited financial statements in the relevant official publications and mass media.
                    Moreover, when a consumer takes out a policy, he/she can ask for a copy of the
                    insurance company’s financial statements.


                    c. BCP-SIS publishes every month in two newspapers, and on its website,
                    information about the insurers ratings including 10 ratios on their financial
                    performance (claims and expenses to premiums, return, etc.). BCP-SIS also
                    includes in its monthly publication as a warning a list of entities that have been
                    detected to offer insurance services (as insurers or agents/brokers), but that are
                    not authorized nor registered at the BCP-SIS.
Recommendation      1. The BCP should include more financial information on the insurance sector
                    when publishing general financial sector statistics and assessments.
                    2. The detailed monthly financial information on the insurers that is shown in the
                    BCP website should be made more easily accessible and understood by
                    consumers and users.



SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Customer Account Handling
                    a. Customers should receive periodic statements of the value of their
                       policy in the case of insurance savings and investment contracts. For
                       traditional savings contracts, this should be provided at least yearly,
                       however more frequent statements should be produced for investment-
                       linked contracts.
                    b. Customers should have a means to dispute the accuracy of the
                       transactions recorded in the statement within a stipulated period.
                    c. Insurers should be required to disclose the cash value of a traditional
                       savings or investment contract upon demand and within a reasonable
                       time. In addition, a table showing projected cash values should be
                       provided at the time of delivery of the initial contract and at the time of
                       any subsequent adjustments.
                    d. Customers should be provided with renewal notices a reasonable
                       number of days before the renewal date for non-life policies. If an
                       insurer does not wish to renew a contract it should also provide a
                         reasonable notice period.
                    e. Claims should not be deniable or adjustable if non-disclosure is
                       discovered at the time of the claim but is immaterial to the proximate
                       cause of the claim. In such cases, the claim may be adjusted for any
                       premium shortfall or inability to recover reinsurance.
                    f.   Insurers should have the right to cancel a policy at any time (other than
                         after a claim has occurred – see above) if material non-disclosure can
                         be established.
Description         a, b, and c. There is practically no insurance investment product or products with
                    a cash value sold in Paraguay.


                    d. There does not appear to be any legally enforceable requirement that
                    customers be provided with renewal notices before the renewal date for policies
                    or that they be notified if the insurer does not wish to renew a contract. SIS
                    reported that it is up to the policyholder to remember to pay any renewal
                    premium.


                    e. and f. Insurers can cancel a policy for non-disclosure, but the non-disclosure
                    has to be material. Materiality is defined in the Civil Code (Article 1549) as any
                    information that, if the Insurer had known it when underwriting the contract,
                    would have led it to reject the risk or accept it under different conditions.
Recommendation      1. The BCP-SIS should introduce a requirement for insurance companies to
                    provide a renewal notice to policyholders with sufficient anticipation.
                    2. If insurance investment products are starting to be offered in the market, BCP-
                    SIS should also regulate the information and disclosure requirements that the
                    insurance company should regularly send to the policyholders of savings and
                    investment insurance products.



SECTION D           PRIVACY & DATA PROTECTION


Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                    Customers have a right to expect that their financial transactions are kept
                    confidential. Insurers should protect the confidentiality and security of
                    personal data, against any anticipated threats, or hazards to the security or
                    integrity of such information, and against unauthorized access.
Description         The law that sets the rules for the treatment of “private information” (Law Nº
                    1682) was issued in January 2001. This regulation does not appear to impose
                    detailed requirements on the processing of personal information such as found in
                    more advanced economies concerning the security of systems in which data are
                    held, and the circumstances in which data can be shared.
                    In September 2002, the Law 1682 was modified by Law 1969, but the introduced
                    changes do not change significantly the general depth and breadth of the
                    previous regulation.
                    Individual have the right to access copies of the data about them, to know what
                    use is made of it and to correct any mistakes.
                    Information on unpaid debts not claimed judicially has to be eliminated from
                    these records three years after due date. Information about debts claimed
                    judicially that were paid has also to be taken out three years after payment.
                    Information about judicial liquidations has a period of five years after the Court
                    decision.
                    The financial information has to be updated permanently, and those persons or
                    companies that keep the databases have to introduce the new information in a
                    maximum of 4 days from the date they received it.
Recommendation      1. The regulation on the “treatment of private information” doesn’t establish any
                    specialized body with the capacity of analyzing the security, content and use of
                    any database containing private information, nor the obligation to communicate
                    the existence of such databases by the persons or entities creating such
                    databases, even if they are for their own use.
                    2. It is important that for all the databases containing “private or personal
                    information” there is one individual accountable for the security measures
                    implemented, for updates and the use of the information. It would be advisable to
                    create a specialized agency where all the databases containing personal or
                    private information should officially declare their existence, who is responsible of
                    it, the security measures adopted to control the access and the record kept on
                    who has consulted it.



SECTON E            DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS


Good Practice E.1   Internal Dispute Settlement
                    a. Insurers should provide an internal avenue for claim and dispute
                       resolution to policyholders.
                    b. Insurers should designate employees to handle retail policyholder
                       complaints.
                    c. Insurers should inform their customers of the internal procedures on
                       dispute resolution.
                    d. The regulator or supervisor should investigate whether insurers
                       comply with their internal procedures regarding consumer protection.
Description         a. Insurance distinguishes between ‘claims’ (meaning asking the insurer to pay
                    out under the terms of an insurance contract) and ‘complaints’ (meaning
                    complaining about an insurer’s refusal of a claim or other alleged misconduct).


                    BCP-SIS has previously taken the view that both claims and complaints are
                    subject to the terms of the insurance contract, and an issue of customer service
                    rather than consumer protection. The focus of its supervision has been on
                    claims, in particular on the adequacy of reserves and whether the insurance
                    contracts and rates had been filed and registered at the BCP-SIS before being
                    used
Visited insurers reported that they had special departments to deal with claims.
As far as the mission team was able to verify, the procedures of claims handling
ranged from bureaucratic to being accessible. Some insurers (especially those
providing cover for international organizations and their staffs) claimed to have a
telephone hotline available 24 hours per day and 7 days per week, with all calls
being recorded. In some cases, assessment of the claim might involve inspection
by an expert appointed and employed by the insurer (for example, inspecting the
site of an accident); and/or obtaining a valuation from an appraiser registered at
the BCP-SIS. Claim appraisers and settlers have to act independently but the
most frequent is that they are hired and paid by the insurance companies. The
policyholder has the right to designate and use a claim appraiser and settler but
he would have to pay at his own.


Interviewed insurers reported that they did receive few complaints about their
decisions on claims, but that such complaints were almost always resolved at the
company level. They keep no statistic or record on the nature, resolution or even
the number of complaints. They reported that consumers could escalate
complaints to the BCP-SIS (a large insurer mentioned that this happened around
5 or 6 times per year; a medium size insurer mentioned 2 cases in the last ten
years). However, the mission could not obtain any more detail from the insurers
or the BCP-SIS.


All insurers explain in their websites how to proceed in the case of a claim (when
the event covered by the insurance contract occurs). However, this doesn’t seem
to extend to the case when the policyholder or beneficiary wanted to raise a
complaint or dispute about the service provided by the insurer. All of the insurers
reported that claims were settled to the entire satisfaction of the insured, but this
opinion was not shared by the consumers associations or other individuals that
the mission team interviewed. The received feedback much rather indicates that
clients do not consider it worth disputing with insurers, as the legal terms
established in the contracts are difficult to dispute, and insurers are better
equipped economically to handle long judicial disputes.


b, and c. The mission team did not find any insurer which had designated
employees or published written procedures in place for the handling of
complaints. It does not appear to be the practice for insurance policies, or
promotional materials, to set out details of how customers can make a complaint
if they are dissatisfied. This seems to contradict what was established in the
Resolution SS.SG Nº 127/09 which established an official form to file complaints
at the DDUS of the BCP-SIS, and requires insurers to have in their premises
visible signs explaining the process and presenting that official form.


d. The mission team found no documented complaints procedures that SIS could
check against. However, the on-site inspection plan can include the assistance
by a member of the staff of the DDUS to check the handling of the process of
complaints by policyholders, although we were given no details on what this
                    verification comprises.
Recommendation      1. The BCP-SIS should pass a regulation to establish written procedures on the
                    verification of the handling of the complaint process by the insurers. At the same
                    time the Resolution SS.SG Nº 127/09 that establishes a standard form to
                    communicate to the DDUS any complaint about non-paid claims, should be
                    better publicized and enforced.
                    2. The insurers and the BCP-SIS should take the necessary measures to keep
                    adequate statistics about complaints (with a detail of the policyholder, nature of
                    claim and final resolution).
Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                    a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek affordable
                       and efficient third-party recourse, which could be an ombudsman or
                       tribunal, in the event the complaint with the insurer cannot be resolved
                       to the consumer’s satisfaction in accordance with internal procedures.
                    b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution vis-à-vis consumer
                       disputes should be made known to the public.
                    c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial and act
                       independently from the appointing authority and the industry.
                    d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                       binding upon the insurers. The mechanisms to ensure the enforcement
                       of these decisions should be established and publicized.
Description         The Law of Insurance doesn’t establish any specific out -of court procedures to
                    deal with disputes related to insurance products, which could not be settled
                    directly between the insurer and the policyholder. Therefore, in principle these
                    have to be resolved in court. Insurers reported that there have been very few
                    court cases related to insurance.
                    However, the Resolution SS.SG. Nº 112/10 established mediation as an
                    alternative way for the solution of conflicts between insurance companies and
                    users of insurance, even when that mechanism is not mentioned on the
                    insurance contract. The DDUS has to inform about that possibility in those
                    complaint cases that would reach it. Agents and brokers are also supposed to
                    inform their clients in those cases of claims refused by the insurer. The Center
                    for Arbitrage and Mediation of Paraguay is explicitly designated as a recognized
                    mediator for these situations, but this is a private organization that charges
                    participation fees that would make sense only for discussions involving very high
                    amounts. We were told by the Center of Arbitrage and Mediation that they have
                    been involved yet in no case of insurance claim.


                    State bodies
                    The Division for the Defense of the Insured (of the BCP-SIS) reported that Court
                    cases brought forth by consumers are very rare. It pursued individual insurance
                    cases that were referred to it by consumers, and for which it has the power to
                    provide advice. Where appropriate, the DDUS can suspend or withdraw an
                    insurer’s license (this situation never occurred), but it lacks the power to impose
                    lesser administrative sanctions (such as a public warning or a fine). Furthermore,
                    BCP-SIS is constrained by limited resources. The resolution SS.SG Nº 31/14
                                     th
                    issued on May 9 , 2014 assigns a staff of three to the DDUS, but there is no
                    description of their functions nor the necessary profile and experience of this
                    staff. The DDUS takes up around 60 insurance cases on behalf of consumers
                    per year, although it doesn’t keep any statistic about these interventions.


                    The Secretariat for Consumer Protection (SEDECO) has been recently created
                    as an autonomous body, related to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.
                    SEDECO doesn’t have the expertise and resources to deal with complaints of
                    insurance users, although it has the capacity to impose administrative sanctions
                    (such as a public warning or a fine).


                    Alternative dispute resolution
                    There is no mechanism for consumers to obtain affordable and effective redress
                    against insurers through an ombudsman or other alternative dispute resolution
                    body.
                    There is no entity or inter-company arrangements, for resolving the distribution of
                    costs between two insurers involved in providing indemnity in relation to one
                    incident.
Recommendation      1 The DDUS should take more effective actions to enforce the Resolution SS.SG
                    Nº 127/09 that establishes a standard form for the communication to the BCP-
                    SIS of complaints related to claim settlement that must be clearly publicized at
                    the insurer’s offices. The DDUS should take also actions involving consumer
                    protection on other issues related with insurance but not just to claims.
                    2. The activity of the DDUS should be transparent and publicly known, with the
                    issuance of regular statistics about its interventions.
                    3. On the medium term, consideration should be given to introduce an
                    Ombudsman scheme to facilitate dispute resolution



SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Guarantee Schemes and Insolvency
                    a. With the exception of schemes covering mandatory insurance (and
                       possibly long-term insurance), insolvency guarantee schemes are not
                       to be encouraged for insurance because of the opaque nature of the
                       industry and the scope for moral hazard. Strong governance and
                       prudential supervision are better alternatives.
                    b. Nominal defendant arrangements should be in place for mandatory
                       insurances such as motor third party liability insurance to cover
                       situations where there is no insured guilty party.
                    c. Assets covering life insurance mathematical reserves and investment
                       contract policy liabilities should be segregated or at the very least
                       earmarked, and long-term policyholders should have preferential
                       access to such assets in the event of a winding-up.
Description         a. There is no insolvency guarantee scheme for insurance in Paraguay. The Law
                 of Insurance provides BCP-SIS with authority to oversee the financial position of
                 insurance companies. Regarding Governance, more recently, the Regulation
                 SS.SG. Nº 032/13 imposes that the reports produced by the boards of Directors,
                 senior management and internal committees (audit, comptroller, actuarial and
                 other outsourced services) of insurers must adopt the standards and guidelines
                 derived from the Insurance Core Principle N. 8 of the IAIS (Risk Management
                 and Internal Control).


                 b. There is no mandatory insurance in Paraguay.


                 c. There is almost no long-term life insurance in Paraguay (about 97% of the life
                 insurance premiums are Group Term Life, on an annual basis); policyholders
                 have preference over other creditors.
Recommendation   1. Motor insurance is in the process of being introduced as mandatory. When this
                 new legislation will be introduced, it is important to establish in parallel the
                 required regulation to cover at least situations where there is no insured guilty
                 party.
SECTION A                 INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS


Good Practice                 The legal and regulatory framework establishes clear institutional
                               arrangements for regulating and enforcing consumer protection in digital
                               financial services.
                              Necessary arrangements or mechanisms are in place to ensure interagency
                               cooperation for overlapping and/or unclear areas of authority.
                                                  11
Description               By September 2014, all e-money issuers will come under the oversight of
                                                         12
                          BCP. Resolution no. 6 of 2014 on e-money (E-Money Resolution) introduced a
                          new license for the creation of e-money issuers (Entidad de Medio de Pago
                          Electrónico, or “EMPE”). EMPEs have to request prior authorization from BCP,
                          and will be subject to its supervision (Art. 20). It is expected that both existing
                          players in the market, Tigo and Personal, will apply for this authorization. To
                          request a license to become a EMPE, the following documentation must be
                          provided to BCP (Art. 9):
                          1. “In the case where the EMPE and the telecommunications service provider
                             are different legal entities, which are not related, [the EMPE] must present:
                                   a.1) The contract(s) signed with the telecommunications service provider
                                        that would enable the EMPE to provide the services authorized in
                                        this Regulation.
                                   a.2) The certification issued by CONATEL verifying that the contracts
                                        submitted conform to the standards and regulations in place in the
                                        telecommunications regulatory framework [...].
                          2. In the case where a telecommunications service provider constitutes the
                             EMPE, it must present:
                                   b.1) The technical and economic conditions for the provision of the
                                        telecommunications services that enable the provision of the
                                        services authorized in this Regulation.
                                   b.2) The certification issued by CONATEL verifying that the technical and
                                        economic conditions for the provision of telecommunications
                                        services are conform to the rules and regulations in place in the
                                        telecommunications regulatory framework.”



10
    The section was prepared by Sarah Fathallah, with feedback provided by Jennifer Chien. It is based on general
principles in the area of legal and institutional framework, complemented with available guidance material such as:
-World Bank (2014), Responsible Digital Financial Services: Consumer Protection in an Electronic Environment,
Presentation in preparation for the Responsible Finance Forum V
-Alliance for Financial Inclusion (2014), Consumer Protection in Mobile Financial Services, Guidance Note No. 13
-GSMA (2012), Mobile Privacy Principles: Promoting a User-Centric Privacy Framework for the Mobile Ecosystem,
Document Version 1.0
-CGAP (2010), Protecting Branchless Banking Consumers: Policy Objectives and Regulatory Options, Focus Note 64
11
   The deadline provided by the regulation is set to mid-June 2014, but a three-month extension can be requested
from BCP.
12
   Resolución nº 6, Acta n° 18 de fecha 13 de marzo de 2014, Reglamento de Medios de Pagos Electrónicos.
                           The abovementioned documentation represents the only licensing pre-requisites
                           for EMPEs, and no requirements regarding providing business plans, corporate
                           structure, finances, shareholders, or fit and proper management teams and
                           boards of directors are provided in the regulation.


                           Various entities are involved in market conduct supervisory arrangements
                           for e-money issuers, depending on the type of legal entity they represent
                           and whether or not they offer electronic contracts (cf. Table X). In addition to
                           entering under the supervision of BCP, EMPEs also fall under the general
                           consumer protection mandate of the Secretaria de la Defensa al Consumidor
                           (SEDECO) which can take matters to court and impose sanctions to any provider
                           of goods and services according to the provisions of Chapter XIV of the
                           Consumer Protection law. In addition, in cases where EMPEs are also telcos,
                           they are also under the purview of the National Commissions of
                           Telecommunications (CONATEL), as per Chapter II of Law 642 of 1995
                           (Telecommunications Law). And finally, regardless of whether or not the EMPE is
                           a telco, should it provide electronic contracts and accept electronic signatures, it
                           also enters under the authority of application of the Ministry of Industry and
                           Commerce (MIC), as per Art. 38 of Law 4.017 of 2010 (Electronic Signatures and
                                            13
                           Contracts Law). The existence of these various institutional mandates poses
                           the risk for potential overlaps. For instance, should there be issues related to
                           electronic contracts issued by a EMPE, they theoretically fall under the purview
                           of both BCP (in its capacity as EMPE supervisor) and MIC (in its capacity as
                           authority of control for electronic contracts). While the mission team has not met
                           with nor assessed the enforcement capacity of CONATEL and MIC, there are
                           concerns as to whether BCP and SEDECO will have the adequate resources for
                           market conduct supervision of EMPEs. This is demonstrated by their limited
                           human resources to supervise market conduct of already authorized financial
                           entities, and the fact that they do not use, in any systematic way, many of the
                           specific tools that are more appropriate for monitoring market conduct, such as
                           mystery shopping, customer focus groups and surveys, review of advertising
                           materials or a systematic analysis of customer complaints made to the various
                           mediation services on offer.




                                                                     SEDECO     BCP         CONATEL      MIC
                            E-money issuers
                            - If a non-telco in partnership with a   ●          ●           ◌
                            telco
                            - If a telco                             ●          ●           ●
                            - In both cases, if uses electronic                                          ●




13
  Later amended by Law 4610/12 transferring the authority of application from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (INTN) to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.
                           contracts
                           Agents
                           All non-bank agents                  ●           ●
                          ◌ Does not fall under the supervision of CONATEL, but requires its prior
                          certification.


                          The institutional arrangements for market conduct supervision applicable
                          to non-bank agents are more straightforward, falling under the purview of
                                                                            14
                          BCP-SIB and SEDECO. Resolution 1 of 2011 (Non-Bank Agents Resolution)
                          places agents, although indirectly, under the purview of BCP-SIB. Prior to
                                                                                                         15
                          contracting non-bank agents, banks, finance companies, and soon EMPEs are
                          required to solicit an authorization from BCP-SIB (Art. 2.2.), by providing a
                          number of documents including a copy of the contract between the financial
                          entity and the non-bank agent. This contract is used as a way for BCP-SIB to
                          ensure that certain market conduct pre-requisites are accounted for (e.g. the
                          contracts must include data privacy and provider liability clauses). Once the
                          agent authorization obtained, financial entities are required to actively report
                          monthly data on the number and location of their non-bank agents to BCP-SIB
                          (Art. 4.), and shall passively keep at the disposal of BCP-SIB certain documents
                          and/or information (Art. 3.14.), including the operating manuals applicable to their
                          non-bank agent activities, the procedures and policies for the selection, training,
                          and monitoring of non-bank agents, as well as any reports from the entities’ Risk
                          and/or Internal Audit Units pertinent to the internal controls in place for non-bank
                          agent operations. These reports, along with the monthly data on agents, are
                          analyzed by BCP-SIB via off-site supervision. However, BCP-SIB has not yet
                          begun conducting on-site inspections at agent premises. In addition, non-bank
                          agents also fall under the general consumer protection mandate of SEDECO, but
                          this newly formed Secretariat lacks the internal resources and financial sector-
                          related expertise to effectively enforce its general consumer protection mandate.
Recommendation            1. To ensure effective market conduct supervision of EMPEs, the institutional
                             arrangements and legal mandates between SEDECO, BCP, CONATEL, and
                             MIC need to be assessed and individual roles and competences for
                             enforcement clarified. Following this assessment, mechanisms for
                             coordination (e.g. to conduct join inspections and supervision) and
                             information sharing should be implemented.
                          2. In line with the recommendations related to strengthening the oversight
                             capacity of BCP-SIB to effectively monitor and enforce compliance of the
                             entities under its supervision, procedures for on-site supervision for non-
                             bank agents should be developed.
                          3. In addition to on-site supervision, consideration should be given to develop
                             off-site supervision and market monitoring tools such as mystery shopping,
                             customer focus groups / surveys, as well as periodic reviews of advertising
                             materials and customer complaints.



14
   Resolución nº 1, Acta n° 70 de fecha 22 de noviembre de 2011, Reglamento para el Uso de los Corresponsales no
Bancarios.
15
   Art. 17 of the E-Money Resolution allows EMPEs to contract and form agent networks.
SECTION B                 LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK


Good Practice                An adequate and comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for
                              consumer protection is in place for digital financial services.
                             The legal and regulatory framework applicable to digital financial services
                              providers promotes fair competition across providers and sectors.
Description               The legal and regulatory framework in support of the development of
                          digital financial services is relatively nascent. It establishes minimum
                          standards and parameters for the respective services, and also includes
                          some basic consumer protection provisions in conjunction with the
                          application of the general consumer protection framework. The legal and
                          regulatory framework for digital financial services in Paraguay can be broken
                          down into four categories: (i) payments, (ii) e-money issuance, (iii) the use of
                          agents, and (iv) electronic signatures and contracts. While some of these laws
                          and regulations contain consumer protection-related provisions (as summarized
                          in Table X), digital financial services providers must in theory also comply with
                                                                16
                          the provisions of the Constitution, the Civil Code, the General Consumer
                                         17
                          Protection Law which applies to all “goods and services” (Art. 3), as well as the
                          legal framework applicable to telecommunications providers when relevant. The
                          complexity of laws and frameworks makes it difficult for service providers to
                          understand and comply with all the provisions that are applicable to them.


                          Payments
                          There is an extensive body of laws and regulations on payments in Paraguay.
                                                          18
                          Resolution no. 1 of 2012 on the payments systems (Payment Systems
                          Resolution) addresses a variety of consumer protection-related provisions,
                          including on transparency and disclosure as well as provider liability, which all
                          “participating entities” in the payments systems must comply with (Book I, 2.).


                          E-money
                          BCP-SIB’s recently issued E-Money Resolution establishes the legal basis for e-
                          money issuance in Paraguay. In this regulation, e-money is defined as a
                          “monetary value stored electronically in an electronic money account upon the
                          receipt of funds in local currency” (Art. 2). E-money is not considered as a
                          deposit and does not accrue interest (Art. 3, e.). With regards to consumer
                          protection, the E-Money Resolution deals with issues related to the protection of
                          client funds, provider liability, complaints handling, and contracts. According to
                          the E-Money Resolution, EMPEs can be formed under two arrangements: either
                          as a non-telco in a contractual partnership with a telco, or as a telco. In both



16
   Constitución Política de 1992
17
   Ley nº 1.334/98 de Defensa del Consumidor y del Usuario
18
   Resolución nº 1, Acta n° 67 de fecha 27 de diciembre de 2012, Reglamento General de los Sistemas de Pagos del
Paraguay.
                           cases, the applying entity has to provide a certification from CONATEL certifying
                           the its conformity with the legal framework applicable to the telecommunications
                           sector, including the Telecommunications Law which contains provisions related
                           to fair treatment, complaints handling, and data privacy.


                           Non-Bank Agents
                           BCP’s Non-Bank Agents Resolution regulates the use of non-bank agents
                           (“corresponsales no bancarios”), defined as any natural or legal person which,
                           “under a contractual agreement and under the responsibility of the financial
                           institution,” provide financial transactions and services (e.g. basic account
                           opening, loan disbursement and collection, payments and transactions, bill
                           payment, deposits) as an additional activity to their main business (Art. 1).


                           It should be noted that dedicated payments service providers such as Aqui Pago
                           do not formally fall under this non-bank agent model. The entities have long
                           established separate contracts with financial institutions, which cover the range
                           of services they are providing. Their operation is currently not formally under any
                           form of supervision of a financial supervisory agency, although they play an
                           important role facilitating payments, including paying of electricity and taxes. In
                           the medium term, it is expected that payment service providers will become
                           authorized and supervised as stand-alone financial service providers by BCP’s
                           payments system department. While no consumer protection-related concerns
                           were reported during the mission, bringing the payments service providers under
                           a clearer consumer protection / market conduct oversight would be warranted.


                           Electronic Signatures and Contracts
                           An important aspect for the development of digital financial services in the ability
                           to form contracts remotely. Law no. 4.017 of 2010 (Electronic Signatures and
                           Contracts Law) concerning the legal validity of electronic signatures, digital
                                                                                19
                           signatures, and electronic information and records, as amended by Law 4.610
                           of 2012, provides the legal basis for the validity of electronic contracts and
                           signatures in Paraguay. Art. 5 authorizes the formation of electronic contracts for
                           any “offer, acceptance, as well as any negotiation, statement or agreement made
                           by parties”, as long as not contrary to the provisions of the Civil Code on the
                                                                                20
                           requirements of consent and validity of contracts. The same article provides
                           that the conclusion of electronic contracts is not subject to the prior consent of
                           parties regarding the use of electronic means. The authority of application of this
                           law is the National Institute of Standards and Technology (Art. 38).




19
   Ley nº 4.017 de Validez Jurídica de la Firma Electrónica, la Firma Digital, los Mensajes de Datos y el Expediente
Electrónico, 24 de diciembre de 2010.
20
   Relevant provisions under the Civil Code are set forth in Book III, “Contracts and Other Sources of Obligation”.
Main law/regulation       Main consumer protection-related provisions
Constitution                 Individuals can access their personal
(Political Constitution       data/information in official or private records
of 1992)                      public, as well as update, rectify, or delete
                              records that are incorrect or unlawfully affect
                              their rights (Art. 28 and Art. 135 re: Habeas
                              Data).
Civil Code                   Provisions related to transactional activities,
(Law no. 1183 of 1985)        including the obligation to provide a proof of
                              payment/receipt (Book II, Chapter IV, Section
                              I).
                             Provisions related to contracts, included
                              prohibited clauses, and the ability of the parties
                              to end a service contract prior to its termination
                              date     for   specific    reasons        including
                              incompetence or negligence of the services
                              provided, the inability to provide the services,
                              and the violation of the contract’s terms (Book
                              III).
Consumer Protection          The obligation to disclose the prices of
Law                           products and services (Art. 10) and other
(Law no. 1.334 of             information on the service provider (Art. 15).
1998)                        Provisions related to contracts (Chapter V),
                              including the definition of abusive clauses, the
                              obligation to use legible characters and simple
                              language, and the ability for the consumer to
                              withdraw within 7 days of signing the contract
                              when the contract has not been concluded at
                              the provider’s premises.
                             Provisions related to credit operations (Chapter
                              VI), including the disclosure of annual or
                              monthly interest rates, fees and charges, the
                              repayment schedule, and the right of the the
                              consumer to pay the debt by anticipation.
                             Provisions related to misleading advertisement
                              (Chapter VIII).
Payment Systems              Provisions on transparency and disclosure
Resolution                    (Book I, 7.), including query facilities for clients
(Resolution 1, Act 67,        to get at least monthly account and/or
2012)                         transaction information.
                             The liability of providers to the consumers
                              (Book I., 13. And 17.).
Non-Bank Agents             Provisions related to non-bank agent training
Resolution                   by the financial entity, including on KYC,
(Resolution no. 1, Act       complaints handling, and data privacy (Art.
70, 2011)                    3.7.).
                            The liability of the contracting entity for the
                             actions and operations of its non-bank agents
                             (Art. 3.8.).
                            The prohibition for agents to charge additional
                             fees or commissions to clients (Art. 3.9.).
                            Provisions related to transparency and
                             disclosure at the non-bank agent premises,
                             including the non-bank agent status, prices
                             and charges, and complaints handling
                             channels, as well as the obligation to provide
                             receipts for each transaction (Art. 3.13.).
E-Money Resolution          Provisions related to the protection of client
(Resolution no. 6, Act       funds through the use of trust funds (Chapter
18, 2014)                    III) and a technological platform that allows for
                             real-time processing and conciliation of funds
                             (Art. 10).
                            The liability of the EMPE for the actions of its
                             agent networks (Art. 17).
                            The obligation for EMPEs to implement
                             effective, easy to use, and free of charge
                             complaints handling channels (Art. 22).
                            Provisions on the minimum contents of
                             contracts (Art. 23), both in physical and
                             electronic formats, including the disclosure of
                             prices and limits in transactions and withdrawal
                             amounts.
                            Provisions regarding the transfer of funds from
                             inactive e-money accounts into bank accounts.
Telecommunications          Provisions related to the protection of users
Law                          and subscribers (Title IX), including on free
(Law 642 of 1995)            and fair treatment, and contracts.
                            The obligation for providers to establish
                             efficient mechanisms for complaints handling,
                             and disclose them to clients (Art. 84-85).
                            Provisions on data privacy and the inviolability
                             of the secrecy of client correspondence (Art.
                             89-90).
                     Electronic Signatures      Provisions on the ability to form electronic
                     and Contracts Law           contracts and accept signatures, including in a
                     (Law no. 4.017 of           form that the parties can keep and consult
                     2010, as amended by         subsequently (Art.8-9).
                     Law 4.610 of 2012)
Recommendation   1. The legal and regulatory framework is currently spread over many laws and
                    regulations and involves various government bodies, as discussed under the
                    institutional arrangements. In tandem with the evaluation of institutional roles
                    of involved oversight bodies, there is a need to assess the existing regulatory
                    framework for consistency and completeness with regards to consumer
                    protection related provisions. Any legal and regulatory gaps revealed by
                    such assessment needs to be addressed as well. There is also a need to
                    consolidate the core provisions under one or two regulatory bodies to
                    facilitate the oversight over market conduct and consumer protection
                    standards.
                 2. Given the complex nature of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to
                    digital financial services, there is a need for BCP to provide consolidated
                    guidance to market players on the applicable consumer protection regime,
                    including legal and regulatory provisions outside of its legal realm.
                 3. Consideration should also be given to develop guidance or informational
                    materials that inform the clients about the core features of digital financial
                    services, as well as the client’s rights and obligations under the legal
                    framework. The material could for example be visibly displayed in the
                    premises of agents, and used by stakeholders when providing financial
                    education measures.



SECTION C        TRANSPARENCY AND DISCLOSURE

Good Practice        Appropriate standards for disclosure of information in digital financial
                      services are in place.
                     Simple, legible, and standardized information is provided in a form that
                      consumers can keep, including through the devices used for transacting
                      such as mobile phones.
                     Agents are required to disclose their agent status to customers and / or to
                      post specific information on the service they provide. They are prohibited
                      from charging extra fees to the customers for this service.
Description      There are basic requirements on transparency and disclosure imposed on
                 digital financial service providers, which are adhered to in practice. The
                 legal and regulatory framework contains basic provisions around the disclosure
                 of fees and charges by the providers, and the requirement to provide account
                 statements. Art. 23 f) of the E-Money Resolution requires that modalities related
                 to the issuance of account statements, either in print or electronically, are
                 specified in the contract provided to the client. The requirement to provide
                 account statements is also reinforced by Book I. 7. of the Payment Systems
                 Resolution, which sets forth that participating entities in the payments systems
                           “must provide their clients with adequate means of consultation to enable them to
                           obtain, at least on a monthly frequency, up to date information on their payments
                           system services.” However, neither provision requires that the periodic access to
                           account statements should be free of charge as suggested by international best
                           practice with regards to account information. In addition, EMPEs are required to
                           provide what appears to be an early form of a Key Facts Statement, described as
                           “a summary of the minimum conditions mentioned [in the contract], in legible and
                           understandable terms” (E-Money Resolution, Art. 23). Nevertheless, a format or
                           template for this summary has not been provided in the regulation. Finally, and
                           while Tigo and Personal both have not yet formally entered under the
                           supervision of BCP, the delivery of receipts for each transaction, required by the
                           Civil Code (Book II, Chapter IV, Section I), and the publication of fees and
                           charges by e-money issuers (including in their branches and on their website)
                           seems to already be a common practice.


                           While the minimum set content for e-money services contracts seem
                           adequate, contracts are not required to be provided to clients prior to
                           signing. Contracts for e-money services must first adhere to the general
                           provisions provided by the Civil Code and the General Consumer Protection
                           Law, including the requirement to be written in “clear and understandable terms
                           for consumers” (Art. 25, Consumer Protection Law). The opening of an e-money
                                                                                      21
                           account must be supported by a “contract of adhesion” which can be signed by
                           the client, either physically or electronically (Art. 23, Resolution no. 6 of 2014).
                           When provided electronically, contracts should be conserved with the aim of
                           being accessed for subsequent reference, while remaining “complete and
                           unaltered” (Art. 8 and 9 of the Electronic Signatures and Contracts Law). In
                           practice, while the mission team was not able to assess existing electronic
                           contracts, paper contracts provided by Tigo and Personal to their clients seem
                           simpler and shorter (generally one page) than contracts seen from other financial
                           service providers. However, these contracts precede the introduction of the E-
                           Money Resolution, which contains more extensive content requirements, so they
                           will have to be adjusted once the entities have become EMPEs. The minimum
                           contents and guidelines of e-money contract are set in this Art. 23 of the E-
                           Money Resolution, including the requirement to indicate the costs and
                           commissions, the express indication that the e-money float does not accrue
                           interest and is not covered by BCP’s Deposit Insurance, as well as the modalities
                           related to the issuance of account statements.


                           With regards to ensuring effective disclosure in agent operations, the non-
                           bank agent resolution provides the essential basis for requiring price
                           disclosure at agent premises, prohibiting agents to charge fees other than
                           those disclosed by the provider, as well as requiring the disclosure of the
                           agent’s status. According to the Non-Bank Agents Resolution, it is the



21
   A contract of adhesion is defined by the General Consumer Protection law as a contract for which the “have been
unilaterally established by the provider of goods or services, without the consumer’s ability to observe, discuss, alter
or substantially modify its contents” (Art. 4).
                 responsibility of the financial institution to ensure that agents are advertised as
                 such, including by using a sign of “adequate size in a conspicuous place on the
                 premises” which includes the term “Agent”, the name of the contracting financial
                 institution, the address of its closest branch, and the opening hours of the agent
                 (Art. 3.13). In addition, Article 3.13 sets forth that agents should advertise “the
                 fees charged by the [financial institution] for each of the services offered by the
                 non-bank agent,” as well as the fact that agents are not allowed to charge
                 additional fees for the provision of these services. Article 3.13.4 also provides
                 that “every transaction carried out by the no n-bank agent should automatically
                 produce a document issued by the [POS] terminal [...], which shall include, at a
                 minimum, the date, the type and amount of the transaction, as well as the identity
                 of the non-bank agent and the financial institution.” In practice, providing
                 transaction receipts and information on prices and commissions at agent
                 premises does not seem to be a systematic and common practice.
Recommendation   1. While the regulatory framework for EMPEs already includes most of the
                    provisions that are considered international best practice, a requirement to
                    provide the account statements periodically free of charge (e.g. once a
                    month), and the provision of the contract prior to the client’s signature is still
                    missing and should be introduced.
                 2. BCP should issue guidance on the content and format for the Key Facts
                    Statements required from EMPEs, preferably in accordance with Key Facts
                    Statements to be developed for other financial services and products
                    provided by financial institutions under its supervision.
                 3. Once formally authorized as EMPEs, the service providers have to adjust
                    their contracts. In anticipation of this, BCP should develop internal guidelines
                    for assessing the contracts to ascertain that they adhere to minimum
                    standards set forth by the legal and regulatory framework and do not include
                    abusive conditions.
                 4. In line with the recommendation set forth above with regards to
                    strengthening on-site supervision for non-bank agents, issues related to the
                    provision of transaction receipts and the disclosure of prices and
                    commissions at agent premises need to be better monitored.



SECTION D        BUSINESS PRACTICES

Good Practice    Liability Regime
                    The legal and regulatory framework creates clarity and transparency on who
                     is liable in the case of fraud, system malfunctions, and unauthorized
                     payments.
                    The supervised financial entity is liable for the agent’s and agent networks’
                     regulatory compliance with regard to the services the agent provides in the
                     name of the financial entity.
Description      Overall, the liability regime in cases of fraud, system malfunctions,
                 unauthorized transactions, and other operations is borne by the provider,
                 as opposed to the consumer, or any third parties involved. With regards to
                 agents, Article 3.8 of the Non-Bank Agents Resolution provides that “financial
                 institution[s] may not transfer to the agent or other third parties, [...] its liability to
                 the customer and to the Superintendent of Banks for the provision of services,
                 the management of risks, and the regulatory compliance related to the
                 operations provided through non-bank agents.” No regulation does addresses
                 the damages and costs borne by the client out of the malfunction or misuse.
Recommendation   Consideration should be given to introduce a regulatory provision that the
                 financial service provider is also liable to cover any losses incurred by the client
                 due to system malfunction or fraud / misuse outside of the client’s responsibility.
Good Practice    Privacy and Data Protection
                    Clear data privacy and confidentiality rules are in place for the collection,
                     use, disclosure and security of personal client information.
                    Bank secrecy provision also apply to agents and to non-bank e-money
                     issuers
Description      The E-Money Resolution contains provisions on privacy and data
                 protection applicable to EMPEs. Art. 24 sets forth that EMPEs should “comply
                 with the requirements of conservation of information and documentation”
                 applicable within the AML/CFT framework, and “must obtain the permission of
                 [account] owners or remitters to verify and update the data and information
                 provided by themselves.” In addition, to obtain their EMPE license, applying
                 entities must provide a certification from CONATEL justifying that their plans to
                 provide e-money services are conform to the legal framework in place in the
                 telecommunications industry. As such, the Telecommunications Law sets forth
                 the obligation for telcos to respect data privacy (Art. 89), providing an indirect
                 way of ensuring the compliance of EMPEs through CONATEL’s certifica tions.
                 Nevertheless, the CONATEL certifications are only produced at the moment of
                 application for a license, and not throughout the activity of the EMPE, in addition
                 to being only based on a self-assessment of the technical and economic
                 conditions for service provision by the EMPE.


                 Agents are contractually bound by their respective financial institution to
                 respect bank secrecy rules. The contract between a financial institution and an
                 agent must include the obligation of the agent to respect bank secrecy rules with
                 regards to client information (Non-Bank Agents Resolution, Art. 3.10.9). In
                 addition, the contracting financial institution must provide training to their non-
                 bank agents on information confidentiality and bank secrecy (Art. 3.7.), and is
                 liable for agent’s actions.
Recommendation   No recommendations.
Good Practice    Professional Competence
                    Providers are required to have policies in place for selecting agents, which
                     include necessary quality and security standards.
                    Staff, intermediaries, and agents of digital financial service providers are
                     subject to regular training (both prior to service commencement and
                     periodically afterwards), which covers at a minimum:
                          o   KYC, in particular the collection and verification of information about
                                         identity in an electronic environment consistently with AML/CFT
                                         laws);
                                     o   Product suitability for financial services provided through digital
                                         means; and
                                     o   Record keeping obligations for e-money accounts/transactions.
Description                 The legal and regulatory framework establishes some basic professional
                            competence standards, mostly applicable to non-bank agents. No
                            provisions regarding the training of staff and intermediaries of EMPEs are in
                            place. For non-bank agents, financial service providers are required to have
                            “policies and procedures for the selection, training, [and] monitoring ” of non-bank
                            agents, which BCP-SIB is entitled to control (Non-Bank Agents Resolution, Art.
                            3.14.8.). In addition, Art. 3.7 sets forth the obligation for financial institutions to
                            provide proper training to their non-bank agents, “including at least the aspects
                            related to the proper identification and care of customers, information
                            confidentiality and bank secrecy.” This is of particular importance when it comes
                            to KYC procedures, as Art. 22 of the Electronic Signatures and Contracts Law
                            provides the obligation to duly verify the relationship between the signatory and
                            the digital signature, with the physical presence of the signatory and a valid ID. In
                            addition, Book I, 12.01of Resolution no. 1 of 2012 states that “the issuing [entity]
                            is responsible for verifying the identification of the originating client involved in a
                            transaction.” In practice, this seems to be commonly applied. Nevertheless, even
                                                                                             22
                            though it seems that there is a handful of “superagents” (or agent network
                            managers) contracted by most providers, there are no standards for the training
                            of non-bank agents, and the application of these provisions is left to the
                            discretion of each provider.


                            Training requirements focused on certain specificities of digital financial
                            service provision are lacking. There are no provisions in the E-money
                            Resolution or the Non-Bank Agents Resolution around the obligation to train
                            front-line staff and intermediaries in order to conduct a suitability assessment or
                            in terms of record keeping.
Recommendation              It is recommended that BCP sets out standards for professional competence that
                            apply to EMPE staff and agents, that cover the peculiarities of digital finance and
                            basic consumer protection (including data secrecy and transparency
                            requirements), in order to ensure the providers develop training programs that
                            meet these standards.
Good Practice               Client Fund Protection
                                Safeguarding arrangements are in place to protect e-money floats/back-up
                                 funds from misappropriation, insolvency or any operational risk. This can
                                 include provisions to hold funds in a trust account, to directly link e-wallets
                                 with a bank account, or to arrange for guarantees.
                                There is transparency towards the client on whether or not the applicable
                                 deposit insurance schemes apply to money held in an electronic



22
     C.A.R., Divicom, Grupo BB, and Super Tarjetas.
                     environment.

Description      While not subject to BCP’s Deposit Insurance, the E-money Resolution
                 provides for basic safeguards on the e-money floats/back-up funds. EMPEs
                 must constitute one or several trust funds in financial institutions to cover at least
                 100% of the total amount of the outstanding float (Art. 15, E-Money Resolution).
                 Balances have to be provided in writing on an individualized basis. The sole
                 beneficiaries of these trust funds are to be the e-money clients, including agents
                 or points of sale. The needed adjustments of the trust funds must be calculated
                 on a daily basis, and settlement done the following work day (Art. 16), While the
                 specified timelines can lead to a small temporary gap in coverage of up to 3
                 days, the scheme in place adequately balances cost/benefit considerations of
                 covering potential risks. Interests accrued on the trust deposits must be used to
                 cover expenses related to the trust fund management (Art. 15). In addition,
                 balances of dormant accounts (defined as 90 days with no transactional activity)
                 must be transferred by the EMPE to a deposit account in a financial institution
                 previously agreed to by the customer (Art. 7). Some weaknesses were noted in
                 the procedures for clients to get reimbursed. The e-money resolution does not
                 yet specify any particular circumstances and procedures for clients to get
                 reimbursed. According to the e-money resolution, EMPEs can e.g. be closed by
                 BCP after its operations have been suspended for more than 6 month. So unless
                 clear procedures and timelines are in place for getting reimbursed under the trust
                 fund, the client in this scenario would have to wait 6 month for getting reimbursed
                 for the float held.


                 The e-money funds are not to be considered as “bank deposits insured by the
                 Deposit Guarantee Fund administered by the [BCP]” (Art. 23, d)). It will be
                 important that the contracts and key fact statements make this information
                 transparent to the client, once EMPEs are authorized by BCP.
Recommendation   1. The procedures and circumstances under which the clients can get
                    reimbursed from the Trust Fund have to be established. They could be
                    mimicked on the procedures and timelines established for the Deposit
                    Insurance scheme of financial service providers.
                 2. BCP should make sure that the e-money clients of EMPEs are aware that
                    the held float is not subject to a deposit insurance scheme, but covered by a
                    Trust Fund. This information should be made transparent in both contract
                    and key fact statement, and should be included in financial education
                    material made available by stakeholders.
                 3. In addition, BCP should ensure that a clear legal provision is added
                    specifying that the float held in trust funds is not accessible to EMPEs that go
                    into bankruptcy, in order to make sure that the trust funds remain relatively
                    safe.
Good Practice    Cooling-Off Period
                 The client should be given the right to cancel the contract free of charge within a
                 brief period of time after signing the contract (cooling off).
Description      The cooling-off provision applicable to EMPEs is stipulated in the General
                 Consumer Protection Law. Art. 26 provides that the consumer has the right “to
                 withdraw within seven days of signing the contract” or from the moment they
                 received the product or service, in the case where the contract has been
                 concluded remotely from the provider’s premises, including through a phone. So,
                 unless the contract was signed in the premises of the service provider or its
                 agents, the client can withdraw free of charge from the contract.
Recommendation   Consideration should be given to reviewing the General Consumer Protection
                 Law in order to generalize the cooling-off period requirement to contracts formed
                 at the provider’s premises as well as contracts formed remotely.



SECTION E        DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS


Good Practice       Digital financial service providers are required to provide internal complaints
                     handling and dispute resolution mechanisms to their customers.
                    Other instances are available to consumers to go to if their complaints were
                     not resolved by the provider.
                    Redress channels are communicated clearly and consistently to consumers,
                     in particular through agents.
                    Consumer complaints in digital financial services are collected, analyzed,
                     and made publicly available by the regulator.
Description      EMPEs are required to establish internal complaints handling systems, and
                 non-bank agents must disclose the contracting financial institution’s
                 customer service channels at their premises. Art. 22 of the E-Money
                 Resolution states that EMPES “must implement effective and widely advertised
                 claims collection and resolution systems. The procedure must be free and easy
                 in its use.” In addition, EMPEs are required to submit to BCP the “number of
                 claims and complaints per month, by type of claim, average processing time, and
                 result” (Art.20, 10)). EMPEs are the only type of financial service providers
                 required to have internal dispute resolution mechanisms and to generate and
                 report statistics on claims, but the resolution does not provide much detail with
                 regards to aspects such as timelines for the resolution of claims, and the record-
                 keeping and classification of claims. It remains to be seen how both existing e-
                 money providers will comply with these requirements, but they both seem to
                 have adequate call centers and internal complaints handling systems in place. In
                 addition, Art. 3.13 of the Non-Bank Agents Resolution provides that non-bank
                 agents should advertise the contracting financial institution’s customer service
                 phone number, as well as any other channels available to submit customer
                 complaints. Nevertheless, there are no requirements for financial institutions
                 (other than EMPEs) to actually have these channels in the first place, which
                 challenges the de facto implementation and effectiveness of the abovementioned
                 requirement.


                 If consumers are not satisfied with the responses of the providers, there is
                 a lack of clarity around the alternative dispute resolution options they have
                 at their disposal. As of now, other than the ability to go to a court, customers
                 can turn to the SEDECO or the Consumer Protection Unit under BCP (once
                 EMPEs are formally licensed by BCP). Yet, these avenues are not properly
                 advertised, as demonstrated by the low numbers of complaints they receive (less
                 than 50 claims a year).
Recommendation   1. Similarly to the recommendations presented for the banking and finance
                    companies sectors, financial service providers need to have a formal system
                    and procedure for complaints and claims-handling in place, with
                    standardized complaints reporting and classification. This is a precondition
                    for effectively advertising the available complaints mechanisms on the
                    premises of their agents.
                 2. It is recommended that BCP uses reported data on complaints to monitor
                    emerging consumer protection issues.
                 3. Given BCP’s capacity constraints (as noted above and in previous sections
                    of this report), it is recommended that BCP establishes internal systems and
                    procedures for receiving and resolving complaints in second instance, for
                    customers who are unsatisfied with the response provided by the financial
                    provider.
                 4. In the medium term, and once they have received a sufficient number of
                    reports from EMPEs, BCP can use this initial data to inform further guidance
                    on expected resolution timelines for customer claims.
SECTION A                 DEMAND-SIDE INFORMATION ON FINANCIAL SERVCES


Good Practice             Demand side survey to measure the usage of financial services and the
                          financial literacy of the population
                               a. Holistic surveys to measure the use of a broad range of financial
                                  services (including electronic payments, savings, loans, and
                                  insurance) are in place and regularly conducted. They should cover
                                  both formal and informal service providers.
                               b. Surveys to assess the level of financial education and capabilities
                                  of the population have been carried out to establish baseline and
                                  assess needs.
Description               a. The Department of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses (DGEEC) is the national
                          institution formally in charge of generating, systematizing, and implementing
                          surveys, as well as of evaluating and disseminating their findings. It carries out a
                          number of surveys, such as the national household survey, the national
                          employment survey, and periodically the population census. Only the household
                          survey includes a few financial sector-related questions, covering the
                          population’s enrollment in pension schemes (Caja de jubilación), as well as basic
                          questions related to remittances and channels used for sending remittances
                          payments. The captured information is incomplete, and not sufficient to get a
                          holistic view of the usage of financial services, and financial capabilities of the
                          population or by type of service provider. Furthermore, the results on the usage
                          of financial services are usually not included in the compilation of results from the
                          Household survey, so not publicly available.


                          In addition to these regular surveys, a few donor funded demand side surveys
                          have recently been carried out to measure the population’s use of financial
                          services. The Global Findex survey in 2011 provides demand side data on the
                          adult population’s actual usage of formal sector checking and savings accounts,
                          electronic payments, and credit instruments, as well as assesses the use of
                          informal financial services. It was recently complemented by the National
                          Financial Inclusion Survey, which in addition to core Global Findex Survey
                          questions also included a number of questions on the financial services used by
                          the population and their underlying rationale. The results show that actual usage
                          of financial services is still low, and insurance products are hardly used (see
                          table IV-1).



23
   This note was prepared by Ilka Funke. It is based on the Good Practices for Financial Education and Consumer
Protection established for individual sectors, and complemented with relevant guidance material , including (i) the
G20 High Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection and the Annex to the G20/OECD Task Force Report on
Financial Consumer Protection, (ii) the sections on Financial Education in World Bank (2014) Global Survey on
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, as well as (iii) World Bank (2013), Making Sense of Financial Capability
Surveys around the World.
With regard to enterprise financing, the World Bank Enterprise Survey in 2010
provides some information on the usage of checking accounts and main sources
of financing for small, medium, and large enterprises. It was complemented by
focus group discussions held for a study on the demand and supply of
microfinance in Paraguay, which was undertaken by the “Red de Microfinanzas
Paraguay” in 2013 and focused on smaller entities. The surveys indicate that
larger firms use a range of financial services, while small and informal entities
only use credit from formal financial entities and are not familiar / do not see the
benefit of using other financial products for managing their business.
While the donor funded surveys help create a baseline, they are not carried out
in regular intervals to identify trends and understand change over time. They are
also not embedded in the regular national statistics infrastructure, and thus hinge
on the availability of donor funds.




                                                                        Nat.
                                                     Global          Financial
                                                  Findex 2011        Inclusion
                                                                    Survey 2014
 % of adults with formal account                  21.7             29
 % of adults using formal account for             5.7              n.a.
 business
 % of adults using          account    to   get   0.9              n.a.
 government payments
 % of adults using account to get wages           10               8
 % of adults with credit card                     9                8
 % of adults with a debit card                    11.3             15
 % of adults using mobile phone to make           1.3              28
 payments
 % of adults using mobile phones to receive       5.6
 remittances
 % of adults with a loan from formal              12.8             24
 institution
 % of adults with any form of loan in the last    29.5             34
 12 month
 % of adults with life insurance                  n.a.             4
 % of adults with health insurance                n.a.             25
Source: World Bank (2014): National Financial Inclusion Survey, for 2011 Global
Financial Inclusion Database (Global Findex), World Bank


b. Surveys to assess financial capabilities
                 The recent World Bank supported National Financial Inclusion Survey
                 incorporated a small financial capability module with questions on received
                 financial capability training, the use of budgeting to plan expenditure, frequency
                 of experienced financial shortfalls as well as are options for bridging shortfalls. In
                 particular, the questions on experienced financial shortfalls highlight that people
                 of all income levels find themselves in situations with insufficient funds to pay for
                 food and other necessary items. This indicates substantial gaps in financial
                 budgeting. A non-representative survey carried out by the “Red de Microfinanzas
                 Paraguay” in 2013 also indicates that microentrepreneurs are not aware of the
                 benefits of using other financial services than credit, which explained the lack of
                 usage.


                 While these surveys helped understand some of the existing gaps in financial
                 capabilities, they are not sufficiently detailed to enable the understanding of the
                 underlying causes of the observed gaps in usage of financial services. The
                 information still needs to be refined to help prioritize and target financial
                 education measures. The sample size was also not large enough to
                 representatively determine potential differences between rural and urban areas,
                 by gender and income level. More in-depth focus groups would have to be
                 carried out to bridge these gaps, and understand the cultural, behavioral,
                 educational as well as perceived supply side factors that lead to the observed
                 gaps in usage.
Recommendation   1. The government, in particular the DGEEC in collaboration with the BCP,
                 should explore options for either (i) incorporating a financial sector module in
                 regular demand-side surveys such as the national household survey carried out
                 by DGEEC or (ii) to carry out a stand-alone survey on the use and demand for
                 financial services. The module should include questions to measure usage of
                 formal and informal financial services, and to understand the underlying rationale
                 behind the observed pattern (e.g. too expensive, not enough money). A short-
                 term commitment to initiate this is recommended, although implementation would
                 be medium term. Examples for a stand-alone survey include the Mexico
                 Financial Inclusion Surveys or the Kenya FinAccess Study. The latter is e.g.
                 carried out roughly every four years, and has allowed the government and
                 donors to get a holistic overview over a fragmented market, in which both formal
                 and informal service providers play a large role in providing financial services. An
                 example for a module incorporated into a household survey would be the
                 Guatemala household survey.


                 2. Focus groups or other qualitative research should be conducted to better
                 understand the underlying cultural, behavioral, educational and supply side
                 constraints factors that negatively impact the uptake and responsible use of
                 financial services as reported in the NFIS (2014). This could be a first input into
                 the development of a national financial education strategy. On the medium to
                 longer term, in-depth financial capability survey should be conducted, and
                 complemented by focus group discussions. Examples for this include the World
                 Bank Financial Capability surveys (conducted in 17 countries) and the OECD /
                 INFE Financial Literacy survey (conducted in 16 countries). The surveys on
                access and financial capabilities could be combined into one survey to achieve
                economies of scale link behavioural patterns to financial capabilities.

Good Practice   Supply side information on availability and usage of formal financial
                services
                a. For formal financial institutions, information on number of entities,
                   outreach, available products, core pricing information, and actual
                   usage is regularly published. The information is easily accessible and
                   understandable for the broad public and stakeholders.
                b. Information on informal financial institutions is regularly made
                   transparent, and provides information on estimated number of entities,
                   products and pricing.
Description     Available supply-side information is fragmented and does not allow getting an
                overview over the providers of financial services, their outreach and uptake of
                products by clients. There is no entity formally in charge of providing a holistic
                overview over financial intermediaries and their products.
                The limited and fragmented availability of data is for instance reflected in the
                annual compilation of statistics (Anuario Estatistica) done by the Department of
                Statistics, Surveys and Censuses (DGEEC). The compilation includes
                information on the assets and balance sheet of the banking system, as well as
                some general indicators for insurance companies, but does not include
                information on finance companies, the financial cooperatives or other financial
                service providers. An effort to overcome some of the fragmentation was recently
                done by the BCP. It included a one-page summary on financial services provided
                by cooperatives in its financial stability report. This is however not yet sufficient to
                get a solid overview over the supply of financial services.


                a. Supply side information on formal financial institutions


                Bank, finance and insurance companies:
                According to Art. 82 of the Central Bank Law, the BCP has the mandate to
                regularly compile statistics on monetary and financial issues, external financing,
                the GDP, as well as on the financial intermediaries supervised by the BCP-SIB
                and the SIS. In line with Art. 34 i) of the Central Bank Law, the Superintendency
                of Banks annually compiles information on the 16 commercial banks (including
                the public bank BNF), 10 finance companies, one mortgage association, 4
                warehouse companies, and 35 foreign exchange bureaus it supervises. The 35
                insurance companies, which are supervised by the Superintendency of
                Insurance (SIS), have to report quarterly financial information to the SIS (Art. 30
                of the Insurance Law N. 827), which compiles the information on an annual basis
                (Art. 61 l).
                The BCP regularly publishes information on the supervised financial
                intermediaries on its webpage. Data from financial statements of banks and
                finance companies is available on a monthly basis, and is also reflected in the
                financial stability report. Furthermore, some information on pricing of products is
                available, such as charged interest rates. Since 2013, the BCP also conducts
and publishes a supply side survey to assess factors constraining the credit
growth. Financial information on insurance companies is provided under the
insurance section, and some limited information is also available for warehouses
and foreign exchange bureaus. However, the available information is spread
over various sub-pages on the BCP’s website, does not reflect usage data (e.g.
number of accounts, borrowers or insurance contracts), and is not provided in a
time series, which makes getting a quick overview and understanding trends
more difficult.


Financial cooperatives
For the cooperative sector (including financial cooperatives), the National
Institute for Cooperatives (INCOOP) is in charge of collecting supply side data.
Art. 117 (General Law on Cooperatives) and Art. 5q (Law 2157 on INCOOP)
assigns INCOOP as the entity in charge of regularly organizing and publishing
statistics and information on the sector. The recently revised regulatory
framework for financial cooperatives establishes that Type A entities have to
monthly report their information, Type B quarterly, and small Type C entities
once a year. A requirement to have audited financial accounts was also recently
introduced. Until end of 2013, the available information, in particular from the
smaller entities, was however mostly self-reported information.
Despite the legal framework for reporting being in place, publicly available
information on the sector is scarce. INCOOP has some data on the larger entities
for 2011 and earlier on its webpage, but more recent information is only available
upon request. To bridge the information gap, the Confederation of Cooperatives
(CONPACOOP) carried out a census of the sector in 2012, which has become
the main and most reliable public source of information on the sector.
CONPACOOP is also considering putting in place a voluntary data platform into
which the sector entities can report, and which it will make regularly available to
alleviate the current dearth of publicly available information.
BCP published some information on financial cooperatives in its financial
inclusion section of the financial stability report. This data is based on information
received from INCOOP, but not otherwise publicly available.


b. Non-supervised financial service providers (including pawnshops and
moneylenders)
No reliable data on the size and number of informal financial service providers is
available:
Two non-profit microcredit organizations as well as an estimated 467 pawnshops
and 796 moneylenders provide credit service to the population. They are not
formally regulated or supervised by any financial regulator. The constitution and
operation of these entities is covered under the Civil Code. The provisions in the
Civil Code are general in nature, and no dedicated entity is specified to be in
charge of monitoring the sector and safeguarding its compliance with these
general provisions. Foundations such as the Fundación Paraguaya are not
required to register, while other forms of basic societies have to register with the
Commercial Registry. Neither has a formal obligation according to the Civil Code
                 to report periodic information to a government entity. The Civil Code only broadly
                 refers to the executive (“poder ejecutivo”) as having the right to solve identified
                 issues.
                 Furthermore, four payment providers operate in the country, providing the bulk of
                 financial payment services to the population. While they would formally fall under
                 the regulation and supervision of the BCP payment system group, the latter so
                 far did not yet have the capacity to formally start regulating and supervising
                 them, or collecting data on their services.
Recommendation   1. Holistic supply-side statistics should be prepared and published on a regular
                    basis. This would not only give the consumer’s an overview of available
                    service providers and products, thus empowering him/her to make
                    appropriate and informed choices, but – outside of the diagnostic’s remit –
                    enable regulators, financial service providers and consumer representatives
                    to monitor market trends. The statistics ought to consistently reflect all
                    regulated financial intermediaries, and include supply side information on
                    actual usage of different financial services.
                        An entity needs to be identified and given a clear institutional mandate
                         and adequate funding for this. BCP or DGEEC both appear natural
                         candidates for this.
                        A standardized spreadsheet with data and definitions will have to be
                         developed to allow comparability and compilation of data from the
                         different sources, and each financial sector supervisor mandated to
                         report the respective data in the timeframe and quality needed to the
                         entity in charge for compiling the data.
                 2. The BCP should reassess the available statistics on banks, finance and
                    insurance companies to present them in a more user-friendly way, facilitate
                    compilation along time series, and comparison across supervised sectors.
                    Supply side information on the usage of financial services should be added.
                 3. INCOOP urgently needs to improve its capacity to compile and publish
                    information on the sector. At a minimum, it is recommended that INCOOP
                    regularly collects financial information on individual Type A and B
                    cooperatives, as well as general information on the number of clients,
                    accounts, loans, debit and credit cards. The information should be available
                    on INCOOP’s website on a quarterly basis, as well as wid ely distributed
                    disseminated to the public.
Good Practice    Unbiased Information for Consumers
                     a. Consumers, especially the most vulnerable, should have easily
                        accessible, understandable and affordable access to information
                        on the main types of financial services and products. The available
                        resources should enable them to understand financial products
                        and services available to them.
                     b. Financial regulators should provide, via the internet and printed
                        publications, independent information on the key features, benefits
                        and risks—and where practicable the costs–of the main types of
                        financial products and services.
                     c. The relevant regulatory and supervisory authority should undertake
                      measures to inform consumers of the available independent
                      information, and encourage actual usage.
Description   a. Available information for consumers
              Most formal financial entities have some information on their products on their
              websites, as well as flyers and brochures available in their branches. The
              information however usually only explains prerequisites and documentation
              requirements, as well as in broad terms the benefits of the products. It usually
              lacks information on costs, commissions or risks. For banks, the client has e.g. to
              distill information on costs and commissions from the pricing list on the web or in
              the branch. The provided information on commissions is usually very complex,
              involving a broad variety of terms, and not easily understandable (see B7 of the
              banking sector assessment). For cooperatives, the pricing list is usually not
              available on the website, or in the branch, and the client has to ask to get this
              information personally. The same situation was observed for semi-formal and
              informal financial service providers.
              Overall, the information is neither easily understandable for the client (e.g.
              complexity and multitude of terms for commissions), nor easily accessible, as it
              has to be pulled from various sources. This makes it difficult for the client to shop
              around and get a solid overview over the products and their pricing conditions.


              It should be mentioned that some financial entities have developed pricing
              calculators for individual products, or provide some information / financial
              education material to explain e.g. information that is provided in monthly credit
              card statements. While accessible, the information is however usually not very
              visibly located or widely advertised.


              b. Product and pricing information provided by the regulator
              The BCP has developed a number of information brochures to help clients
              understand credit cards, basic accounts, inflation, and how to keep a budget.
              Further topics are expected to be added over time. The brochures can be
              downloaded on the BCP webpage under its financial education section.
              The BCP–SIB also publishes monthly interest rate information on its website.
              The information is detailed, listing the nominal and effective interest rates
              charged by each bank and finance company for a broad range of lending and
              savings products. Furthermore, the BCP’s homepage prominently displays
              information on the usury rate applicable for banks and finance companies. A
              discussion of interest rate evolution is also included in the monthly financial
              stability report. No such information is available for insurance products. However,
              the interest rates information alone does not allow for an easy comparison of
              products, as the listed interest rates do not include all the commissions and
              upfront costs charged by financial entities. This total cost information is currently
              still missing (see B7 banking assessment).


              INCOOP has on its website a link to interest rates charged by financial
              cooperatives, but no information is yet posted there. Together with the noted gap
              in product and pricing information from individual cooperatives, prices and
                 commissions charged by cooperatives are currently not transparent to the public.


                 c. Measures to inform costumers of available public information
                 The mission team has not learned about broad based efforts by the regulators to
                 publicly communicate and encourage the use of independent information.
                 Nevertheless, the pricing information provided by the BCP is used by
                 newspapers to regularly report on interest rates, and has also facilitated the
                 development of independent websites such as www.tasasfinancieras.com.py,
                 which allows the client to compare a number of tailored bank products based on
                 interest rates.
Recommendation   1. INCOOP should improve its website to allow uploading of regular statistical
                    information, including on interest rates.
                 2. In line with recommendations made on introducing a total cost requirement in
                    the regulatory framework, BCP and INCOOP should provide total cost
                    information for individual financial services of financial institutions on their
                    websites.
                 3. To enhance transparency in savings and payment products, consideration
                    should also be given to introduce sample price packages (similar to a price
                    index), which are based on an established number of transactions or usage
                    pattern. This would allow for a comparison of total costs for savings and
                    payment products between financial institutions. Pricing packages could for
                    example include a sample package for clients with only 2-3 transactions per
                    month, another sample package with a limited number of withdrawals, debit
                    card purchases and electronic transfers, as well as a high frequency sample
                    package that includes a large number of diverse transactions. The sample
                    packages should be modeled on actual usage patterns observed in the
                    market, and made transparent on BCP and INCOOP websites. The industry
                    should also be mandated to include this information on the respective
                    sample packages in their pricing table.
                 4. A broader communication effort has to be made to guide stakeholders and
                    the general public to available independent information. Consideration
                    should also be given to making the available information more user friendly,
                    including using different communication tools such as video tutorials, comics,
                    or visual tools to help communicate core features of products and what to
                    look out for.



SECTION B        FINANCIAL EDUCATION AND CAPABILITY ENHANCEMENT MEASURES


Good Practice    Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                 a. Demand and supply side information is regularly assessed to establish
                    gaps in usage, and determine financial capability needs.
                 b. Based on a, a broadly based program of financial education and
                    information is developed.
                 c. An institution such as the central bank or a financial regulator is
                    assigned to lead and coordinate the development and implementation
                  of the national financial capability program.
              d. A range of organizations, including those of the government, state
                 agencies, non-government organizations and sector associations are
                 involved in developing, implementing and where needed revising the
                 financial capability program. A clear division of labor has been
                 established between the stakeholders.
Description   a. Regular assessment of demand and supply side information
              Given the described deficiencies in available demand and supply side data, no
              regular gap assessment has taken place so far.
              To develop a National Financial Inclusion Strategy (ENIF), the BCP, with support
              of the World Bank, has commissioned an in-depth assessment of demand and
              supply side constraints, as well as of the legal and regulatory framework. The
              assessments are expected to be finalized by September 2014 and will serve as
              basis for developing a prioritized action plan for fostering financial inclusion,
              including measures to enhance financial literacy.


              b. Development of a broadly based program of financial education:
              No formal broad-based financial education program is currently in place. It is
              however foreseen that a working group on financial education will be created
              under the umbrella of the Committee for Financial Inclusion. The working group
              would develop priority interventions (based on the overall financial inclusion
              action plan) and coordinate programs of public and likely also private
              stakeholders in the area of financial education.
              There is no dedicated budget foreseen to implement the programs of the working
              group. Instead, the expectation is that the participating stakeholders will finance
              identified measures from their regular budget. This is likely to create bottlenecks,
              unless the planned measures are firmly integrated in each entity’s budget for the
              upcoming fiscal years.


              c. Institutional arrangement to lead and coordinate a national financial
              capabilities program. No entity is currently in charge of leading and
              coordinating financial capability programs:
                     The Consumer Protection Law assigns the responsibility for general
                      consumer education to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, as well
                      as the municipal governments. In 2013, this role was formally transferred
                      to SEDECO, which started operation in early 2014. The mandate for
                      consumer education is geared towards helping the client understand his
                      rights and obligations under the Consumer Protection Law, and thus too
                      broad to give SEDECO a formal role in financial education. Furthermore,
                      SEDECO (as well as formerly the MIC) is faced with a lack of capacity
                      and technical expertise with regard to the financial sector (no dedicated
                      financial sector expert is in the team). The municipalities have not played
                      an active role in consumer protection and education.
                     The BCP has signed Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with
                      individual ministries (e.g. the Ministry of Education and, the Ministry of
                      Social Affairs) and other stakeholders to coordinate and collaborate in
                         financial capability measures. In the aftermath of the worldwide financial
                         crisis, the BCP Board also formally incorporated into its work plan
                         measures to inform the population on financial markets and the
                         economic issues. Finally, it has one staff member dedicated to financial
                         education initiatives within the newly created Financial Inclusion
                         Intendency.
                        INCOOP, as the supervisor for cooperatives, only has a mandate to
                         foster the cooperative movement in the country, and does not provide
                         any measures in the area of transparency of services and financial
                         education per se.
                 A draft decree to create the Committee for Financial Inclusion is in an advanced
                 stage of preparation, and it is expected that the Committee will be formally
                 created in the fall of 2014. Once created, it will be in charge of formally adopted
                 and implemented the national financial inclusion action plan. The Ministry of
                 Finance will chair the planned National Committee for Financial Inclusion.
                 Leadership arrangements for the individual working groups have not yet been
                 assigned, but it is expected that a working group on financial education will be
                 created.


                 d. Involvement of a range of public and private stakeholders
                 A number of public and private stakeholders are providing financial capability
                 training and education measures to clients and stakeholders (see below), but
                 these are mostly stand-alone initiatives and not yet coordinated.
Recommendation   The establishment of a working group on Financial Education under the umbrella
                 of the Financial Inclusion Committee follows international best practice and is
                 highly encouraged. The mandate of the working group should be to develop a
                 prioritized and well-sequenced financial education strategy, and monitor its
                 implementation:
                        To create broad ownership, the working group should ideally include
                         representatives from both public and private stakeholders. In the public
                         sphere, in addition to the Financial Inclusion Committee members, the
                         Deposit Insurance Fund, the BCP credit registry, the Secretariat of
                         Social Assistance, as well as the Ministry of Education should be
                         included as needed. Participants from the private sector should include
                         the sector associations, and selectively also donors, NGOs and financial
                         entities that actively conduct financial education programs.
                        The plan should be based on identified underlying constraints, and
                         define remedial actions and entry points, sequencing, communication
                         media to be used, responsibilities of public and private stakeholders, and
                         funding sources for each measure. A monitoring and evaluation
                         framework should be included to assess the effectiveness of individual
                         measures, and progress over time.
                        Prior to launching of activities to improve the financial literacy of clients,
                         the programs / modules should be tested in focus groups for
                         effectiveness.
                        Consideration should be given to provide the financial education working
                         group with a dedicated budget or to pool available resources.


Good Practice   Usage of a broad range of communication strategies (including the Mass
                Media)
                             a. A range of initiatives are developed and implemented by the
                                relevant ministry and stakeholders to improve people's
                                financial capability. This includes direct training,
                                information brochures and flyers, as well as mass media
                                such as TV and radio.
                             b. The usage of mass media should be encouraged by the
                                relevant ministry or institution to provide financial
                                education, information and guidance to the public on
                                financial services and products.
                             c. The information is available in all relevant languages
                                spoken in the country.
                             d. The government should provide appropriate incentives and
                                encourage collaboration between governmental agencies,
                                banking regulators, the banking industry and consumer
                                associations in the provision of financial education,
                                information and guidance regarding banking products and
                                services.
Description     a. Overview over initiatives provided by public and private stakeholders
                Public sector initiatives:
                The BCP signed Memoranda of Understanding with the Ministry of Education,
                the former Department of Consumer Protection, as well as recently with the
                Secretariat for Social Affairs to establish bilateral working groups and design joint
                financial education programs. This has led, amongst other programs to the
                development of a dedicated high school course, which is now incorporated into
                the new high school curriculum and recently received a prize from Child and
                Youth Finance International. The new course is already rolled out and being
                offered in 1,300 schools, but educational materials such as books and model
                lessons to supplement the course program have not yet been developed. In
                addition, the teachers have only received a day of training to prepare them for
                the course, which given the lack of supplementary material appears limited.


                The BCP and the Ministry of Social Affairs also collaborate to help improve the
                financial literacy of beneficiaries of the Tekopora conditional cash transfer
                program, which will in the future receive their transfers via accounts held at the
                public bank BNF. The capacity building will be provided by a leading international
                NGO and will aim to foster savings and help beneficiaries understand financial
                products and services. Under earlier pilot programs, two participating private
                banks provided capacity building to beneficiaries of Tekopora to help them
                understand how to withdraw money with payment cards from ATMs and improve
                their understanding of financial products.
The BCP also maintains a webpage with some financial education materials, and
provides capacity building to teachers and professors, supervisors, and
individuals on a broad range of topics and via various communication media
(including workshops, pamphlets, information brochures etc). The Deposit
Insurance for banks and finance companies has a brochure on Deposit
Insurance available, which it distributes through bank branches.


Private sector and stakeholder initiatives:
A number of banks and finance companies have developed brochures, training
materials and games, which they provide during financial education workshops
or other courses to students, clients, and interested enterprises. Some of the
material is also available on the web, including for example guides to help clients
understand the information on financial statements or the calculation of interest
rates.


One of the NGO-MFIs provides financial education to children to help them
establish a sound savings culture, and includes financial education and
management in its vocational training programs. Donors, public banks and NGOs
are also actively supporting members of cooperatives and producers to help
improve their financial management skills and understand financial concepts.


The two existing e-money issuers is working separately on developing
financial education programs targeted at their existing and potential
customers. On the one hand, Tigo initiated a project named “Projecto Ultima
Milla” (Last Mile Project) in partnership with a commercial bank, aiming to
provide basic financial services to populations currently financially excluded.
Through this project, Tigo is currently developing a pilot for financial education
through SMS messages in Spanish, around three themes (savings, credit,
budgeting). On the other hand, Personal is planning to roll out a financial
education campaign using radio, television, and SMS messages as delivery
channels. The launch date for this campaign is expected to be in August 2014,
and the topics covered would include the use of e-money accounts to encourage
savings, training to use basic phones and smart phones for e-money services,
the use of agents to conduct transactions, and costs and charges applicable in e-
money services.


b. Use of mass media
So far, limited use is made of mass media for financial education purposes. The
BCP has most of its information available on their webpage, but limited use of
mass marketing is made to guide the population to the available material or the
available complaint mechanism. The same holds for the other measures and
initiatives mentioned above. With limited funds and human resources available,
the focus continues to be on dedicated workshops and trainings.
Many of the stakeholders visited by the mission team indicated that the use of
radio as a communication tool would be the most effective if funds were
available.
                 c. Languages used
                 The material is so far provided in Spanish. There is agreement amongst the
                 consulted stakeholders that the majority of the population is capable of reading in
                 Spanish (as Guarani is mostly a spoken language). In this sense, it appears
                 sufficient to provide the written materials in Spanish alone. When using mass
                 media such as the radio, Guarani should be used where appropriate.


                 d. Incentives by the government
                 The mission team did not learn about direct incentives provided by the
                 government for the implementation of financial education measures. However,
                 the new government has a focus on financial inclusion and consumer protection,
                 and as such has reiterated the importance of introducing and implementing
                 measures to foster the responsible use of financial services to all stakeholders. A
                 number of stakeholders, in particular the sector associations and the
                 confederation of cooperatives, are currently exploring options for integrating
                 financial education into their overall work program.
Recommendation   1. The findings highlight the importance of increasing coordination amongst
                 available public and private financial education measures. The working group on
                 financial education can serve as this much needed forum for coordination of
                 activities, and enhancing focus and efficiency, but needs to involve both
                 representatives from the public and private sector.
                 2. Appropriate funding of measures has to be put in place to allow full
                 implementation of programs and the dissemination via mass media where
                 appropriate. This requires fully costing of individual measures, and allocating or
                 securing dedicated funding for the roll-out.
                 3. When designing financial education measures, it will be important to enhance
                 prioritization and targeting of initiatives (e.g. a broad financial education
                 campaign involving mass media could be implemented in tandem with regulatory
                 measures to enhance the information transparency for credit cards, or together
                 with regulatory measures to enhance the transparency of commissions and their
                 terms).
                 4. The government should continue to assess possible entry points for financial
                 education programs. Entry points could for example include the delivery of
                 conditional cash transfers, pension payments for former civil servants, as well as
                 other government payments, as well as moments when a consumer is in the
                 process of making a financial decision, thus is receptive for this information.
Good Practice    Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                 a. Prior to the launch of financial literacy initiatives, the government
                    should test in a small sample the effectiveness of the initiative, and
                    fine-tune the messages and approach as needed.
                 b. From time to time, the effectiveness of key financial literacy initiatives
                    should be evaluated by the relevant authorities, and assessed towards
                    their continued relevance
Description      a. Consumer testing for planned financial education measures
                 The mission team did not learn about any prior testing of planned measures with
                 focus groups, and also noticed a general lack of understanding of stakeholders
                 as to the relevance of prior testing. Financial education modules tend to be
                 developed based on programs implemented in other countries or based on
                 “generally considered” best practice.


                 b. Measuring the impact of implemented financial education initiatives
                 As discussed in the first two guiding principles for financial education, neither the
                 demand nor supply side data is sufficient to monitor changes in the use of
                 financial services or measure the financial literacy levels of the population. This
                 makes assessing the impact of broad financial education initiatives difficult.


                 Regarding the impact of individual financial education tools, the mission team did
                 not learn about holistic assessments. For example, the newly developed
                 economic and finance course for high school plans to evaluate the knowledge of
                 teachers at the end of the school year, but no considerations are currently given
                 to evaluate the gained knowledge of the final beneficiaries of the program: the
                 students. This eliminates an important corrective tool for a program that is still in
                 its infancy and needs to build a reputation to be successful on the longer term.
Recommendation   1. Prior to launching activities to improve the financial literacy of clients, larger
                    programs/modules should be tested in focus groups or pilots for
                    effectiveness. This will help ensure that the initiatives have the intended
                    impact and that messages are correctly understood, and as also help
                    improve cost effectiveness of undertaken measures over time.
                 2. The working group on financial education should establish baselines as well
                    as targets and timeframes for broad financial capabilities of the target
                    population. The indicators should be regularly monitored, and used to fine-
                    tune existing programs and adjust the work program.
                 3. Pilot financial literacy initiatives, or key financial education programs should
                    be evaluated to assess their impact and potential for scaling up.
