93949
Youth in the Maldives:
Shaping a New Future for Young Women and Men Through
Engagement and Empowerment

October 3, 2014




Sri Lanka Maldives Country Unit
Social Development Unit
South Asia Region




Document of the World Bank
                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents ................................................................................................................... i
Preface ................................................................................................................................. iii
Acronyms ............................................................................................................................. iv
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... v
1.     Introduction................................................................................................................... 1
     Background and Justification ............................................................................................. 1
     Objectives, Audience and Data Sources .............................................................................. 2
     Report Roadmap................................................................................................................ 4
2.     Framework and Context for Analzing Youth in the Maldives ........................................... 5
     Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 5
     Country Context ................................................................................................................ 7
     Youth Policy and Definitions ............................................................................................ 10
3.     Issues Affecting Youth .................................................................................................. 12
     3.1 Health ........................................................................................................................ 12
     3.2 Education ................................................................................................................... 22
     3.3 Youth Employment and Unemployment ..................................................................... 29
     3.4 Family Structure and Relationships............................................................................. 35
     3.5 Gangs and Violence .................................................................................................... 39
     3.6 Youth Civic Engagement and Participation .................................................................. 50
4.     Conclusions and Recommendations ............................................................................. 57
     Summary of Findings ....................................................................................................... 57
     Moving Forward – Shaping a New Future for Youth .......................................................... 60
     Recommendations At-A-Glance ....................................................................................... 66
Bibliography ........................................................................................................................ 69
Annex 1. Other Data Sources ............................................................................................... 85
Annex 2. Cursory Scan of Youth Policies and Programs in the Maldives ................................ 87




                                                                      i
ii
                                          PREFACE


This report, which examines challenges facing youth in the Maldives, as well as opportunities for
their development, was a collaborative effort between the World Bank and the Ministry of Youth
and Sports.

A World Bank team comprising Piotr Pawlak, Parthapriya Ghosh, Jana El-Horr, Dustin Smith and
Maria Correia, prepared this report. Maria-Beatriz Orlando at the World Bank, Washington D.C.,
was instrumental in sharing her experiences in working with gender and youth issues. Special thanks
are extended to Somil Nagpal (Senior Health Specialist), Harsha Aturupane (Lead Education
Specialist), Mari Shojo (Education Specialist), and Aminath Inasha Shafeeq (Operations Analyst), for
their operational support through the country-missions and collection of qualitative data. We are
also indebted to Natasha Leite, Independent Consultant for UNICEF, who shared invaluable
insights about youth in the Maldives. Our recognition and gratitude goes to all who have contributed
to this report by sharing country-specific data, reports and publications, program and policy
examples and other research materials relevant to the topic of youth and gender in the Maldives.
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude to the young women and young men in the Maldives
who were interviewed for this report.




                                                 iii
                                 ACRONYMS
ADB              Asian Development Bank
AIDS             Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
ARROW            Asian-Pacific Resource & Research Centre for Women
AUSAid           Australian Agency for International Development
BBS              Biological and Behavioral Survey
CBO              Community-Based Organization
CEDAW            Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
                 Women
CSO              Civil Society Organizations
DRP              Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party
FGD              Focus-Group Discussion
FPU              Family Protection Unit
GBV              Gender-Based Violence
HIV              Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IGMH             Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital
IPPF             International Planned Parenthood Federation
IPV              Intimate Partner Violence
JJU              Juvenile Justice Unit
LDC              Least Developed Country
MDHS             Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey
MIC              Middle-income Country
MOE              Ministry of Education (Maldives)
MPND             Ministry of Planning and National Development (Maldives)
NER              Net Enrollment Rate
NGO              Non-Governmental Organization
NYP              National Youth Policy
SAGE             South Asia Gender Initiative
SEN              Special Education Needs
SRGBV            School-related Gender-based Violence
SRH              Sexual and Reproductive Health
SRHR             Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights
STI              Sexually Transmitted Infection
UNDP             United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF           United Nations Children’s Fund
DAW              United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women
UNESCO           United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNESCO Bangkok   United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Asia-
                 Pacific Regional Bureau for Education




                                          iv
                                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction

        This report responds to the growing concern over issues facing Maldivian youth today, and
specifically, to a request made by the Ministry of Youth and Sports to examine the status of youth in
the Maldives. Such concerns are certainly warranted, particularly in light of a regional youth bulge
which is taking place in South Asia, as well as an observed increase in at risk behavior such as youth
drug use and membership in gangs. While a number of studies have sought to examine youth issues
in the Maldives, a comprehensive and holistic assessment is lacking. This report was aimed at
helping to fill this knowledge gap.

        This report examines issues affecting young people in the Maldives as they transition from
adolescence to adulthood, and based on this analysis and a review of international good practice,
recommends a number of actions for the Government’s consideration. The analysis focused on
youth experiences as they pertain to: health, education, labor, family structure, gangs and violence,
and civic engagement and participation.

        A youth development framework, based on public health literature and adapted to the
Maldives, serves as the organizing structure of the report. The report draws on original data
collection and analysis, as well as an extensive review of existing literature. With regard to data
collection, the study involved field-based research including a household survey and in-depth
interviews, and focus-group discussions with youth and stakeholders in the Maldives.

Conceptual Framework

         For the purposes of this study, ‘youth’ is defined as spanning the adolescent period between
10 to 24 years of age. Youth or adolescent development thus refers to the physical, social, and
emotional processes of maturation that occur during the 10 to 24 year age period. The adolescent
period represents the transition from childhood to adulthood, with biological processes driving the
initiation of adolescence and societal factors largely determining the initiation of adulthood.

         This study broadly applied an ‘ecological’ framework in analyzing youth issues. An ecological
framework considers the relationship between the individual adolescent and her or his environment.
In utilizing the ecological framework, the report seeks to highlight the risks and challenges that
affect the wellbeing of youth, as well as their ability to realize their potential as fully productive
citizens in Maldivian society.


                                                    v
Key Findings

         Youth are tomorrow’s adults – the future of the Maldives hinges on the youth of today.
Currently, young Maldivians feel disenfranchised and excluded, and are perceived as idle and
disconnected from the fabric of society. This problem is not limited to one or two at-risk groups, as
was originally thought when this study originated. While a small group of youth are employed and
thriving economically and socially, a large proportion of the young population are confronted by
significant challenges, which often play out differently for young women and men. Globalization,
internet access, higher levels of education, economic growth over the decades, and a stream of
tourists and foreigners in the country, has exposed young women and men to the outside world and
new ideas and values, making them acutely aware of what they can aspire to. Yet, both female and
male youth face the shackles of the limited island economy, lack empowerment and community
engagement, and contend with rigid norms of behavior and increasingly conservative values, as well
as an inadequate education and training system that ill prepares them for the labor market. In many
cases, Maldivian youth also face limited spatial mobility. These circumstances dash their expectations
and hopes for a different and better life.

        Many of the challenges facing young Maldivians discussed in this report – lack of access to
reproductive and sexual health services, poor educational quality, unemployment and
underemployment, and crime and violence – are not uncommon in developing and many developed
countries. Yet, the findings of this report highlight several challenges that are particularly
pronounced for Maldivian youth:

      Thwarted expectations. Despite the spatial isolation of many Maldivians, youth today are
       better educated and better connected to the outside world than ever before. Social media is
       exposing young people to new ideas and values; the country’s graduation to middle-income
       status also means that young people now aspire to more expensive lifestyles and higher
       social status. However, norms and perceptions among parents and communities have limited
       the goals that youth may aspire for, leaving young people disappointed and disengaged.

      Physical isolation. The youth population is geographically dispersed. Over a quarter of the
       national population resides in Malé, while some 200 other islands have less than 1,000
       inhabitants. Furthermore, the physical isolation has added to the disconnect between Malé
       and the rest of the islands, leading to a limited trickling down of information and services.
       As a consequence, Maldives faces high costs of transportation, and citizens experience
       difficulties in mobility and in accessing public services, thereby limiting opportunities,
       particularly for women. As such, another negative effect of this geographic isolation is that
       men must often leave the atolls to seek out employment opportunities, causing married
       couples to be separated for long periods.

      Labor market constraints. Youth unemployment is pronounced in the Maldives,
       particularly for women, but it is unclear whether the problem is one of demand or supply.
       Young people lack the socio-emotional and other required skills in the job market, and
       schools are not equipping youth with these essential skillsets, nor with sufficient career
       guidance. Simultaneously, the reservation wage appears to be high- young people have high

                                                  vi
       or unrealistic expectations in terms of what constitutes an acceptable job. Added to this
       reality are the perceptions and expectations of parents with regard to what is an acceptable
       job and wage for their children, leading to limited support and encouragement for youth to
       be economically active. This in turn has created a national phenomenon which is referred to
       as “youth voluntary unemployment.” In the atolls specifically, many young women are keen
       to work and earn a livelihood but lack opportunities due to cultural norms. In addition to
       fishing, many men also work in resorts, although they often aspire to new types of
       employment.

      Health care system fails to meet the needs of youth. The health care system of the
       Maldives fails to meet many of the needs of youth due to several key reasons. First, health
       care is curative rather than preventative; and second, the subject of sexual and reproductive
       health among youth, particularly unmarried youth, remains taboo and sensitive.

      Stresses on families and family breakdown. Divorce rates in the Maldives are relatively
       high, as is the proportion of female-headed households. One problem is that Maldivian
       youth are often ill prepared for the duties and responsibilities of parenthood even though
       social norms place a significant emphasis on childbearing – a marker of adulthood for
       women. Lack of suitable housing in urban spaces, and unemployment or underemployment,
       places further stresses on families. Family issues and breakdown, in addition to other factors,
       are connected to youth gang membership.

      Gang participation and violence is a relatively new phenomenon but has been on the
       rise. Youth are joining gangs for a variety of reasons, including inactivity and apathy,
       unemployment, drug use, the need to belong and form brotherhood, and the need for young
       men to prove their masculinity. Moreover, high levels of domestic violence, divorce and
       broken homes have led young people to look outside of traditional family structures for the
       support and protection that gangs can provide. A further problem is that people with drug
       or criminal offenses experience difficulties in reintegrating into society and finding jobs;
       access to counseling and rehabilitation services, especially for young people, is limited and
       inadequate. As such, young people with criminal histories are often left with few alternative
       options and reengage in gang activity.

The report revealed the following risk and protective factors that influence the development of
Maldivian youth as they transition into adulthood:

      Family. Family and relationships are especially important for youth in the Maldives as they
       provide customary and financial support. Conversely, lack of adult encouragement and
       support to continue education and search for employment, parental displays of negative
       attitudes and behaviors including physical and emotional abuse by family members, the
       absence of parental guidance, and high rates of divorce and family breakup negatively impact
       youth and their development.

      Schools. Engagement in schools protects youth against a number of negative behaviors,
       including drug and alcohol use, and engaging in violence and unsafe sexual practices.

                                                 vii
       Unfortunately, when schools do not provide quality services, or do not foster a healthy
       environment for youth – because they expose them to rigid, violent, and gender inequitable
       attitudes and behavior, corporal punishment, bullying, discrimination, harassment and other
       forms of violence – not only is their development hindered, but they are more likely to
       engage in negative behaviors.

      Health. The health sector can play a significant role in achieving positive outcomes for
       youth development. However, as the number of young people entering their reproductive
       years in the country is on the rise, youth perpetually lack access to quality services,
       particularly in regard to sexual and reproductive health, and adolescents and youth are not
       provided with sufficient knowledge about preventative health, which places their health at
       risk. As rates of drug use amongst Maldivian youth continue to rise, the nation also faces
       challenges in providing sufficient and appropriate rehabilitation and support services to these
       individuals.

      Gender Norms. While Maldives ranks relatively high in education and health, it scores
       poorly in political empowerment and economic opportunity for women, and high levels of
       gender-based violence are prevalent. In recent years, gender inequality appears to have
       worsened in the Maldives, and civil society groups have reported significantly increasing
       restrictions on women’s dress, mobility, autonomy, forms of employment, voice and ability
       to make independent decisions.

In light of the challenges facing Maldivian youth, as well as the key factors which strongly impact
their development, it is evident that action must be taken in order to not only secure their well-
being, but also to ensure their full development into adulthood. As the nation’s single largest
demographic today, these youth will be the nation’s leaders of tomorrow.

Moving Forward – Shaping a New Future for Young Women and Men in the Maldives

Addressing the needs of youth, and enabling them to fully participate as productive citizens in
Maldivian society will require a broad strategy of youth empowerment, whereby youth are not only
positively perceived and valued at all levels of society, but will truly be able to exercise a marked
degree of agency, making decisions and espousing change in their lives, their communities, and their
nation. Based upon the findings of the report, the following key actions are recommended:

   1. Conducting a national youth campaign. Such a campaign will effectively communicate to
      youth that the Government of Maldives, parents, and communities are committed to engage
      with them, and that they also need the full participation of youth in society to ensure a future
      for the country. Such a campaign will not only highlight the actual challenges faced by youth,
      but will positively shift perceptions of youth in society, encourage parents and communities
      to support social and economic engagement with youth, and will serve more broadly as a
      platform to launch coordinated youth programming in the country.

   2. Developing new spaces for youth programming and participation. “New spaces” does
      not necessarily refer to physical spaces, but rather to venues in which youth can assemble
                                                 viii
       and build community, discuss the issues facing them, access important information, and
       build networks and skills. Pre-existing youth centers or other structures may be utilized in
       order to provide skills training, public health education and support, civic education and
       leadership opportunities, amongst other amenities.


   3. Supporting preventative health care for young women and men. In addition to working
      towards a broader transition to the use of a preventative healthcare model in Maldives, the
      role of health workers should be considered as a means to improve the provision of youth
      friendly health care services. As Maldivian youth face a dearth of information in the area of
      sexual and reproductive health, social media should be utilized in order to bridge such
      knowledge gaps, as well as to shift societal norms vies-a-vies sexual and reproductive health
      services for young people. Social media may additionally be used to reduce the stigma
      associated with accessing psychological health services.

   4. Preparing young people for jobs. While little is currently understood about labor markets
      and the reasons for high employment among youth, conducting a rapid and low-cost
      Training PLUS program will enable the Government of Maldives to develop and deliver a
      short term training program to equip youth with the skills needed to enter the labor force, as
      well as to widen their range of opportunities through establishing links, networks and
      internships for gainful employment. In order to additionally strengthen the school to work
      transition, curriculums and textbooks should be reassessed in order to align graduates’ skills
      with labor market needs, and after school programs should be expanded to further prepare
      students for the labor market.

   5. Implementing ‘Youth Score Cards’ in schools. As evidenced by international
      experiences, youth score cards should be piloted through the World Bank’s Enhancing
      Education Development in the Maldives Project, as this low-cost intervention is an effective way to
      engage young people in areas which are important to them, including schools. Youth Score
      Cards enable young people and their parents to monitor the quality of local schools, and to
      additionally foster accountability on behalf of school management.

In confronting the challenges facing youth, the Government of Maldives needs to address the dearth
of data, including gender-disaggregated data, which exists on youth. More importantly, impact
evaluations and assessments must be included in the design and implementation of future policies
and programs, especially given the numerous short-lived youth initiatives that have been ineffective,
but not evaluated. Finally, international experiences suggest that the needs of youth are best met
through inter-sectoral coordination and collaboration, as well as with public-private sector
involvement. These should be key considerations as the Government moves forward in tackling
youth issues.




                                                   ix
                                           1. INTRODUCTION
                                   BACKGROUND AND JUSTIFICATION
A youth bulge is currently unveiling across South Asia. In the case of the Maldives, as of
2012, nearly half of the population was under the age of 25.1 In coming years, these youth
will transition into adulthood and assume the associated roles and responsibilities as parents,
community members and leaders.

For most youth worldwide, the critical transition period from childhood to young adulthood
is delicate and challenging, and hinges on adequate support and guidance from family,
schools, and society at large.2 When the needs of youth go unaddressed, particularly in
countries that are experiencing youth bulges, vulnerability to economic distress increases,
which can lead to social unrest.

There is a growing concern among the public and policy makers over the situation of young
Maldivian women and men today. The Government of Maldives has recognized that their
youth are at risk of becoming unproductive citizens, and identified youth as a sector needing
special attention. While youth would legally be adults from the age of 18 in most countries,
many young people in the Maldives are denied passage into adulthood due to labor market
constraints, lack of participation in decision-making processes, constraints to ownership of
property and goods, and a lack of status and a role in society.

While there has been debate and discussion on the challenges Maldivian youth face, relatively
little has been done to gain an understanding of the nature of their problems, the underlying
causes of youth risks and behaviors, and the corollary policies and programs required to
address the issues. Aside from UNESCO’s assistance to the Government of Maldives in
preparing the National Youth Policy in 1984, and some work carried out recently by the
United Nations Development Porgramme (UNDP) and the Asian Development Bank
(ADB) on gender, there has been limited analysis of youth issues in the Maldives.

Recognizing the importance of youth as the pillars of the future and the need for an
improved empirical basis for youth programs, the Government of the Maldives requested
the World Bank’s assistance to better understand the nature of youth issues and to identify
what must be done to improve conditions for youth. This report is a response to that
request.




1 Department of National Planning. 2012. “Statistical Yearbook of Maldives - 2012.” Malé: Department of National Planning, Government
of the Maldives.
2 Feldman, S., and G. Elliot. 1997. “At the Threshold: The Developing Adolescent.” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

                                                                 1
                              OBJECTIVES, AUDIENCE AND DATA SOURCES
Objectives

This report examines issues affecting young people in the Maldives as they transition from
adolescence to adulthood, and based on this analysis and a review of international good
practices, recommends actions to address these issues. The analysis focuses on youth
experiences as they pertain to: health, education, labor, family structure, gangs and violence,
and civic engagement and participation.

For the purpose of this report, ‘youth’ in the Maldives is defined as people between 15 and
24 years of age, a definition that is consistent with that of the UN. Although this definition
differs from the official one used by the Government of Maldives, the Ministry of Youth
and Sports of the Government of Maldives has endorsed this definition for the purpose of
this report.3

Audience

This audience for this report includes: (a) Maldivian government officials tasked with the
development of youth policies, programs, services and activities; (b) donor agencies and
other development agencies working with youth in the Maldives; and (c) local and
international non-governmental (NGO) and community-based organizations (CBO) working
on youth and related issues.

Methodology and Data Sources

A youth development framework, based on public health literature and adapted to the
Maldives, serves as the organizing structure to the report. The report draws on both original
data collection and analysis and a review of existing literature and secondary data sources.
With regard to the former, the study involved field-based research, including a household
survey, in-depth interviews and focus-group discussions with youth and stakeholders in the
Maldives, as follows:

        (a) A Survey was conducted in: (a) urban Malé and Addu City; and (b) four other cities in
            three respective atolls including Gan and Fonadhoo in Laam atoll, Kulhuduffushi in
            Haa Dhaalu atoll, and Hanimaadhoo in Haa Dhaalu atoll. A total of 1,003 individuals
            (520 females and 483 males) participated in a survey, of which 402 were youth, ages
            15-24 years (161 males and 241 females). The survey sought to determine gender,
            age, living situation, education, employment (including type, sector, level and source
            of income), and family situation including marital status and number of children.

        (b) Focus-group discussions with a total of 97 youth (47 male and 50 female) in the 15-35 age
            category in four locations including Malé, Malé atoll, Mahibadhoo, Alif Dhaal atoll,
            Maalhos, Alif Alif atoll, and Dharavandoo, Baa atoll. The objective was to explore
            youth perceptions and attitudes around themes such as their roles and

3   In accordance with the Youth Policy, 2003, the Ministry of Youth and Sports defines youth as individuals in the age range of 18-35 years.
                                                                       2
       responsibilities; opportunities and challenges in daily life; family life and the
       transition to adulthood; practices, beliefs and attitudes related to gender roles and
       gender equality; youth culture and tradition; and employment opportunities and
       challenges related to the transition from school to work.

The report draws extensively from the existing secondary data sources as follows:

   1999, Reproductive Health Baseline Survey which surveyed 2,254 households and
    included 4,087 household respondents.
   2004, Reproductive Health Baseline Survey which surveyed some 16,078 people living in
    2279 households from 20 islands. A total of 4,102 respondents from 2,279 households
    were interviewed. In addition, 1,141 young men and women ages 15 to 24 also
    participated (663 unmarried young women and 469 unmarried young men, ages 15-24)
    nationwide.
   2005, UNFPA’s Youth Voices – Facts, Figures and Opinions survey was administered to
    4,002 youth and 700 adults from all regions of the country. Youth-led discussions in 21
    islands were held with 84 groups of Maldivian youth (ages 15- 24) and adults (ages 25
    and up), and island administration, with 1,200 people contributing to the discussions.
   2007, Women's Health and Life Experiences Survey with a sample size of 2,584
    households: 1,864 households in the atolls, 575 households in Malé and 145 households
    in the 3 additional tsunami affected islands. The sample size represents 6% of all
    households in the Maldives and 5% of the women population aged 15-49 in the
    Maldives.
   2007, the Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences included a cross-
    sectional population-based household survey of women aged 15-49 years. The study was
    conducted across the whole country, with the overall sample size of 2,582 households
    (1,862 households in the atolls, 575 households in Malé, and an additional 145
    households in tsunami-affected islands). The sample size represented 6% of all
    households in Maldives and 5% of the female population aged 15-49 years.
   2008, the Global School-based Student Health Survey which was conducted by the
    Ministry of Education included 3,241 respondents (including 1,453 male respondents
    and 1,752 female respondents) completed in 39 schools. 38.6% of respondents were 16
    years old and older, 60% of respondents were 13 to 15 years old, and 1.4% of
    respondents were 12 years old or younger. 37.1% were attending Grade 8, 33.5% were in
    Grade 9 and 29.3% were in Grade 10.
   2008, Biological and Behavioral Survey on HIV and AIDS which surveyed 605 young
    men and women aged 15-24 years (460 youth in Malé and 145 in Laamu).
   2009, UNICEF study, which involved 17,035 people in 2,500 households, and 2,000
    children in Maldivian schools.
   2009, Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey, which included interviews with 8,362
    ever-married women and 1,727 ever-married men, ages 15-64. A total of 2,240 never-
    married women and men age 15-24 completed individual interviews.
   2011-2012, National Drug Use Survey, conducted in 39 selected islands and more than
    3,500 households. From those households, 13,172 screening questionnaires were
    completed for individuals aged 15-64 years, and of these, approximately 74% (10,172

                                              3
    individuals) were screened, comprised of 6,334 females and 3,838 males. Additionally, a
    total of 27 FGDs were conducted in Malé and in the atolls with drug users, rehabilitation
    personnel, counsellors at NDA and DRC, NGOs and CBOs, adolescent males and
    females and key stakeholders.
   2011, Prison Assessment and Proposed Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Offenders
    Report conducted by the Government of Maldives and the United Nations
    Development Programme (2011) administered a questionnaire to 576 incarcerated male
    and female offenders in the Maldives (aged between 18-75, with 95% of respondents
    being male, age 30 years or under).
   2012, Rapid Situation Assessment of Gangs in Malé, included FGDs with gang members
    or members of groups labeled as gangs. The assessment had a total of 131 participants;
    24 in-depth interviews with gang members or people labeled as gang members were
    carried out.

Other data sources are described in Annex 1.

Some of the field-based research carried out for this report was unusable because it was not
disaggregated by age or gender; hence the report only draws on data that could be clearly
attributed. Additionally, the field research did not cover key issues such as sexual and
reproductive health. In light of such limitations, every effort was made to unearth other data
sources and reports, including scholarly articles and peer-reviewed publications. These
secondary information sources focused on the following issues: youth civil and socio-
political participation, engagement and inclusion, family dynamics, family structures and
relationships, gender roles and norms, health and well-being, violence and risky behaviors,
education and school-related challenges, and finally, employment and work force
participation.

                                     REPORT ROADMAP

Following this introductory Section I, this report is organized as follows:

       Section II presents conceptual definitions and a framework for analyzing youth in
        the Maldives; it also provides context for the report, including macroeconomic
        indicators, demographic information and an overview of the youth policy
        framework.

       Section III presents emerging concerns or issues in six areas: Health, Education,
        Employment, Family Structures and Relationships, Violence and Crime, and Civil
        and Socio-Political Engagement of Youth.

       Section IV provides conclusions and recommendations, highlighting ways to break
        the chain of events and influences that place Maldivian youth at risk.




                                               4
        2. FRAMEWORK AND CONTEXT FOR ANALZING
                 YOUTH IN THE MALDIVES
                                                      DEFINITIONS
Youth

The literature on youth is replete with caution on the use of a chronological age to
distinguish phases of the life cycle. The definition of youth depends on the sectoral and
cultural context; for example, health specialists may refer to youth as the pubescent period,
which begins at different ages in different countries, while labor ministries may use the
minimum work age as the point at which the youth phase begins.

The term adolescence refers to the transition from childhood to adulthood. Biological
processes drive the initiation of adolescence, its onset being defined by puberty.4 In
contrast, societal factors largely determine the initiation of adulthood. It is possible that
forced adulthood in adolescence or continuing adolescence beyond age 30 has negative
impacts on development programming for
youth. In a context where a man is still              Risk-taking behaviors predispose
considered “young” in his 30s, it can be difficult youth to negative outcomes (e.g.,
to determine where initiatives focused on young unprotected intercourse is a
people stop and general development starts.           health risk behavior that
Similarly, where girls of 18 years have been          predisposes an individual to
married for some years and have their own             sexually-transmitted infections
children, it is easy to subsume them into adult       [STIs] and unwanted pregnancy).
reproductive health service programming and           The outcomes of these risk-taking
forget that they still face issues related to         behaviors – such as early non-
adolescence.   5
                                                      marital childbearing, leaving
                                                                          school early, drug addiction,
Youth Development                                                         violence, etc. – compromise a
                                                                          young person’s future and can
Youth or adolescent development refers to the                             have high societal costs in the
physical, social, and emotional processes of                              short and long term.
maturation that occur during the 10 to 24 year
age period. The elements of this developmental period include: pubertal maturation,


4Feldman, S., and G. Elliot. 1997. “At the Threshold: The Developing Adolescent.” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
5United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 2013. “What do we mean by youth?” Available:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/youth/youth-definition/

                                                                 5
cognitive development, ability to understand a future time perspective, ability to extrapolate,
experimentation (including gender role experimentation), and moral development.

While research and policy on youth have tended to focus on the behavioral aspects of youth
development, recent work has shifted to the underlying causes of these behaviors.6 Risk
factors, also referred to as risk antecedents, are those factors that increase the likelihood of
experiencing negative outcomes.7 Factors predisposing negative outcomes may be individual
(e.g. aggressive temperament), familial (e.g. family breakdown including divorce or
separation, violent or substance abusing families, familial mental illness), or environmental
(high crime and violent neighborhoods or even climate change).

Counter-balancing such risks are the protective factors8 that likewise arise from the
individual, familial and social environments in which a young person lives.9 For example,
individual characteristics that have been repeatedly found to be protective include social
skills, intelligence, higher levels of education and a belief in a higher power beyond oneself.
Protective family characteristics include a caring parent, an authoritative parenting style,10
and smaller family size. Likewise, social
environments associated with reduced risk             Engaging in pro-social behaviors
include caring non-familial adults, collective        and avoiding health compromising
self-efficacy, and neighborhood engagement.           and future jeopardizing behaviors
Thus, as a dynamic process one must                   leads to positive youth development
concurrently consider both the factors that           (Roth et al. 1998). A sense of
predispose a young person to vulnerability            industry and competency, a feeling
and those that protect (direct effect) or buffer      of connectedness to others and
(indirect or mediated effect) them from harm.         society, a belief in controlling one’s
                                                                          fate, and a stable identity are
It is important to note, however, that while                              elements of positive development in
risk and protective factors aid in                                        adolescence.
understanding underlying causes of behaviors,
the subjective experiences of adolescents and youth are tremendously varied. Although the
odds of negative behaviors are much higher for those individuals who have many risk
factors, not all succumb. The concept of resilience may help to explain the reasons that
youth outcomes are not foreordained. Resilience refers to the self-righting capacity of an
individual to bounce back and keep going. It implies resistance to threat but not
invincibility11 or invulnerability.12 Rutter (1993) suggests that resilience is interactive with


6 World Bank. 2000. “Trinidad and Tobago. Youth and Social Development. An Integrated Approach for Social Inclusion.” Washington,
D.C.: World Bank.
7 Resnick, M. and M. Hojat. 1998. “Protecting Adolescents from Harm: Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on Adolescen t

Health.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 278(10): 823-32.
8 Blum, R. 1998. “Healthy Youth Development as a Model for Youth Health Promotion: A R eview.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 22,

368-375.
9 Patterson and Blum (1996) refer to “resources,” Benson (1997) refers to “assets,” and Masten (2000) refers to “resilience” as countering

the risk factors. See: Patterson, J., and R.W. Blum. 1996. “Risk and resilience among Children and Youth with Disabilities.” Archives of
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 150:692-98; Benson, P. 1997. “All Kids Are Our Kids.” San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; and Masten, A.S.,
and M.G.J. Reed. 2000. “Resilience in Development.” In C.R. Snyder and S.J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of Positive Psychology. New York:
Oxford University Press.
10 Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., Kosterman, R., Abbott, R. And K.G. Hill. 1999. “Preventing Adolescent Health-risk Behaviors by

Strengthening Protection During Childhood.” Archives of Pediatrics and AdolescentMedicine, 153, 226–234.
11 Garmezy, N. 1991. “Resiliency and Vulnerability to Adverse Developmental Outcomes Associated with Poverty.” American Behavioral

Scientist, 34:416-430.
                                                                    6
vulnerabilities.13 That is, resilience is developmental in nature, stemming from biology and
experiences earlier in life, while protective factors may operate in different ways at different
stages of development.

For the purpose of this report, the ecological model14 is adopted to study the various
protective and risk factors for youth in the Maldives in the following six areas: health,
education, employment, family formation and relationships, violence, and youth civil and
socio-political engagement.

                                                COUNTRY CONTEXT
The Maldives consists of 1,192 small tropical islands in the Indian Ocean, of which 190 are
inhabited, 105 are self-contained tourist resorts and 21 are used for commercial activities.
The Maldives territory crosses strategic shipping routes and the marine environment is richly
diverse. With more territorial sea than land, marine resources have played a vital role in
shaping the contours of economic development, with nature-based tourism and fishing
being key drivers of economic growth.

Demographics

The population of the Maldives is 393,595 (estimate as of July 2014), with the population
structure shown below in Figure 1. High annual population growth rates averaging 3% per
year in the 1970s through to the 1990s at 3.4% per year,15 combined with the limited
availability of family planning in the outer atolls16 has resulted in the current population
structure. In 2006, 31.1% of the Maldivian population was below 15 years of age, while the
working age population (aged between 15 to 64 years) accounted for 62.5% of the
population. The median age of the population in 2006 was 22 years, a rise from the median
age in 2000, which was 18.7 years.17

According to the 2012 Statistical Yearbook of the Maldives, 49% of the population is under
the age of 25, a minor decline from the previous year, while those in the age category 15-24
now constitute approximately 25% of the country’s total population, which is greater than
the global average (see Figure 1).18

The legal age of marriage is 18 for both males and females, and in 2010 the average age for
first marriage among youth was 19 years. Some 41% of the marriages in 2010 were in the age

12 Garmezy, N. 1985. “Stress Resistant Children: The Search for Protective Factors.” In J.E. Stevenson (Ed.), Recent Research in
Developmental Psychopathology, supplement 4:213-33 of the Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines. Oxford:
Pergamon Press.
13 Rutter, M. 1993. “Resilience: Some Conceptual Considerations.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 14:626-31.
14 For more information please refer to: Bronfenbrenne, U. 1994. “Ecological Model of Human Development.” International Encyclopedia

of Development, Vol. 2, Second Edition. Oxford: Elsevier. Available: http://www.psy.cmu.edu/~siegler/35bronfebrenner94.pdf.
15 Ministry of Health. 2001. “The Maldives Health Report 2001.” Available: http://www.health.gov.mv/publications.asp?id=1
16 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 1994. “First Country Programme.” Malé: Maldives.
17 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “ICPD Beyond 2014. Maldives Operational Review 2012. Progress, Challenges and

the Way Forward.” Malé: UNFPA and the Government of Maldives, Department of National Planning. Available:
http://www.planning.gov.mv/publications/2013/ICPD%20Beyond%202014%20-%20Maldives%20Operational%20Review%202012-
13.05.2013.pdf (last accessed on January 30, 2014).
18 Department of National Planning. 2012. “Statistical Yearbook of Maldives - 2012.” Malé: Department of National Planning,

Government of the Maldives.
                                                                 7
group of 20 to 24 years.19 Although there are reports of Maldivians traveling to Pakistan and
India to carry out illegal child marriages, the country has the lowest rate of child marriage in
the region, at approximately 4%.20



                              Figure 1: Total Population by Age Group and Sex, 2010




                                    Source: ICPD Beyond 2014, Country Profile for the Maldives.


Macroeconomic Indicators21

Over the last two decades, the Maldives recorded remarkable economic growth, especially
when compared with the rest of South Asia. In the early 1980s it was one of the world’s
twenty poorest countries. Maldives reached an impressive per capita income of US$ 2,514 in
2004, from US$ 771 in 1984, and sustained an annual average Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) growth of 7.9% in the 15-year period leading up to 2004. This growth was all the
more impressive given that the Maldives lacks the resource endowments, scale of economies,
and geographical diversity enjoyed by its South Asian neighbors. In addition, these economic
achievements have been complemented by high literacy, low maternal and child mortality,

19 Department of National Planning. 2011. “Maldives Statistical Yearbook 2011.” Malé: Department of National Planning, Government of
Maldives. Available: http://planning.gov.mv/YearBook2011/MDG.pdf
20 Please see U.S. Department of State. 2010. “U.S. Department of State’s 2010 Human Rights Reports.” Available:

http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/; as well as United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 2013. “Child Marriage in South Asia:
Realities, Responses and the Way Forward.” Paper prepared by Tina Khanna, Ravi Verma and Ellen Weiss. Available:
https://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Child_marriage_paper%20in%20South%20Asia.2013.pdf
21 Unless otherwise stated, this section is based on World Bank. 2014. “Maldives - Interim strategy note for the period FY14-FY16.”

Washington, D.C ; World Bank.
                                                                 8
declining poverty levels, and improvements in service delivery during the past decade.
Poverty levels have dramatically declined in the Maldives from 23% to 8% during the period
of 1997 to 2004. The sustained growth and rising prosperity of the last three decades was
founded on a private sector-led tourism industry that is based upon the country’s
extraordinary natural assets. Tourism directly and indirectly accounts for two-thirds of
economic activity in the country.

At the present, however, the Maldives faces some very serious macroeconomic and fiscal
challenges. As Box 1 explains, the national budget is continually strained by expenditures in a
number of areas,
including public service      Box 1. Macroeconomic and Fiscal Crisis in the Maldives
wages, the Aasandha
                             External and fiscal imbalances have increased substantially and
universal health scheme      Maldives is at high risk of debt distress, the source of which is that
(which has proven            the country is spending beyond its means. There is an increasing
significantly more costly    gap between revenues and expenditures, financed by unsustainable
than anticipated), as well   levels of public debt. In 2013, total expenditures were above 42
as from subsidies,           percent of GDP, while total revenue and grants stood at above 32
including those for          percent of GDP (the highest in the region). This increase in public
electricity and fuel. Such   spending has been driven by expenditures on the wage bill,
public expenditures have     universal subsidies (including food and electricity subsidies), social
been the main drivers of     welfare payments, transfers to state-owned enterprises, and capital
spending in Maldives,        spending in the outer atolls.
and have resulted in a
                             Loose fiscal policy has made macroeconomic management difficult,
major gap between            putting pressure on the balance of payments and external reserves.
revenues, thus requiring     According to IMF and World Bank estimates, in 2013 usable
finance through public       reserves1 were critically low at around US$ 100 million, or three
debt, which is incurred at   weeks of imports.
unsustainable levels, with
increasing interest rates.   Macroeconomic imbalances are putting stress on the banking
This has led to the          system, which is confronted to increasing exposure to sovereign
description of the           risk. High budget deficits have led to dramatic public sector credit
Maldives as a welfare        expansion. Much of the domestic financing requirement has fallen
state.                              on the banking sector. This has been crowding out credit to the
                                    private sector and putting the banks’ balance sheets at risk. These
                                    stresses are compounded by the banks’ high exposure to the
Public service wages are a
                                    tourism sector.
significant component of
                                 Source: Interim Strategy Note for the Republic of the Maldives, World Bank (2014)
Maldives’ high level of
public expenditures. In
2012, public sector employment expenditures constituted 37% of the national budget. This
reflects the significant presence of public sector employment in the Maldives; approximately
8.3% of the national population (excluding police and military personnel, as well as
councilors) is engaged in public employment, and public service constitutes approximately
45-50% of overall formal wage employment across the nation. The large size of Maldives’
public sector is at least partially explained by the need to effectively deliver services to a
population that is widely dispersed across the island nation. This said, its size and associated
financial costs are considered to be unsustainable for the Maldives.

                                                        9
Maldives also faces a major deficiency in qualified human resources. There is a dearth of
qualified Maldivians to fill technical, middle and senior management positions, particularly in
the tourism sector. This has led to a significant degree of reliance on expatriate workers- of
which at least 100,000 have taken up opportunities in Maldives. Such reliance on expatriates
demonstrates a clear skills gap in the Maldivian education system.



                                     YOUTH POLICY AND DEFINITIONS
National Youth Policy

An overview of policy and programming on youth across sectors is found in Annex 2. The
first youth policy in the Maldives dates back 30 years ago to 1984, when UNESCO assisted
the Government of the Maldives to prepare the National Youth Policy (NYP). The policy
was based on general guidelines laid down by the President of the Republic in his inaugural
address to the National Youth Council on August 23, 1980.22

In an attempt to address emerging issues faced by youth, in 2003, the Government issued
the Youth Policy 2004. However, structural changes affecting youth since then (e.g.
increased youth population, increased engagement of young people in various areas, and an
increase in drug use and drug involvement in organized crimes, traffic violations and gang
activities), have prompted the ministry responsible for youth to commission the drafting of a
new bill on youth. As of the report’s writing, however, the Maldives did not have this
specific legislation related to youth.

The National Youth Council (NYC) acts as an advisory body to the Minister of Human
Resources, Youth and Sports (MHRYS). It was established in 1981 as an advisory body
composed of sixteen members representing the President's Office, the main technical and
social ministries, the educational and training institutes and the private sector. The Minister
of MHRYS appoints the members of the NYC, which today is comprised of nine members.

NYC is the national coordinating body for youth affairs, advising the Minister of MHRYS in
coordination with other youth departments. Its main functions are:

          To advocate for youth citizenry – including engagement, leadership and voice –
           through programming, resources, funding and recognition.

          To connect the youth sector and increase youth outreach both locally and overseas.

          To enable the development of youth and the youth sector, through training and
           capacity building.


22The focus of the policy is on: strengthening communications between youth and adults; encouraging youth to participate more actively in
development projects; promoting sports and other recreational activities; enhancing access to education and linking education to
development, community and environmental needs; encouraging youth to connect to national cultural heritage and reinforcing moral
education in the wake of growing exposure to external influences and contacts; promoting health, preventive care and hygiene; and
increasing opportunities for skills development and income generating activities, as well as leadership training for youth.
                                                                  10
In addition to engaging on policy issues, the NYC advises on youth events and conferences,
as well as on ways to strengthen and support the programs and activities of youth clubs,
associations and NGOs, with a focus on youth friendly services.

Youth Age Definitions in the Maldives

General policy guidelines laid down by the President of Maldives to the National Youth
Council in 1980 defined ‘youth’ as being between 15 to 35 years in age; however, this was
changed to 18-35 years by the minister responsible for youth, to conform to the amendment
of the Children’s Act passed in 2002. The latter act stipulated that children under the age of
18 have legal protections.23 The ministry responsible for youth and sports has since
proposed that the age group be reverted to 15-35 years, the rationale being that by the time a
child reaches 18 years of age, she or he has already come across several important events and
experiences in life. For example, the following laws designate specific ages that apply to
youth transitions: 24

          15 years: Minimum age of criminal responsibility (Rules on Investigation,
           Adjudication and Sentencing in respect of Offences committed by Minors 02/06)
          16 years: Minimum legal age for paid employment (Employment Act 2/08)
          16 years: Eligible to enter into legal contracts (Contract Act 4/91)
          18 years: Legal protection limit as a child (Children’s Act 9/91)
          18 years: Minimum age at marriage (Family Law 4/00)
          18 years: Driving license (Land Transport Act 5/09)
          18 years: Right to vote; right to run for public office (Constitution)

As it stands today, according to the prevailing policy framework, youth in the Maldives span
the 18-35 year old age group. Worldwide, it is not uncommon for youth to cover such a
large spectrum of the population. Yet, the current definition applied in the Maldives is not
practical, as it spans 17 years and covers many stages in the lives of young people. UNICEF
and other relevant organizations argue that youth development should be part of a life-cycle
approach to human development, that takes into account different stages of the lifecycle and
corollary needs at different development stages, as follows: early childhood (0-5 year olds);
elementary (6-10 year olds); middle school (11-14 year olds); high school (15-19 year olds);
and young adults (20-24 year olds). 25 As noted earlier, this report focuses on the 15-24 year
old cohort, consistent with the UN definition.




23 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2003. “Reproductive and Sexual Health of Adolescents in the Maldives.” Report submitt ed
to UNRC and prepared by Simad Saeed, Ibrahim Naseem, Dheena Moosa, Ahmed Afaal. Available:
http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/maldives/drive/RSHAintheMaldives20June2003.pdf
24 Government of Maldives. 2008. “The Constitution of the Republic of Maldives.” Available:

http://www.maldivesinfo.gov.mv/home/upload/downloads/Compilation.pdf
25 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2002. “Working For and With Adolescents – Some UNICEF Examples;” Ferber, T. and

Pittman, K. (with Marshall, T.). 2002. “State Youth Policy: Helping All Youth to Grow up Fully Prepared and Fully Engaged.” Takoma
Park, MD: The Forum for Youth Investment.
                                                                11
                          3. ISSUES AFFECTING YOUTH
                                                3.1 HEALTH
A comprehensive picture of the health of Maldivian youth is not easy to establish. The
health care system in the Maldives is primarily curative, with limited information collected on
preventable diseases and other health concerns, such as unintended pregnancy, sexually-
transmitted infections, violence,
mental health disorders, suicide, and      Box 2. Youth Health Statistics At-a-Glance*
the use of alcohol, tobacco and drugs.
                                                      The average age of first marriage for girls is 19
                                                       years, and the average age of becoming pregnant
                                                       with a first child is 20 years.
In the Maldives, investigating young
                                                      In 2010, 294 births were by mothers under the
people’s sexual behavior is sensitive                  age of 20.
and controversial, particularly among                 HIV prevalence (%) in 2012 among young
unmarried young people. There is                       people aged 15-24, male and female, was <0.1.
widespread stigma as well as cultural                 Knowledge and access to information and
taboos surrounding the discussion of                   services on how to prevent unwanted pregnancy
sexuality, as well as an extreme                       is limited.
reluctance to recognize that young                    Comprehensive knowledge of HIV among
unmarried men and women may be                         females (15-24) for 2008-2012 in urban settings
sexually active. Consequently, young                   was 43.4 %, and 31.8% in rural settings.
people have difficulties accessing                    1 out of every 3 youth is engaged in drug abuse.
contraception, and have limited                       Maldivian youth remain sexually active before
awareness about sex and human                          marriage: 3.2% of unmarried women (15-24
sexuality – particularly in rural settings.            years) and 9.8% of men (15-24 years) have had
Moreover, due to these deeply                          sexual intercourse.
ingrained social and cultural taboos, as
                                            Sources: Statistical Yearbook of Maldives, 2011; The Maldives Health
well as a more general lack of youth-       Statistics, 2011; UNICEF Maldives Statistics
specific data that is sex-disaggregated,    http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/maldives_maldives_statistics.html
                                            ; UNFPA Profile of Adolescents and Young People in the Maldives,
it difficult to provide a comprehensive     2006; CIA Maldives Factsheet, 2014.
picture of the on-the-ground health         https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
                                            factbook/geos/mv.html (last accessed on April 1, 2014); The National
reality of youth in the Maldives. As a      Drug Use Survey (2012); Maldives DHS (MOHF & ICF Macro, 2010).
consequence, some of the issues that
are of utmost importance to young
Maldivians are under-researched and under-discussed.

This said, available evidence indicates that Maldivian youth today, consistent with youth
elsewhere, face a number of risks related to sexual and reproductive health (SRH), including
risky sexual behavior, HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections (STIs), adolescent
pregnancy and unsafe abortions, high use of tobacco, drug and substance abuse, and mental
health and suicide. These are discussed in turn.
                                                       12
Sexually Active Unmarried Youth

Under the form of Sharia law practiced in the Maldives, sex before marriage is an offence
punishable by flogging, and pregnancy outside marriage is a criminal offence with serious
legal and social ramifications. There is evidence however that sexual activity among
unmarried Maldivian youth is a reality and that youth initiate sexual activity at an early age,
regardless of social norms and legal consequences. For example:

          The 2009 Maldives Demographic and Health Survey, the first nationally
           representative study to explore premarital sexual activity, found that 3.2% of
           unmarried women (15-24 years) and 9.8% of unmarried men (15-24 years) had sexual
           intercourse.

          A Situational Assessment of HIV and AIDS in the Maldives for the Year 2000 notes:
           “the rapidly increasing young population, mobility, exposure to foreign lifestyles and long separation
           from families place higher vulnerability to the risk of HIV” and that “a proportion of young people
           were found to experiment with sex before marriage. Further, parents and relative do not teach
           anything about sex, and sexuality or related issues to their children.” 26

          The 2004 Reproductive Health Baseline Survey found that youth were generally
           sexually active before marriage, and two thirds of those who were active had their
           first experience of sexual intercourse before the age of 18 years.27

          Similarly, the 2008 Biological and Behavioral Survey on HIV and AIDS found that
           the median age of sexual debut was 20 years old. Surveyed youth had had a median
           number of five sexual partners during the past year, and while the majority of young
           people reported having sex with permanent partners, there were reports of young
           men and young women paying for sex and/or selling sex.28


Unwanted Pregnancies and Unsafe Abortions

           Abortion: “a risk free procedure….and a safe alternative to contraception” - young
           Maldivian female.29

Unwanted pregnancies and unsafe abortions are a concern in Maldives. Findings from the
2010 Statistical Analysis of the Family Protection Unit (FPU) at the Indira Gandhi Memorial


26 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 2006. “Policy and Programming for HIV/AIDS & Reproductive Health of Young People in
South Asia.” Kathmandu, Nepal: UNFPA CST for South and West Asia.
27 Ministry of Health. 2004. “The Reproductive Health Survey.” Malé: Government of Maldives and the United Nations Population Fu nd.

Pg. 32.
28 In Malé: 9 males and 1 female aged 18-24 years old reported paying for sex, and in Laamu 1 male and 1 female aged 18-24 years old

reported selling sex. United Nations Devleopment Programme (UNDP). 2008. “Biological and Behavioral Survey on HIV and AIDS.”
Available: http://www.health.gov.mv/HIV/BBS%20Maldives%202008.pdf (Last accessed on Jan 26, 2014).
29 Perception of young women interviewed as part of the International Planned Parenthood Federation’s qualitative study on the i ssue of

unsafe abortions in the Maldives conducted in 2008. International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF). 2008. “Socio-cultural Factors
and Unsafe Abortions in Maldives.” London: IPPF. Pg. 3.

                                                                  13
Hospital (IGMH) in Malé show that out of a total of 620 cases attended to by the unit in the
analysis period (year 2010), 121 cases were pregnancies outside marriage, and the majority of
those cases were among young women ages 18 – 24.30 A gender assessment conducted by
the Asian Development Bank in 2007 indicates also that there is an increase in unwanted
pregnancies amongst unmarried youth.31 The Health Master Plan 1996-2005 contains reports
of premarital sexual activity, unsafe sexual practices, and unsafe abortion among
adolescents.32

The domestic legal and social context, as well as cultural norms and attitudes towards
pregnancy out of wedlock create a complex and undeniable link between such pregnancies
and the practice of unsafe abortion. There are anecdotal stories of Thursday afternoon
flights to Colombo, nicknamed as ‘bandu dhonna flight’ or ‘the abortion flight.’ 33 Although
substantial data is lacking, some evidence suggests that unsafe abortion is common among
both married and unmarried populations.34 For example:

         The 2008 Qualitative Study of Sociocultural Factors and Unsafe Abortions in
          Maldives conducted by the Society for Health Education and the International
          Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) reports: “induced abortions were found to be
          common events among females in Male’ and most of those could be considered to be obtained in
          unsafe circumstances. The discussions indicated that abortions were more common among unmarried
          youths than among married couples.” 35

         The 2011 Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried
          Women study found that unsafe abortion is a key issue among young Maldivian
          women who become pregnant outside of marriage.36

         The 2012 ICPD 2014 Survey Workshop conducted as part of the Maldives Country
          Review revealed concerns about the rise in the number of babies born out of
          wedlock, babies who had been found murdered or thrown away, as well as the
          increase in unsafe abortions.37




30 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the
Maldives.” Malé: UNFPA.
31 Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2007. “Maldives: Gender and Development Assessment.”
32 Hameed, S. 2012. “Sexual Health Policies and Youth: A Case Study of the Maldives.” Thesis submitted to the Department of Social

Policy at the London School of Economics for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, London, June 2012. London School of Economics
and Political Science.
33 Comments to an online article: “Abortion in the Maldives,” Minivan News, January 7, 2010. Available:

http://minivannews.com/society/abortion-in-the-maldives-the-untold-story-2191
34 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “ICPD Beyond 2014. Maldives Operational Review 2012. Progress, Challenges and

the Way Forward.” Malé: UNFPA and the Government of Maldives, Department of National Planning. Available:
http://www.planning.gov.mv/publications/2013/ICPD%20Beyond%202014%20-%20Maldives%20Operational%20Review%202012-
13.05.2013.pdf (last accessed on January 30, 2014).
35 Thalagala, Neil. 2008. “Sociocultural Factors and Unsafe Abortions in Maldives: Qualitative Perspectives. ”
36 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the

Maldives.” Malé: UNFPA.
37 ICPD 2014 Beyond – Maldives. “Workshop for the Maldivian Civil Society.” Available: http://icpd20maldives.wordpress.com/ (last

accessed on February 24, 2014).
                                                               14
Social stigmatization and legal consequences associated with out of wedlock pregnancy,
censorship by political, religious or other leaders, and lack of access to safe and legal
abortion38 are the main reasons why young women resort to unsafe abortion services.

Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Unprotected Sex

Unprotected sex and HIV/AIDS are a major risk to young people in the country. The
Biological and Behavioral Survey on HIV and AIDS, conducted in 2008 with 605 young
people ages 15-24, found that young people surveyed do not use condoms with non-regular
partners and do not perceive themselves as being at risk for HIV. According to the survey
there is high prevalence of “unprotected sex with multiple partners” among the high-risk groups,39
including youth in the 15-24 year age group: 90% of surveyed youth engage in unprotected
sex.40 The survey also found that a significantly high proportion of 145 youth surveyed in
Laamu (23%) and 19% of 460 youth surveyed in Malé reported signs and symptoms of an
STI, but the same groups reported poor health-seeking behavior (mostly self-medication or
simply taking no action).

Limited Knowledge and Access to Information on Reproductive and Sexual Health

The risky sexual behaviors noted above can be attributed to young people’s limited
knowledge about HIV/AIDS, the source and type of information they receive, and facts and
information that are available and accessible to them at home, in schools and in their
communities.

          The 2008 Biological and Behavioral Survey indicates that 23% of 460 youth
           interviewed in Malé, and 6% of 145 youth interviewed in Laamu, said “practicing
           religion protects one from HIV”, 20% (and respectively 12%) mentioned “not changing sex
           partners often” as a protective factor.

          The 2009 Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey revealed that 25% of 1,213
           never-married female youth respondents and 22% of 1,027 never-married male
           youth respondents “had not talked about reproductive health and sexuality with anyone.” 41
           More than half of the respondents did not know that a woman could get pregnant
           following first sexual intercourse,42 a finding that is consistent with the previous 1999
           and 2004 SRH Baseline Surveys.43 Furthermore, “Enquiries at the Education
           Development Centre (EDC) under the Ministry of Education (MoE) which develops


38 Abortion is criminalized in the Maldives, except in pregnancies where the fetus is diagnosed with thalassemia. United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations Department of Social Affairs (DESA). 2002. “Abortion Policy: Maldives.”
39 High-risk groups in the study included: female sex workers, men who have sex with men, injecting drug users, occupational cohorts of

men including seafarers, construction workers and resort workers.
40 United Nations Devleopment Programme (UNDP). 2008. “Biological and Behavioral Survey on HIV and AIDS.” Available:

http://www.health.gov.mv/HIV/BBS%20Maldives%202008.pdf (Last accessed on Jan 26, 2014).
41 Data from the youth questionnaire responses in the Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey, 2009: Ministry of Health and Family and

ICF Macro. 2009. “Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey. Preliminary Data.” Malé: Ministry of Health and Family. Available:
http://www.health.gov.mv/publications/MDHS%202009%20Preliminary%20Report_LATEST.pdf (last accessed on January 27, 2014).
42 Ibid.
43 For example: Reproductive Health Baseline Survey, 1999 and Reproductive Health Survey, 2004 as described in United Nations

Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the Maldives.” Malé:
UNFPA.
                                                                 15
           the school curriculum, and a brief look through available textbooks showed that RH
           information is mainly included in the Islam and biology subject syllabi.”44

          Findings from focus-group discussions conducted for this report in Malé and three
           other locations revealed that very limited opportunities exist to gain information on
           reproductive and sexual health – and such opportunities almost never occur at home
           with parents or in schools with teachers – leaving young people with no support in
           terms of knowledge on SRH, HIV/AIDS and STIs.

This above situation leaves young women and men vulnerable to misconceptions and peer
pressure, and in the case of women, vulnerable to sexual predators and at risk of sexual
abuse and exploitation.45 The problem is made worse – for women in particular, but also for
men – by the fact that most health workers are foreign and male.

Policies and Programs on SRH

To address SRH of youth in the Maldives, the Government took several youth-relevant
policy initiatives. These include, among others:

          The Population Policy’s Goal 14 stipulates that population education must be
           provided to children, adolescents and adults.46

          “ICPD+10 and Beyond: Progress, Achievements and Challenges in the Maldives
           1994-2004” identifies priority actions that include “[a]dressing the needs of youth through
           the provision of information and services, promoting responsible behaviour through strengthening life
           skills education in schools and out of school youth and carrying out awareness campaigns through
           media on issues of drug use, unsafe sex, gender based violence etc. and their implications.” 47

          Health Master Plan 1996-2005 addresses adolescent health within the framework of
           maternal and child health, and offers strategies to raise awareness on SRH needs in
           schools.

          National Reproductive Health Strategy 2005-200748 identifies adolescent sexual and
           reproductive health as a thematic area, with the goal to “improve the sexual and
           reproductive health of adolescents (10-19) and young people (15-24) in the Maldives.” 49


44 The study also considered the issue of the removal of existing SRH information from the primary school syllabus.
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the
Maldives.” Malé: UNFPA. Pg. 23.
45 Abdulghafoor, H. 2012. “Maldives NGO Shadow Report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.”

Malé: Hope for Women.
46 Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2004. “Population Policy of the Maldives.” Malé: Ministry of Planning and

Development.
47 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2004. “IPCD + 10 and Beyond: Progress, Achievements and Challenges in the Maldives

1994-2004.” Pg. 5. Available: http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/maldives/drive/Brochure_on_IPCD+10_Review_Report_2004.pdf
48 Ministry of Health. 2004. “National Reproductive Health Strategy 2005-2007.” Available:

http://www.health.gov.mv/latest%20publications/e-books.asp
49 On Pg. 13, the strategy also identifies the following objectives: (1) 50% of adolescents and youth (10-24 years) have access to age

appropriate information related to SRH, (2) ASRH Life Skills Education provided to at least 75% of adolescents/young people in selected
schools in Malé, (3) Develop and pilot youth-friendly services on SRH.”
                                                                  16
         The 7th National Development Plan 2006-2010 identifies the need to promote
          awareness of RH among adolescents.50

Despite these positive efforts, a nagging problem is that SRH policies continue to focus on
promoting awareness51 rather than dealing with the need for services to deal with STIs,
unwanted pregnancies, and unsafe abortions.52 Similarly, there are numerous strategies
targeting HIV/AIDS but very few addressing information gaps related to other STIs.53

An initiative that holds promise is the Youth Health Café (YHC), which was established in
Malé under the Ministry of Human Resources, Youth and Sports. The objective of the YMC
is to provide skills training programs, awareness programs on SRH and mental health issues,
as well as to foster youth volunteerism, offer career guidance and provide outreach to youth.
Inadequate funding and staffing, however, has plagued the YHC, therefore limiting its
impact and potential.54

Tobacco Use

Smoking is a social and a health problem among Maldivian youth, and its negative
consequences and impacts on young people have been well-documented. On a global level,
data shows that the Maldives ranks high on overall tobacco use prevalence when compared
to international standards, with 57 percent of men and 29 percent of women having used
some form of tobacco. Specifically, between the ages of 20-24, 42% of young Maldivians are
smokers, one of the highest numbers in the South Asia region, according to the 2009
Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey. Findings from the initial survey revealed 52% of
young people smoked a whole cigarette at 16 years and above, with high prevalence among
young men specifically. Furthermore, based on customs data, in 2010 alone 346 million
cigarettes were imported into the Maldives, at a cost of US$8 million, a disproportionate
figure considering the nation’s population of 350,000 citizens, which signals the danger of
tobacco use in Maldivian society.

Adolescent tobacco use predicts a range of early and later adult health and social health
problems. While such consequences as coronary heart disease, stroke, peripheral vascular
disease, numerous cancers- including those of the lung, mouth, esophagus, larynx, kidney,
pancreas, bladder, stomach and cervix have been well documented, there is also evidence of

50 Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2007. “7th National Development Plan 2006-2010.” Malé: Ministry of Planning and
National Development.
51 Ministry of Health. 2004. “National Reproductive Health Strategy 2005-2007.” Available:

http://www.health.gov.mv/latest%20publications/e-books.asp; Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2004. “Population Policy
of the Maldives.” Malé: Ministry of Planning and Development; Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2007. “7th National
Development Plan 2006-2010.” Malé: Ministry of Planning and National Development.
52 Narcotics Control Board (NCB). 2003. “Rapid Situation Assessment of Drug Abuse in Maldives 2003;” Thalagala, N. 2008.

“Sociocultural Factors and Unsafe Abortions in Maldives: Qualitative Perspectives.”
53 Commerce Development and Environment Pvt Ltd. (CDE). 2003. “Reproductive and Sexual Health of Adolescents in the Maldives.”

Available: http://www.unfpa.org.mv/downloads/RSHA_2003.pdf; Ministry of Health and Family. 2009. “Maldivian Demographic and
Health Survey.” Malé: Ministry of Health and Family.
54 Hameed, S. 2012. “Sexual Health Policies and Youth: A Case Study of the Maldives.” Thesis submitted to the Department of Social

Policy at the London School of Economics for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, London, June 2012. London School of Economics
and Political Science.
                                                               17
the possible harmful effects of youth tobacco smoking on later social, emotional, and
behavioral well-being, later tobacco use and the initiation of alcohol use or the development
of alcohol-related problems.55



Drug Abuse

Drug use is a growing challenge in the Maldives. The majority of drug users in the Maldives
are between 15-25 years of age.56 According to UNFPA’s Youth Voices Report in 2005, 68%
of 4,002 youth ages 15-24 surveyed in a joint UN study identified drugs as a challenge facing
Maldivian youth today.57 A staggering number of young people first experience or witness
drug use and injection at an early age. For example, the 2003 Rapid Situation Assessment of
Drug Abuse revealed that almost half of all users (47%) were below the age of 20 years and
that the mean age of drug use initiation was 16.8 years.58 The 2008 Biological and Behavioral
Survey on HIV and AIDS found that the median age of first drug use ranges from 16 to 17,
with the age of first drug use being nine years.59

The field-based survey conducted for this report revealed that among current drug users, as
many as 73% in Malé and 49% in the atolls were less than 24 years old. Their median age
was 21 in Malé, and 25 years in the atolls. Young persons in the age group of 15-19 years
accounted for the highest proportion of drug users in Malé, comprising 47% of all youth
interviewed.

Illicit drug use is mostly a male phenomenon.60 The 2003 Rapid Situation Assessment found
that 97% of drug users were males.61 This is consistent with prior research findings and re-
confirmed by findings from the field-based research conducted for this report, which
revealed that a large majority of current drug users are young males, especially those younger
men and urban youth in Malé.

Common reasons for drug initiation include perceived false positive outcomes from drug
use. The 2011/2012 National Drug Use survey notes that, “more common reasons for initiation of
drug use could be seen as ‘pull’ factors because of perceived positive outcomes of drug use as opposed to the
‘push’ factors where drugs are used to deal with certain perceived negative factors in life.”



55 Mathers, M., Toumbourou, J.W., Catalano, R.F.., Williams, J.,and G.C. Patton. 2006. “Consequences of Youth Tobacco Use: a Review of
Prospective Behavioural Studies.” Addiction. 2006 July; 101(7):948-58.
56 Ahmed, S.K. 1998. “Report of the Preparatory Mission for Rapid Assessment Study in Maldives.” New Delhi: UNDCP, ROSA;

Naaz, A.A. 2002. “Country Report on Maldives.” Presented at the First Regional Meeting of Technical Committee on Social Development,
Kathmandu, Nepal; Shakoor, A. 2001. “Country Report on Maldives.” Presented at the Twenty Fifth meeting of Heads of National Drug
Law Enforcement Agencies, Asia and Pacific, 15-18 October 2001.
57 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2005. “Maldives: Youth Voices Report 2005.” Malé: UNFPA.
58 Foundation for Advancement of Self Help in Attaining Needs (FASHAN) and NCB. 2003. “Rapid Situation Assessment of Drug Abuse

in Maldives 2003.” Malé: UNESCAP and UNDP.
59 For Malé, the median age was 16, and for Addu, 17 years. First drug use was reported at 9 years in both locations. United Nations

Development Programme (UNDP). 2008. “Biological and Behavioral Survey on HIV and AIDS.” Available:
http://www.health.gov.mv/HIV/BBS%20Maldives%202008.pdf (Last accessed on Jan 26, 2014).
60 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2013. “National Drug Use Survey. Maldives - 2011/2012.” Malé: UNODC.
61 Foundation for Advancement of Self Help in Attaining Needs (FASHAN) and NCB. 2003. “Rapid Situation Assessment of Drug Abuse

in Maldives 2003.” Malé: UNESCAP and UNDP.
                                                                 18
Drug use is also associated with high rates of crime in the Maldives. According to Maldives
Police Services, 2012 Crime Statistics, drug related offences are the third most common
crime reported to the police in the Maldives.62 Police records indicate that between 2001 and
2007, drug offences increased by over 500% and violent crimes by 200% in Malé.
Furthermore, a 2011 UNDP-Government study, Prison Assessment and Proposed Rehabilitation
and Reintegration of Offenders, revealed that the majority of prisoners were serving a sentence
for drug related offences, of which, about 70% were for drug use.63 Other sources provide
similar findings, including the 2004 UNDP report on gender issues in the Criminal Justice
System in the Maldives, which notes that, “many, if not most, young women involved in the criminal
justice system had either been sentenced for drug offences or had committed other offences related to their drug
use,” 64 while the 2011 Statistical Yearbook of Maldives reports that a total of 783 persons in
2006, and 1,187 persons in 2007 had been detained by the Maldives Police Service in relation
to drug use offences, out of which the majority of individuals were between the ages of 16-
24 years.65

According to a report published by the Asia Foundation in 2011, there are inadequate
rehabilitation services and unqualified specialized health workers for people convicted of
drug-related offences, which leads to complications when they are released from jail.66
Stigmatized by their drug-related prison sentence, they struggle to reintegrate into the
community, find and maintain jobs, and resume using drugs. As a consequence, they either
join or rejoin gangs: “people do not give offenders…. […addicts…] ….a second chance... once they get
labeled it is hard to get back into the community… they cannot start a life as no one would give them a job,
no parent will allow their daughter to go out with them.” 67

In response to the increasing challenges faced by Maldivian youth, including drugs,
substance abuse and related gang activities, a Juvenile Justice Unit (JJU) was established in
2005 to address both the increase in juvenile delinquencies and the need for the
establishment of a system that facilitates the rehabilitation and reform of young offenders.
Further, in light of the early age of initiation and first injection among youth, the
Government of Maldives launched the new Drug Act 17/2011- a major milestone for
addressing drug abuse in the country – as it places emphasis on rehabilitation and treating
drug users rather than promoting incarceration. Under this Act, the National Drug Agency
has been mandated as the lead agency dealing with all issues related to drug prevention, harm
reduction and treatment.68



62 Maldives Police Service. “Crime Statistics 2012.” Available: http://www.police.gov.mv/#eservice (last accessed on February 13, 2014).
63 Among this group, the majority had used heroin (69.1%) and cannabis (63.3%), followed by alcohol (47.9%). United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). 2011. “Prison Assessment and Proposed Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Offenders Report.”
Government of Maldives and UNDP.
64 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2004. “Gender Issues in the Criminal Justice System of the Maldives.” University of

Melbourne, 2 September 2004.
65 Department of National Planning. 2011. “Maldives Statistical Yearbook 2011.” Malé: Department of National Planning, Government of

Maldives. Available: http://planning.gov.mv/YearBook2011/MDG.pdf
66 The Asia Foundation and Maldives Institute for Psychological Services, Training and Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in

Malé.” Colombo: The Asia Foundation. Available: http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last
accessed on January 31, 2014).
67 Statement from a gang member interviewed in Malé. Ibid.
68 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2013. “National Drug Use Survey. Maldives - 2011/2012.” Malé: UNODC.



                                                                  19
Mental Health and Suicide

The mental health and wellbeing of youth is presently a strong concern in the Maldives. The
ill effects of drugs and illicit substance abuse among youth, poor reproductive and sexual
health behaviors, and other social challenges - such as witnessing and experiencing violence,
and unemployment or underemployment - pose growing risks for the psychological well-
being of youth. Additionally, the 2004 tsunami left over-whelming traces of physical damage
and psychological distress among young men and young women in the nation.

          Several studies, including the 2006 Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Aspects
           of Disaster Preparedness in the Maldives study, the 2005 Ministry of Planning’s
           study of the tsunami disaster, the World Bank’s 2005 study of the impact of the
           tsunami, the World Food Programme’s 2005 Rapid Assessment Report of the
           Impact of the Tsunami in the Maldives, and the 2005 World Health Organization
           study on mental health and psychosocial relief efforts after the tsunami in South-East
           Asia, all report that the 2004 tsunami in the Maldives had a direct effect on the
           psychological health of youth.69

          A 2007 research study addressing the initial response by national and international
           agencies to gender issues during the aftermath of the Maldives’ tsunami suggests
           that, “men seemed to suffer more mental anguish because they felt they were unable to fulfill their
           proper ‘male’ role of providing for their family.” 70

          Findings from the survey conducted for this report show that more than 1 in 4
           young people (28%) reported feeling sad, at loss or depressed for two weeks or more
           in a row. Suffering from social anxiety was also confirmed by 2% of all young
           women and young men interviewed in the study.

Focus-group discussions conducted for this report with young men in Mahibadhoo Island
revealed that the most common reasons for feeling sad or being depressed are frustration
with reality and a lack of opportunities for ‘active involvement’ (e.g. through intellectual or
physical activities outside of school, access to or participation in entertainment such as
movie theaters, concerts, youth social groups), poverty and unemployment, and the difficulty
in discussing personal problems and concerns with adults and within their families. Younger
men indicated that conservative cultural traditions and social norms, as well as difficulties in
fulfilling these expectations, combined with their “different than their parents” reality, is one of
the strongest predictors of depression and sadness.71



69 “Ministry of Health Republic of Maldives. 2005. “Emergency Preparedness and Response Health Sector Plan (Draft)”; World Bank,
Asian Development Bank and the United Nations System. 2005. “The Impact of the Tsunami: Joint Needs Assessment”; World Food
Programme (WFP). 2005. “Rapid Assessment Report of the Impact of the Tsunami in the Maldives.” Rome: WFP; World Health
Organization (WHO). 2005. “Mental health and psychosocial relief efforts after the tsunami in South-East Asia”; Ministry of Planning and
National Development. 2006. “Preliminary Results From the Population and Housing Census 2006.” Malé: Ministry of Planning;
The President’s Office and Television Maldives. 2005. “The Tsunami disaster in the Maldives.” Male: Government of M aldives. DVD.
70 Fulu, E. 2007. “Gender, Vulnerability, and the Experts: Responding to the Maldives Tsunami.” Development and Change, 38(5): 8 43–

864 (2007).
71 Focus-group discussions in Malé and in Mahibadhoo were conducted by Piotr Pawlak, independent consultant for the World Bank, while

focus-group discussions in Maalhos and in Dharavandoo were conducted by Natasha Leite, independent consultant for UNICEF. For
                                                                  20
Suicides are an issue in the Maldives. From 0.7 per 100,000 citizens in 2005, the number of
all suicides increased to 10 per 100,000 in 2008. The number of suicides in a year doubled
from 14 in 2007 to more than 30 in 2008,72 and young people are not excluded from this
group. Although solid data is lacking, findings from the survey conducted for this report
revealed that 15% of respondents knew someone who attempted suicide, and 9% reported
an attempted suicide within the last twelve months.

Stigma and social discrimination associated with seeking and accessing mental health services
and the overall unavailability of youth-focused services inhibit young men and women from
receiving support and information on mental and other health services. Research confirms
that youth may be afraid of, or are deterred by services that are not youth-focused;
intimidating environments, including inflexible opening hours; costs of services; resistant or
unresponsive health care providers; discomfort in requesting assistance or resources; or they
may also be unaware of what services are offered.73 Furthermore, with transportation
between islands being difficult and expensive, remote islands are deprived of professional
mental health services which address the mental well-being needs of youth.74 Currently, the
only out-patient facility for mental health is at the Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital in Malé,
and only two psychiatrists working in the Maldives focus on the area of drug rehabilitation.75




more information, please see: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the Maldives: Challenges and
Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).
72 Government of Maldives. 2009. “Presidential Address 2009.” Malé: President’s Office, Government of the Maldives.
73 Chandra-Mouli, V., Bloem, P. and J. Ferguson. 2013. “The World Health Organization’s Work on Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive

Health.” Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz 56 (2), February 2013, Pg. 256-61; United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “Strategy on Adolescents and Youth”; World Health
Organization (WHO). 2012. “Making Health Services Adolescent Friendly: Developing National Quality Standards for Adolescent F riendly
Health Services. WHO: Geneva. Available:
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/75217/1/9789241503594_eng.pdf
74 Ibrahim, A. and A. Hameed. 2006. “Mental health and psychosocial support aspects of disaster preparedness in the Maldives.”

International Review of Psychiatry, December 2006; 18(6): 573–578.
75 Government of the Maldives. 2010. “Activities Addressing Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Human Rights Commission of the

Maldives.” Malé: Government of the Maldives. Available:
http://www.hrcm.org.mv/publications/otherreports/DisabilityReport13April2010.pdf

                                                                21
                                                 3.2 EDUCATION76
The Maldives has shown impressive progress
towards achieving education targets set by the                             Box 3. Education Statistics
Millennium Development Goals as they relate
to universal primary education and gender                                              At-a-Glance
equality in education. Progress has also been
made in increasing the number of schools:                               Youth (15-24 years) literacy rate for
until 1992, ten years of schooling was                                   2008-2012, male: 99.2%, female:
available only in Malé. However, in 1992 the                             99.4%1
Southern Secondary School was established in                            Pre-primary school participation,
Addu City, as the first secondary school to                              gross enrollment rate for 2008 -
open outside Malé. The second secondary                                  2012,* male: 113%, female: 117.5%
school located in an atoll, Jalaluddin School in                        Primary school participation, net
Haa Dhaalu Kulhudhuffushi, went into                                     enrollment rate for 2013,** male:
operation in 1998. Lower secondary education                             93.8%, and female: 95.0%
is now available in 187 schools, and 33                                 Primary school participation, gross
schools across the country offer grades 11-12.                           enrollment rate for 2013,** male:
As a result, the net enrolment rate of students                          99.3%, female: 98.7%
attending secondary schools has increased                               Lower secondary school
from 42.5% in 2001 to 92.3% in 2013.                                     participation, net enrollment rate for
                                                                         2013,** male: 91.4% and female
Despite positive developments, young people                              99.3%
face challenges in accessing quality education                          Lower secondary school
that will facilitate their transition into                               participation, gross enrollment rate
adulthood. Higher education participation is                             for 2013,** male: 93.8% and female
low for a middle-income country and the                                  95.4%
gross higher education enrollment rate is only
6%. Challenges also differ by gender, with                          * Data refers to the most recent year available during the
                                                                    period specified in the column heading, in UNICEF
males faring worse than females at the                              Maldives Statistics.
primary and secondary levels, in terms of
enrollment, rates of repetition, and scores on                      ** Data refers to latest school statistics, Ministry of
                                                                    Education.
standardized tests, and girls are still
                                                                    Sources: UNICEF Maldives Statistics. Available:
discouraged from attending school.                                  http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/maldives_maldives_s
                                                                    tatistics.html and
Quality of Education and Low                                        http://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/Maldives_
                                                                    COAR_2012.pdf ; Ministry of Education School Statistics
Educational Achievement                                             2013. Available:
                                                                    http://www.moe.gov.mv/assets/upload/STAT_BOOK_20
                                                                    13.pdf
Quality of education is a significant challenge
facing the Maldives, as illustrated by the
following findings:77



 Unless otherwise stated, this section is based on Aturupane, H. and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the
76

Maldives. Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia: Human Development Unit. Report No. 51. Discussion Paper Series. World Bank.
Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180
NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf (last accessed on February 2, 2014).
                                                             22
          Although access to seven years of primary education is available in all inhabited
           islands of Maldives, net enrollment in primary education is declining.78

          In the most recent report, as part of the 2012 Maldives Operational Review, UNFPA
           indicates a sharp drop in net enrollment at the higher secondary education level to
           19%, and shows that the net enrollment rate at the higher secondary level is higher
           for males, with an NER of 18.4%, in comparison to 16.4% for females.79 The report
           suggests that one of the main reasons for such a sharp drop in participation at the
           higher secondary level has been the limited number of schools offering grades 11-12:
           out of about 220 schools in the Maldives, until recently only 5 provided higher
           secondary education.80

          The average scores for English at grades 4 and 7 are merely 32% and 29%
           respectively, and the average scores for mathematics are only 39% and 30% at the
           same grade levels. There are also substantial regional disparities. Learning outcomes
           are considerably higher in Malé than in the atolls, especially in the English language,
           which is a prerequisite for employment in a tourism-based economy.

          Examination pass rates at the General Certificate of Examination Ordinary Level
           (GCE O/L) show low results: of 6,346 young people who sat for the GCE Ordinary
           Level Examination in 2012, only 41% passed in five or more subjects. This suggests
           that the majority of the young people who complete ten years of schooling are
           unable to secure further education.81

Focus-group discussions conducted for this report in Mahibadhoo Island revealed that there
is a sense of disconnect between the quality of the current educational curriculum and the
level of preparedness and applicability it offers for youth in future employment.82 The
interviews noted, “a significant worry about the standard of educational services and curriculum,” while
“there is a disparity between those in islands and in Malé.” 83

Lower educational attainment has been found to decrease work opportunities and future
earnings.84 Low levels of educational outcomes and regional differences across the Maldives
are a serious concern, as the cognitive skills of a labor force are closely related to the


77  World Bank. 2013. “Project Information Document. Education Sector Development Project. South Asia, Maldives.” Washington, D.C .:
World Bank.
78 Ministry of Education. 2013. “Education Statistics 2012.” Malé: Ministry of Education.
79 Department of National Planning. 2011. “National Planning, Household and Income and Expenditure Survey, 2009 -2010.” Malé:

Department of National Planning, Government of Maldives.
80 Osorio, C. G. and D.E. Fonseka. 2013. “Maldives Development Update.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Available:

http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/10/18612521/maldives-development-update (last accessed January 22, 2014).
81 Aturupane, H. and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the Maldives. Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia:

Human Development Unit. Report No. 51. Discussion Paper Series. World Bank. Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180
NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf (last accessed on February 2, 2014).
82 Information obtained in focus group discussions held with youth in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll. Discussions held

on January 11, 2014.
83 Interview with Council President of the Alif Dhaal Atoll, and Council Director of the Alif Dhaal Atoll. Interview held on January 11,

2014 in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll.
84 Pereznieto, P., Harper, C., Clench, B. and J. Coarasa. 2010. “The Economic Impact of School Violence.” Woking and London: Plan

International and Overseas Development Institute.
                                                                   23
economic development of a country.85 Thus, the weak and low educational outcomes among
youth, especially in the lagging atolls, will hamper the future economic competitiveness and
prospects of the country.86

Aware of the modest learning outcomes at both the primary and secondary levels, in
addition to substantial regional disparities, the Ministry of Education has increased the
number of schools offering higher secondary education in atolls, where there are sufficient
student numbers to make this expansion viable, to 38 schools (four schools in Malé and 34
schools in the atolls). The Ministry of Education is also promoting private-public
partnerships to increase tertiary education opportunities.87

Despite these developments, underperformance and school dropout among young males
persists, while females continue to face barriers to education in the Maldives, including
discrimination and discouragement when it comes to making choices among different fields
of study at the secondary and tertiary levels.


Underperformance of Male Youth

Educational trends in the Maldives have begun to resemble those of the Global North:
where gender parity has finally been achieved in education, the trend is now that boys are
faring worse at the primary and secondary levels, in terms of enrollment, rates of repetition,
and scores on standardized tests.88

          A 2012 World Bank report addressing challenges and prospects of the education
           sector in the Maldives suggests that young men show modest outcomes in primary
           and lower secondary education – and these disparities in learning outcomes are even
           wider between the Malé Attol and elsewhere in the Maldives.89

          Records from the examination pass rates at the General Certificate of Examination
           Ordinary Level (GCEO/L) also show poor results for boys: in 2010 only 33% of
           boys passed (in comparison to 37% of girls).90 Similarly, examination pass rates at the


85 Hanushek, E. and L. Woessmann. 2008. “The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, 46
(3): 607-668.; and Hanushek, E. and F. Welch (Eds.). 2006. “Handbook of the Economics of Education - Volume 1.” Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science and Technology Books.
86 Aturupane, H. and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the Maldives. Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia:

Human Development Unit. Report No. 51. Discussion Paper Series. World Bank. Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180
NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf (last accessed on February 2, 2014).
87 World Bank. 2013. “Project Information Document. Education Sector Development Project. South Asia, Maldives.” Washington, D.C.:

World Bank.
88 Barker, G., Verma, R., Crownover, J., Segundo, M., Fonseca, V., Conteras, J.M., Heilman, B. and P. Pawlak. 2012. “Boys and Education

in the Global South: Emerging Vulnerabilities and New Opportunities for Promoting Changes in Gender Norms.” THYMOS Journal of
Boyhood, Vol. 6, Issue 2, Year 2012. Harriman, TN: The Men’s Studies Press.
89 Aturupane, H. and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the Maldives. Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia:

Human Development Unit. Report No. 51. Discussion Paper Series. World Bank. Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180
NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf (last accessed on February 2, 2014).
90 The time trend, however, has been positive. The GCE O/L pass rate among boys has risen from 26% in 2007 to 33% in 2010, and

among girls from 25% in 2007 to 37% in 2010. However, this increase in the GCE O/L pass rate over time may be over-estimated, as in
recent years there appear to be some schools which have kept back their weaker students from sitting for the GCE O/L in order to raise
                                                                 24
           General Certificate of Examination Advanced Level (GCE A/L) in 2010 were only
           35% for boys, and 43% for girls. This is an inadequate pass rate, as it suggests that
           two out of every three boys are unsuccessful in passing the examination.

Various studies suggest that the different ways boys are socialized contribute to their
underperformance in school. Issues include: a lack of male role models in homes for boys to
emulate for school achievement; the fact that being recognized as a man in some settings
means defining oneself as anti-academic or anti-school; and the preponderance of female
teachers (which may imply that classroom styles are more geared towards styles of learning
and interaction for women and girls).91 In fact, the 2013 Global Gender Gap Report
published by the World Economic Forum shows clearly that in the Maldives, 73% of
teachers in primary education and 67% in tertiary education are females.92

School dropout is an emerging important issue with net enrolment in both primary and
secondary school showing a declining trend.93 Consequences of dropping out or being
delayed in school have both short and long term effects on girls and boys. For instance,
missing school affects the development of skills such as reading and writing, which in turn
affect the progress and rate of cognitive development.94

Education Issues Pertaining to Females

A lack of support and encouragement to continue education beyond the primary level
continues to affect the lives of young Maldivians, and young women more specifically.
Research-based evidence suggests:

          As documented in the 2009 UNICEF State of the World Childrens report, increasing
           religious fundamentalism and an emerging prevalence of conservative ideas for
           women’s roles in the society are negatively affecting girls’ school attendance.95

          Recent anecdotal evidence from young women who took part in the rapid situation
           assessment of maternal health, SRHR, gender equality and women’s empowerment
           issues in the Maldives, as part of the Shadow Report to the Committee on the




their overall pass rates. Such a practice would artificially increase the GCE O/L pass rate. For more information, please see: Aturupane, H.
and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the Maldives. Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia: Human Develop ment
Unit. Report No. 51. Discussion Paper Series. World Bank. Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180
NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf (last accessed on February 2, 2014).
91 Barker, G. 2005. “Dying to Be Men: Youth, Masculinity and Social Exclusion.” London: Routledge; and Chevannes, B. 2006. “The role

of men in families in the Caribbean: A historical perspective.” In Bannon, I. and Correia, M.C. (eds.) The Other Half of Gender: Men’s
Issues in Development. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Pg. 73-92.
92 Available: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GGGR13/Maldives.pdf (last accessed on February 8, 2014).
93 For more information, please see the Ministry of Education website: http://www.moe.gov.mv/
94 De Castro, E., Zenaida, A., Camacho, V., Faye, A., Balanon, G. and M.T. Galang. 2012. “Children Caught in Conflicts: Assessing the

Psychosocial Impact of Armed Conflict on Children in the Philippines.” International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studie s, 9(3): 249–
265 (2012).
95 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2009. “State of the Worlds Children 2009.”

                                                                    25
           Elimination of Discrimination against Women, suggests that, “the expectation for young
           school leavers, especially in the islands, is to become a good housewife.” 96

          The 2009 UNICEF report addressing barriers to girls’ education in South Asia found
           that the systems of secondary and post-secondary education and vocational training
           programs in the Maldives have excluded equitable girls’ participation.97 The same
           report suggests that because opportunities for post-primary education are available
           only in urban areas or city centers situated only on some islands, it becomes nearly
           impossible for girls to continue their education as their safety away from home
           becomes an issue.98

          A report by the International Trade Union Confederation in 2009 found that
           although equal access to education is provided for boys and girls, parents end formal
           education for girls upon completion of primary school and keep them from leaving
           their home island for secondary school.99

          A 2011 Rapid Situation Assessment of the Maldives conducted by the Asian-Pacific
           Resource & Research Centre for Women (ARROW) observed that, “the low levels of
           access to higher secondary enrolment, challenges to mobility and employment opportunities especially
           for girls mean that marriage is the somewhat inevitable life option available for young women.” 100

Limited Progress on Higher Education

Progress on higher education has been limited. A recently completed World Bank report
indicates that the demand for higher education is increasing as the proportion of youth
among the population who complete secondary education rises.101 With the per capita
income of the country increasing, the demand for higher education is expanding as the
educational aspirations of young people grow in relation to increasing affluence.

On addressing the issue of higher education in the Maldives, the report estimates that the
higher education system (degree or above and pre-degree level) has a total enrollment of
about 11,000 - 12,000 students. Over 95% of enrollment is in pre-degree level diploma and
certificate programs. However, these higher education enrolment rates are low for a middle-


96 Asian-Pacific Resource & Research Centre for Women (ARROW). 2011. “Maternal Health, Sexual Reproductive Health and Rights,
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: A Rapid Situation Assessment of the Maldives.” Malaysia: ARROW (unpublished).
97 The country has achieved reduced fertility and child mortality, as well as women’s increased access to micro-credit, but this study finds

no research-based evidence to demonstrate that universal participation of Maldivian girls in basic education has contributed to such
achievements. The literature does not reveal any case, story or narrative of girls and women that explains how a basic-educated girl or
woman has made sense out of her educational participation. Gender parity of enrollment in primary education has not revealed much
about parity or disparities in other areas of education, or about other socio-economic and political benefits to girls and women. For more
information please see United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2009. “Overcoming Barriers to Girls’ Education in South Asia.
Deepening the Analysis.” Kathmandu: UNICEF Regional Office for South Asia (ROSA). Available:
http://www.unicef.org/rosa/whole_book_b.pdf.
98 See comments above.
99 International Trade Union Confederation. 2009. “Internationally Recognized Core Labor Standards in the Maldives.” Report For the

World Trade Organization General Council Review of the Trade Policies of Maldives. Executive Summary. Geneva, 26 and 28 October,
2009. Available: http://www.ituc-csi.org/IMG/pdf/Trade_Policy_Review_Maldives_final_october_09_.pdf
100 Asian-Pacific Resource & Research Centre for Women (ARROW). 2011. “Maternal Health, Sexual Reproductive Health and Rights,

Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: A Rapid Situation Assessment of the Maldives.” Malaysia: ARROW (unpublished).
101 World Bank. 2011. “Higher Education in the Maldives: An Evolving Seascape.” South Asia Human Development Sector. Report No.

36. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
                                                                    26
income country. If only university degree level or equivalent enrollment is considered, the
gross higher education enrollment rate (GER) is about 6%. This is approximately the same
GER as countries such as Bangladesh, Nepal and Pakistan, which are much poorer than the
Maldives, and have less developed basic education systems. This figure is also about half the
GER in India, and less than a third of the GER in Sri Lanka. The main reasons for the low
enrollment in higher education are very limited access to higher education opportunities, and
generally poor access to and completion of higher secondary education in the country.102

Quality and Skills of Teachers

      “Teachers are essential players in promoting quality education; they are advocates for, and catalysts of,
      change. No education reform is likely to succeed without the active participation and ownership of
      teachers.’ 103

According to Department of National Planning statistics for 2010, 1 in 4 local teachers in the
country are untrained. The proportion of untrained teachers in atolls is higher than in Malé
(10% in Malé, in comparison to 27% in the atolls).104

The Maldives Operational Review 2012 reports that teachers lack necessary training for the
early detection of learning difficulties among students, as well as to work with children with
disabilities.105 Focus-groups discussions held in Haa Dhaal Atoll as part of the Maldives
Country Review for the ICPD 2014 Survey found that apart from the capital island
Kulhudhufushi, all the other islands reported that children with disabilities did not attend
any form of mainstream schooling because of a lack of trained teachers.106 The high
percentage of untrained teachers at the primary level has a cumulative effect on the learning
deficiencies of students in secondary education and beyond. Large discrepancies in trained
teachers between atolls and Malé also create an imbalance in the quality of education offered
throughout the country.

In recent years, the Government of Maldives has initiated several policy initiatives to
improve the quality of education. These include the Ministry of Education of the Republic
of Maldives Education Master Plan 1996–2005, the Ministry of Planning and National
Development: Sixth National Development Plan 2001–2005, and the Ministry of Education




102 “The higher education sector in the Maldives is comprised of the Maldives National University (converted from the Maldives College of
Higher Education in February 2011), with student enrollment of approximately 6,256 students, the Maldives Polytechnic with around 630
students, and seven private sector higher education institutions that provide higher education courses and programs including: Clique
College (757), Cyryx College (2557), Focus Education Center (552), International Business Systems Overseas (752), Mandhu College (472),
Modem Academy for Professional Studies (237), and Villa College (608)” – as quoted in World Bank. 2011. “Higher Education in the
Maldives: An Evolving Seascape.” South Asia Human Development Sector. Report No. 36. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
103 Volunteer Service Overseas (VSO). 2005. “Learning from Listening - A policy report on Maldivian teachers’ attitudes to their own

profession.” London: VSO.
104 Osorio, C. G. and D.E. Fonseka. 2013. “Maldives Development Update.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Available:

http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/10/18612521/maldives-development-update (last accessed January 22, 2014).
105 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “ICPD Beyond 2014. Maldives Operational Revi ew 2012. Progress, Challenges and

the Way Forward.” Malé: UNFPA and the Government of Maldives, Department of National Planning. Pg. 34. Available:
106 The focus-group discussions were held in Hdh. Kulhudhufushi, Hdh. Neykurendhoo, Hdh. Kurinbee, Hdh. Nolhivaram and Hdh.

Nolhivaramfaru, Haa Dhaal Atoll, from 21 – 22 September 2012. Available at the official web page of ICPD+20 Maldives:
http://icpd20maldives.wordpress.com/ (last accessed on February 8, 2014).
                                                                  27
Strategic Action Plan 2004–2006. However, a lack of trained teachers to meet some of the
professional development needs in schools continues to persist.107




107Volunteer Service Overseas (VSO). 2005. “Learning from Listening - A policy report on Maldivian teachers’ attitudes to their own
profession.” London: VSO.
                                                                  28
                       3.3 YOUTH EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT
According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), the world is facing a worsening
youth unemployment crisis, with young people three times more likely to be unemployed
than adults.108 The unemployment problem – estimated to amount to some 73 million young
people in search of work – is not limited to developing countries. Alarm bells are sounding
in Europe and in the United States.109 In the Maldives, unemployment is also a concern,
although there is debate on whether the problem is one related to the supply of jobs, since
the Maldives attracts a large proportion of foreign workers, or rather the demand for jobs,
since many argue that the welfare state of the Maldives creates little incentive to take up just
any employment opportunity. Added to this reality are the perceptions and expectations of
parents as to what are acceptable employment opportunities and wages for their children,
thus leading to a national phenomenon referred to as “youth voluntary unemployment.”
Drawing on field research and other sources, this section explores youth and labor market
issues.

Youth Employment and Unemployment in Numbers

As in other countries worldwide, unemployment in the Maldives is more of a youth
phenomenon. But among youth, it is also a more specifically gender-based phenomenon. As
shown in table 1 below, the female unemployment rate (ages 15-24) is 3 times higher than
the unemployment rate among males for the same age category. While the unemployment
rate decreases significantly among males between the ages of 20-24 (from 24.7% among 15-
19 year olds, to 10.3% among 20-24 year olds), the rate remains high among females for the
same age category (the unemployment rate is 35.3% for females between the age of 15-29,
and decreases to 27.9% among 20-24 year olds).

Youth unemployment rates are much higher for females than for males, although their
proportion of the total unemployed labor force tends to be lower. For the 20-24 year old age
group, the rate is almost three times higher for females than males, and 50% higher for the
15-19 age group. This does not take into account the fact that many youth may be
“discouraged workers,” meaning that they may not spend time searching for a job
opportunity as it is assumed that they are unlikely to find one.

In terms of regional comparisons, the Maldives has high youth unemployment levels: it is
highest in Maldives (22%) and Sri Lanka (21.3%), and double the rates of India, Bangladesh
and Pakistan.110 Compared to youth unemployment in other countries, the Maldives ranks as
the 42nd highest in the world (among 129 countries).

A significant number of young men and women are neither participating in education nor
working. As Table 2 indicates, in the age 15-19 year age group, 20.5% of young men and
26.5% of young women are neither in school nor working. The number reaches almost 30%

108 International Labour Organization (ILO). (n.d.) “Youth employment.” Available: http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/youth-
employment/lang--de/index.htm
109 Connolly, K. 2013. “Angela Merkel: Youth unemployment is most pressing issue facing Europe.” The Guardian. 2 July 2013. Avail able:

http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/angela-merkel-youth-unemployment-europe
110 The rates were 10.5, 9.3 and 7.7 percent for India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, respectively.
                                                                  29
for 20-24 year old females. Youth unemployment contributes to other social ills such as drug
abuse and gang-related violence.

Table 1. Employment and Unemployment in the Maldives, by sex and age, 2009
               Total 15              Economically active                 Not                    Labor force
 Locality,     years of                                                                Not                      Unemployment
                                                                     economically               participation
sex & age       age &                                                                 stated                        rate
                            Total     Employed      Unemployed          active                       rate
                 over

Both Sexes     205,931     128,836       110,231           18,605          63,642     13,453            62.6                14.4

15-19           39,904      14,055         9,913            4,142           23,730     2,119            35.2                29.5

20-24           34,809      25,420        20,802            4,618            7,932     1,457            73.0                18.2

Male           103,634      75,682        69,701            5,981          20,648      7,304            73.0                 7.9

15-19            20,155      7,730         5,819            1,911           11,366     1,059            38.4                24.7

20-24            16,933     14,022        12,579            1,443            2,200       711            82.8                10.3

Female         102,297      53,154        40,530           12,624          42,994      6,149            52.0                23.7

15-19            19,749      6,325         4,094            2,231           12,364     1,060            32.0                35.3

20-24            17,876     11,398         8,223            3,175            5,732       746            63.8                27.9

Source: Maldives Demographic and Health Survey, 2006

Dominance of the Tourism Sector

Tourism is the largest economic sector of the country, contributing 32.9% to GDP and
employing the largest portion of the labor force. The dominance of the tourism industry has
both positive and negative effects on young people. On the positive side, demand for
tourism, hospitality and leisure services is income elastic and the demand for these services is
likely to enjoy strong growth. Unfortunately, reliance on the sector makes the Maldivian
economy highly vulnerable to fluctuations and variations in global economic and social
conditions through their effect on tourism, and the transmission of these effects to the other
related sectors.111




111World Bank. 2011. “Higher Education in the Maldives: An Evolving Seascape.” South Asia Human Development Sector. Report No.
36. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
                                                              30
         Table 2: Percent Distribution of Never-married Women and Men age 15-24
                     By current activity, by sex and age (Maldives, 2009)
 Age                Attending           Working only             Attending            Neither attending                  Other
 Group             school only                                   school and           school or working
                                                                  working

                Men       Women        Men       Women         Men       Women         Men        Women            Men         Women

 15-19          44.8      46.2         24.3      23.4         9.8        3.8         20.5        26.5            0.5          0.1

 20-24          6.6       8.2          70.3      56.9         4.5        5.6         18.6        29.2            0.1          0

Source: Maldives Demographic and Health Survey, 2006

Young Men’s Migration and Corollary Social Implications

The tourism sector in Malé and the resort and industrial islands have attracted the younger
population (and mostly men) from less-developed atolls. Primary reasons for the
predominance of men in the sector are: the social stigma of young unmarried women staying
on resort islands for extended periods of time; perceived risks of women travelling alone; the
high cost of transportation; and limited child care facilities.112 This was confirmed in focus-
group discussions with young and adult women in Mahibadhoo Island. For example, one
participant noted: “there is strong opposition from families and community members, led by community
elders, to allowing female workers to work and remain on a resort island overnight.” 113

The fact that young men are forced to migrate and that young women are unable to do so
contributes to a number of problems, including men being separated from families, young
women being dependent on their parents and unable to become independent, tensions
between young couples, and family breakdown and divorce.

Limited Job Opportunities for Young Women

Although data shows that young women are actively seeking work, rigid gender norms and
expectations prevent them from seeking and finding employment. Focus-group discussions
with women in Mahibadhoo and Maalhos Islands, for example, revealed that many young
women, and especially those still living with their parents, have been actively discouraged or
even restricted by their families from seeking jobs outside their homes. When asked if they
would take an opportunity for full-time work, the young women stated that they would have
to first balance family obligations with the possibility of outside work. Further, women
prefer regular salary-based work as opposed to self-employment or informal house-based




112 International Trade Union Confederation. 2009. “Internationally Recognized Core Labor Standards in the Maldives.” Report For the
World Trade Organization General Council Review of the Trade Policies of Maldives. Executive Summary. Geneva, 26 and 28 October,
2009. Available: http://www.ituc-csi.org/IMG/pdf/Trade_Policy_Review_Maldives_final_october_09_.pdf
113 Information obtained in focus group discussions held with youth in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll. Discussions held

on January 11, 2014.
                                                                    31
work. The increasing level of religious fundamentalism and conservative thinking has also
increased the barriers to women working.114

Beyond the rigid gender norms that dictate that women should stay home and tend to
domestic duties, young women interviewed stated that they lack exposure to employment
opportunities and have limited access to new job markets. Many young women had inspiring
and ambitious ideas and plans for business start-ups or alternative career paths either outside
or within the household, but had little understanding of how they might increase benefits
and limit business risks. Focus-groups discussions with youth in all locations confirmed this
point.

Traditional Employment Options for Men on the Islands

Maldivian islands are dependent on a seafaring economy, with fishing traditionally providing
the main occupation for men in the atolls. Yet, findings from the focus-group discussions in
Mahibadhoo Island indicate that “there are negative perceptions about fishing…. [and agricultural]
…activities as professions for people who haven’t studied enough.” 115 Similar sentiments were
expressed during focus-group discussions in Mahibadhoo Maalhos and in Dharavandoo, and
in a 2014 UNICEF supported youth study in the Maldives.116

‘Lost in Translation’ – Mismatch Between Skills and Experiences of Youth and Work
Requirements

Due to the lack of well-educated Maldivians, the country faces a severe shortage of qualified
personnel for technical, middle and senior management jobs. An estimated 100,000
expatriate workers in the country are in senior management positions in tourism, as well as
banking, finance, trade and shipping. In addition, Maldives faces the challenge of producing
human capital with the skills and competencies needed for a small multi-island nation to
operate in the modern global economy. Employers in the country require ‘soft skills’ across
sectors (tourism, banking, insurance, financial services, management, trade and marketing)
which young people lack.

According to the World Bank, one of the primary obstacles preventing employment among
educated youth is poor English language skills.117 Findings from the 2011 study on
challenges and prospects of education in the Maldives concluded that the national
assessments of learning outcomes at Grade 4 and Grade 7 show that English language
learning levels are unsatisfactory: the mean score for English among students at grade 4 is


114 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “ICPD Beyond 2014. Maldives Operational Review 2012. Progress, Challenges and
the Way Forward.” Malé: UNFPA and the Government of Maldives, Department of National Planning. Available:
http://www.planning.gov.mv/publications/2013/ICPD%20Beyond%202014%20-%20Maldives%20Operational%20Review%202012-
13.05.2013.pdf (last accessed on January 30, 2014).
115 Focus-group discussions in Malé and in Mahibadhoo were conducted for this report by Piotr Pawlak, independent consultant for the

World Bank.
116 Focus-group discussions in in Maalhos and in Dharavandoo were conducted by Natasha Leite, independent consultant for UNICEF.

For more information, please see: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the Maldives: Challenges and
Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).
117 World Bank. 2010. “The Challenge of Youth Employment in Sri Lanka.” R. Gunatilaka, M. Mayer and M. Vodopivec (Eds.).

Washington D.C.: World Bank. Pg. 4-5. Available:
http://www.unicef.org/srilanka/challenge_youth_unemployment.pdf (last accessed on February 25, 1014).
                                                                 32
just 32%, and at grade 7 it is 29%. These, according to the report, are low average scores,
suggesting that learning levels in both primary education and lower secondary education are
weak.118

Another issue is the mismatch between what employers expect and require in terms of job
qualifications, practical skills and experience, and the real skills and experiences young
people acquire. According to focus-group discussions with youth and adults in Mahibadhoo,
the skills mismatch arises because at a basic level of education, “the school curriculum does not
provide the skills employers are looking for.” As a result, private sector companies prefer already
skilled foreign workers entering the Maldivian labor market rather than investing in or
creating training opportunities for young Maldivians. Furthermore, there are limited
opportunities for vocational training, skills development and on the job training, as well as
limited career guidance in schools for Maldivian youth. If available, vocational training and
employment-focused training programs focus predominately on male-dominated sectors
such as fishery and tourism.

Finally, anecdotal evidence suggests that the reservation wage of youth in the Maldives may
prevent young people from accepting jobs. The fact that key social services such as
education and health are provided free to Maldivians may also serve as a disincentive to
work. In a recent public statement, the Minister of Home Affairs, Umar Naseer, addressed
these issues in light of the conclusion of the Blues for Youth Camp, which aimed at
introducing youth aged 15 and 18 years to the job market. The Minister stated that there is
no task too menial or lowly for a Maldivian: “if doing the work earns you an income, and is a service
unto the nation, then it is not too lowly for us.” 1 He added that “none of the work currently being
conducted by foreigners in this country is either lowly or dirty work.” According to news reports, the
Minister urged Maldivian youth to partake in whatever work that may come their way: “youth
should keep in mind that our ancestors fulfilled all these tasks, did all this work, without employing any
foreigners to do the work for them.”

Voluntary Youth Unemployment

Interviews and focus groups conducted for this report suggest that youth in the Maldives are
unwilling and discouraged to take on certain types of jobs. Findings indicate that parents
would rather pay their sons and daughters not to work than to let them work in a job which
they consider beneath them; a notable 50% of young people surveyed in the field-based
research solely stated that they rely on their parents as their main source of income, with
more young males (51%) than young females (47%) depending on their parents for income.
The perceptions and attitudes of parents of what is a suitable job for their children are a key
component of youth voluntary unemployment.

According to the Department of National Planning (2012), many young people in the
Maldives remain discouraged from seeking employment and are not actively looking for


  Aturupane, H. and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the Maldives. Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia:
118

Human Development Unit. Report No. 51. Discussion Paper Series. World Bank. Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180
NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf (last accessed on February 2, 2014).

                                                             33
work. Focus-group discussions with youth in Malé, Mahibadhoo, Maalhos and in
Dharavandoo revealed that because of their disappointment and frustration with the
institutions and performance of elected and appointed officials, declining societal values and
increasing mistrust, as well as a pre-existing perceptions of corruption and a lack of
transparency in job recruitment, a large proportion of youth remain economically inactive
and disengaged. Youth in the focus-groups discussions stated that, “who you know has more
influence in your employment chances than your actual qualifications.” 119 Further, there was an
undeniable feeling that personal relations are almost the “only” criteria in a selection process
for lucrative jobs, especially in the public sphere. This is consistent with findings from the
2011 Transparency International report on Maldives, which indicates that Maldivians,
including the youth cohort, feel that overall corruption levels in the country have
increased.120

Youth Entrepreneurship

The Maldives has traditionally lacked a culture of entrepreneurship. According to interviews
in Mahibadhoo Island conducted for this report, parents actively discourage young people’s
entrepreneurship.121 In spite of this, the scope of income-generating opportunities available
to young people and especially women in the Maldives appears to be improving. For
instance, young women can be seen buying and selling goods in the markets or running
shops, opening small tailoring stores or starting other small business ventures – something
considered unimaginable and taboo several years ago. If entrepreneurship among young
people is to be viable, however, capital, training and mentorship must be made available to
guide them in developing and launching livelihoods and businesses.




119 Focus-group discussions in Malé and in Mahibadhoo were conducted by Piotr Pawlak, independent consultant for the World Bank,
while focus-group discussions in Maalhos and in Dharavandoo were conducted by Natasha Leite, independent consultant for UNICEF.
For more information, please see: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the Maldives: Challenges and
Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).
120 Hardoon, D. and F. Heinrich. 2011. “Daily Lives and Corruption: Public Opinions in the Maldives.” Berlin: Transparency International.

Available: http://transparencymaldives.org/transparency/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/corruption.pdf (last accessed on January 12,
2014).
121 Interview with Council President of the Alif Dhaal Atoll and Council Director of the Alif Dhaal Atoll. Interview held on January 11,

2014 in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll.
                                                                  34
                           3.4 FAMILY STRUCTURE AND RELATIONSHIPS
The Maldives is undergoing a period of rapid social transformation. Economic development,
increasing consumerism and western influences, urbanization as well as internal migration,
shifts in religious sentiments and democratization have shifted ideas and discourses
surrounding gender, family and relationships.122 Various factors create new frontiers and
influence the ways that youth in the Maldives experience and see their roles and
responsibilities in relationship within their families and peers.

Family and relationships within the family are important for youth in the Maldives. The 2005
Youth Voices: Facts, Opinions and Solutions report shows that the youth in the Maldives
have strong family bonds and are well respected by their peers. Over 90% of 4,002 youths
surveyed felt that they receive adequate emotional support from their families and that they
can communicate well with their parents; over 85% of the surveyed youth felt that their
peers respect them.” 123

Indeed, a survey conducted for this report, which examined the relationships that young
people have with their parents and siblings, showed very positive results in terms of family
connections. According to the survey, 99% of young women described the relationship with
their siblings (whether male of female) as happy, 97% of young men said they get along very
well with siblings, and 90% of young women and 89% of young men interviewed said they enjoy
their relationship with their mothers.

Yet, Maldivian youths’ experiences of family and household arrangements are also complex,
multifaceted and varied, and many face a number of changes to - and challenges in - their
engagement, roles and responsibilities in families, in partnerships and relationships, and in
the broader context of their communities. Interviews with youth and other stakeholders
suggest a shift among young people’s attitudes, from being community-focused to
individualistic and self-centered. There is evidence of emerging inter-generational tensions as
the divide widens between the experiences and aspirations of youth and older generations.

Inter-generational ‘Tensions’

           “They [young people, especially male]….are unambitious and lazy, and think only about
           themselves.” 124 - Council member, Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll.

The Maldives today is facing a transition of ‘youth’ identity, which is common among youth
living in globalized societies. This new ‘youth identity’ is characterized by a confusion
between liberal or conservative, or for example, urban and rural, Western and non-Western
principles. For many young people this means freely enjoying a culture of immediate
gratification. In that way, materialism, consumerism and individualism clash with messages



122 Fulu, E. 2013. “Domestic Violence in Asia: Globalization, Gender and Islam in the Maldives.” Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
123 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2005. “Maldives: Youth Voices Report 2005.” Malé: UNFPA.
124 Interview with members of the Alif Dhaal Atoll council. Interview held on January 11, 2014 in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif

Dhaal Atoll.
                                                                   35
of traditionalism, family and community, resulting in ‘tensions and struggles’ between
generations.

Focus-group discussions conducted for this report with youth in Mahibadhoo Island shed
light on the debate between the expectations and pressures young people face from their
parents, teachers, guardians and other elders, and their own desires and goals. Older
generations (adults) frequently see youth as ‘unambitious,’ ‘lazy’ and ‘disconnected,’ and
focused on ‘me’ rather than ‘us,’ while the younger generations, especially those young men
and women who have studied or worked in Malé and beyond, see themselves as part of a
global village, fast-paced and modern society, where individual aspirations over take family
traditions. Older generations may thus place significant pressure on young women and men
to firmly adhere to traditional customs and hierarchies which may not be fully aligned with
the current reality of youth. As a consequence, according to focus group discussions, young
women and men are not provided with alternative role models who show them how to
bridge their ‘new modern and emancipated reality’ with traditional customs and norms.

While family-relations are of central importance to youth in the Maldives, and marriage is a
key component of the transition into adulthood, marriage patterns globally and in the
Maldives are changing. Young men and women are waiting until they are older to get
married, they are marrying individuals closer to their age, and they have more of a say with
regard to whom they marry.125 According to the survey conducted for this report, 83% of
youth surveyed remain unmarried; more young men (90%) than young women (76%)
remain unmarried. The survey findings also revealed an emerging trend among youth
towards marriage: 56% of young people surveyed said that the reason to leave their homes
and to migrate out of the atolls into Malé was not to form a family or to marry (only 3.5% of
respondents identified this reason), but to pursue education (and employment). However,
even with the recent changes in terms of who and when one will marry, some aspects of the
marriage process continue to remain unchanged, such as the requirement that a young
groom is to be economically stable, possess a job, and among other stipulations, to provide
decent housing for his family.


           “What a woman wants to be is different from what men [….and adult family
           members…..] think ‘she should be.’” 126 - A young adolescent male, Mahibadhoo, Alif
           Dhaal Atoll

Intergenerational tensions exist not just between adults and youth, but also within the youth
cohort. Focus-group discussions in Mahibadhoo Island revealed a difference in attitudes
between adolescent boys (ages 17-19) and their older male peers (ages 23-27). For instance,
younger boys believe that “girls should have the same opportunities like boys.” They believe
that as a young person of any gender, “you can do many things in life” and they stated that it
is very important “to be educated: having quality and continuum of education, be financially
independent and have a healthy life.” Discussions with older male youth (23-27) on the same


125 Barker, G., and P. Pawlak. 2011. “Men’s Participation in Care Work, in Families, and in Gender Equality in the Contemporary World.”
In Men and Families and Policy in a Changing World. New York: United Nations.
126 Female participant of a focus-group discussion held in Mahibadhoo, Alif Dhaal Atoll, on January 11, 2014.

                                                                  36
island revealed that while younger youth prioritize values such as independence and social
justice, the older youth prioritize values related to traditional power and gender relations,
“having good behavior: praying regularly; having a job that keeps family together and pays
bills.”
Changing Patterns in Family Formation

In the Maldives, the formation of a marriage does not mean that a new household is formed.
Unmarried youth, regardless of age, generally stay with their parents, both for customary and
financial reasons. Traditionally, Maldivians, even after reaching adult ages, do not move out
of the family home unless they are entering marriage, in which case, in most instances, the
new married couple continues to share the household of the parents of one of the spouses.
According to the survey conducted for this report, 52% of married young males live in their
parent’s home, while 46% of married young females live in their parent’s home. Marriage
often increases the social capital of young people through networking with a new family and
the expansion of an extended family and kinship network. This may lead to new social and
economic opportunities via families and relatives of brides and grooms.

Early Marriage and Parenting skills

As noted above, young women and men in the Maldives experience challenges in terms of
unemployment and underemployment, continuing education in their communities outside
Malé, finding a suitable place to live and to raise a family, and if and when married with
children, considerable parenting challenges – all of which have a considerable influence on
their transition into adulthood. Thus, the result of delaying marriage, for example, due to
limited accumulation of capital, in a culture where it is a fundamental component of the
transition into adulthood, can be seen as a form of exclusion that could generate new social
and economic difficulties. 127

        Box 5. Strengthening Youth Parenting Skills - Marriage Awareness Programme

 To address the problem of poor parenting skills among youth, the Ministry of Justice, the
 Ministry of Youth and Sports and the Family Court introduced a regulation requiring all couples
 intending to marry to attend a one-day Marriage Awareness Programme. The awareness program
 intends to provide the information needed for a marriage based on religious and social aspects.
 Basic information about marriage and the importance of marital life and SH issues (such as STIs
 and contraception) are provided and available to both married and unmarried couples. According
 to the Ministry of Justice’s announcement, from August 1st 2007, no couple can marry without
 submitting a certificate of participation in an awareness program.
 Source: Miadhu Online News, August 5th, 2007: “Couples need to attend the awareness program.” Available:
 http://www.miadhu.com/2007/08/local-news/couples-need-to-attend-the-awareness-program-justice-3211/ (last accessed on May 6,
 2014).




127Barker, G., and P. Pawlak. 2011. “Men’s Participation in Care Work, in Families, and in Gender Equality in the Contemporary World.”
In Men and Families and Policy in a Changing World. New York: United Nations. Page 24.
                                                                  37
High Rates of Divorce and Female-headed Households
           “In this globalized era, more and more women are entering the work force. High standards of living
           necessitate women supplement their husband’s income. However, there are no childcare facilities. And certain
           religious elements see women in the workforce – or active in public space – in a negative light. All of this can
           create stress within families and lead to divorce.” 128

Divorce is common in the Maldives. According to the Department of National Planning,
5,699 couples married in 2012, but 3,011 couples were divorced in the same year. A general
lack of research on Maldives’ high divorce rate makes it difficult to pinpoint exact reasons
for divorce, although rapid urbanization in Male, housing congestion and a broader lack of
housing for the growing population may all contribute. A large household combined with
the relatively small size of houses creates unhealthy living conditions for newlyweds and their
relatives, with people often sleeping in shifts. It is common to find whole families living in
single rooms, which double as a kitchen and living room. Such living conditions place great
strain on families, sometimes leading to family break up. Additionally, in her recent
statement, State Minister for Gender and Family Dr. Haala Hameed said that the recent
increase in divorce rates may be due to stress within families as women enter the work
force.129

At 35%, Maldives has one of the highest rates of female-headed households in the world
(2010 data).130 These high rates of female-headed households are linked with divorce rates
and the large number of males who are leaving their families and households to work outside
their resident islands, usually in the fishing industry, in resorts or elsewhere.




128 State Minister for Gender and Family Dr. Haala Hameed as quoted in Minivan – Independent News for the Maldives. See: Rasheed, Z.
“Maldives Holds Guinness World Record for Divorce Rate.” Minivan News. 22 January, 2014. Available:
http://minivannews.com/society/maldives-holds-guinness-world-record-for-divorce-rate-75770
129 Rasheed, Z. “Maldives Holds Guinness World Record for Divorce Rate.” Minivan News. 22 January, 2014. Available:

http://minivannews.com/society/maldives-holds-guinness-world-record-for-divorce-rate-75770
130 Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2012. “Laying the Groundwork for Gender Equality in the Maldives – 2012.” Available:

http://www.adb.org/themes/gender/gdcf-case-studies/laying-groundwork-gender-equality-maldives (last accessed on January 29, 2014).
                                                                38
                                           3.5 GANGS AND VIOLENCE
The emergence and rapid increase of gangs, as well as escalating rates of gang-related crimes
has raised public concern over the issue of youth violence.131 Research also points to the
high rate of gender-based violence that Maldivian woman, including young women, face in
their homes and schools.132 Gendered and peer related school-based violence including
bullying, social discrimination and exclusion have also been reported throughout the
country. New phenomena such as cyber-bullying and ‘revenge porn’ are now present in the
daily lives of young men and women in the Maldives. Factors such as income inequality,
rapid demographic changes in the youth population, modernization, urbanization and
globalization, and gangs and drugs are a potent mixture that has increased the likelihood of
youth violence worldwide.133 This section reviews the causes, scale, nature and manifestation
of different forms of youth violence in the Maldives.

Youth, Gangs and Gang-related Violence

           “You can’t compare us (Maldivian gangs) to the ones in the UK or to other countries. We
           are very different. Maldivian gang violence can be much more brutal and frequent, as this is
           a small community and people can’t hide in places for that long.” – The Asia
           Foundation134

           “[Because of] High levels of domestic violence, divorce and broken homes, joining gangs has
           become a popular choice for Maldivian youth looking outside of traditional family
           structures for support and protection.” – The Asia Foundation135

In the context of the Maldives, gangs are defined as ‘groupings’ of young people that may
potentially be engaged in violence, but are not necessarily violent in nature. There are reports
of gang-like groupings of peers formed on the basis of sport club participation, community,
neighborhood or island identity, and geographic territory. Although these groupings may
engage in serious and organized actions to carry out illegal activities, they may also have
primarily social purposes (often resulting from limited prospects and social activities
available to youth) and thus may only occasionally become involved in harmful activities
such as bullying or fights. As of 2012, between 20 and 30 different gangs were reportedly
operating in Malé, with 50 to 400 members in each group, and most members being male
and averaging 25 years of age.136 Findings from the field-based research conducted for this
report show that among 402 young men and young women surveyed, 4% said they belong to


131 National Archives and Records Administration. “Background Notes on Countries of the World: Maldives.” Washington, D.C.: National
Archives and Records Administration. Available http://www.gpo.gov/ (Last accessed on January 18, 2014).
132 Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial results on prevalence, health outcomes and

women’s responses to violence.” Government of Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family; and Fulu, E. 2004. “Gender-based Violence in
the Maldives: What We Know So Far - A report on the findings of qualitative research on GBV carried out by the Ministry of Gender,
Family Development and Social Security in 2004.”
133 World Health Organization (WHO). 2002. “Fact Sheet on Youth Violence.” Available:

http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/global_campaign/en/youthviolencefacts.pdf (last accessed on March 5, 2014).
134 The Asia Foundation and Maldives Institute for Psychological Services, Training and Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in

Malé.” Colombo: The Asia Foundation. Available: http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last
accessed on January 31, 2014).
135 Ibid.
136 Ibid.

                                                                39
a gang, while 32% said they had friends in gangs and 17% reported they had family members
who belong to a gang. The survey also probed the ways which young people had been
introduced to gangs: according to respondents, 55% had joined gangs in their neighborhood,
20% in school, 15% through sports groups, and 10% via friends.

In recent years, gang violence has been rising and is currently considered a serious risk factor
for the safety and security of youth in the Maldives.137 Inter- and intra-gang violence and
crime have become prevalent in the country, requiring heightened police interventions.

As to the reasons that youth join gangs in the Maldives, there are a number of interrelated
factors, as follows:

          Unemployment. Globally, research points to the association between male
           unemployment and engagement in delinquency, violence and antisocial behaviors.138
           In the Maldives, a qualitative study conducted in Malé with 131 gang members
           revealed that 63% of those gang members are currently unemployed, and 52% have
           never been employed: “I have tried to get a real job but I have not had any luck. Being in the
           gang allows me to earn some money. If I get a proper job I will leave the gang life.” 139 The study
           suggests that unemployment and ‘wanting a better lifestyle’ but ‘not being able to
           achieve it without work or through legitimate work,’ may be major factors in driving
           youth into gangs in the country.140

          Drug Use and Violence. The relationship between drug use and violence has been
           well documented globally, and in the Maldives, recent data from the Maldives Police
           Service shows a rapid and concerning increase in drug-related offences. According to
           the Maldives Police Service website, drug-related offences increased from 1,824 in
           2011, to 2,534 in 2012 and 3,969 in 2013.141 Furthermore, the 2012 Rapid
           Assessment of Gangs in Malé reports that 54% of 131 surveyed gang members
           reported they were currently using drugs and 44% reported that they were engaged in
           the sale of drugs.142 Another 63% reported having been detained by the police at
           some point – and amongst those detained, 38% had served a prison sentence, and
           18% reported having been released from prison under conditions of parole,


137 Ibid.
138 Barker, G., and P. Pawlak. 2011. “Men’s Participation in Care Work, in Families, and in Gender Equality in the Contemporary World.”
In Men and Families and Policy in a Changing World. New York: United Nations; Barker, G. and C. Ricardo. 2005. “Young Men and the
Construction of Masculinity in Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS, Conflict and Violence.” Social Development Working
Paper No. 26. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
139 Statement from a gang member in Malé obtained in a rapid assessment study on gangs in the Maldives. Please see: Asia Foundation and

Maldives Institute for Psychological Services, Training and Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in Malé.” Colombo: The Asia
Foundation. Available: http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last accessed on January 31, 2014).
140 For example, please see the Strain Theory, which suggests that youth join gangs because they want a better lifestyle, but are unable to

achieve this through legitimate work: Goldstein, A.P. 1991. “Delinquent Gangs: A Psychological Perspective.” Champaign, IL: Research
Press. Also, please see: Barker, G., and P. Pawlak. 2011. “Men’s Participation in Care Work, in Families, and in Gender Equality in the
Contemporary World.” In Men and Families and Policy in a Changing World. New York: United Nations; and Barker, G. and C. Ricardo.
2005. “Young Men and the Construction of Masculinity in Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS, Conflict and Violence.”
Social Development Working Paper No. 26. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
141 Maldives Police Service. “Crime Statistics 2012.” Available: http://www.police.gov.mv/#eservice (last accessed on February 13, 2014).
142 Asia Foundation and Maldives Institute for Psychological Services, Training and Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in Malé.”

Colombo: The Asia Foundation. Available: http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last accessed on
January 31, 2014).
                                                                   40
           presidential pardon or under the ‘second chance’ opportunity.143 The 2011 Prison
           Assessment and Proposed Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Offenders study
           revealed that 66% of 576 prisoners who took part in the study were sentenced on
           drug convictions, particularly for the usage and possession of small quantities
           (66.0%).144

          Proving Manhood. The need to create acceptable alternatives, to break away, to be
           socially accepted, and to gain influence and power may lead young people to
           participate in gangs. Further, evidence from other countries suggest that for young
           men, participation in gangs and the use of violence is a way to become a man -
           achieving a sense of socially respected manhood is not perceived to be attainable
           otherwise.145 Through gang participation and gang-related activities, young men find
           companionship with other male peers, and in some cases, male role models and
           substitute families. As a young gang member in Male said, “….gangs are much better
           than my own family…they are there when I need them.” 146 Many young men who use
           violence on other men may do so because they feel pressured to prove their
           manhood.147

          Political Violence. In the Maldives, the Asia Foundation study on gangs suggests
           that the increase in the number of gangs is directly tied to political parties, as these
           political actors attempt to gain influence and power by aligning their parties with
           certain gangs. Political groups may also “hire” gangs in exchange for money, alcohol,
           or drugs to do specific “jobs,” such as participating in political protests, voting,
           starting political riots, destroying property or injuring a third party.148




  Ibid.
143

  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2011. “Prison Assessment and Proposed Rehabilitation and Reintegration of
144

Offenders Report.” Government of Maldives and UNDP.
145 Barker, G. and C. Ricardo. 2005. “Young Men and the Construction of Masculinity in Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS,
Conflict and Violence.” Social Development Working Paper No. 26. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
146 A young gang member interviewed as part of the situation assessment study in Malé. Asia Foundation and Maldives Institute for

Psychological Services, Training and Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in Malé.” Colombo: The Asia Foundation. Available:
http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last accessed on January 31, 2014).
147 United Nations Women (UN Women). 2012. “Working With Men and Boys to Promote Gender Equality: A Review of the Field and

Emerging Approaches.” Expert paper prepared by Dean Peacock and Gary Barker for the Expert Group Meeting on the Prevention of
Violence Against Women and Girls. Bangkok, Thailand; 17-20 September 2012.
148 Ibid.

                                                                41
                                 Box 6: Impact of Anti-Gang Violence Act in 2010

      Prior to the enactment of the Anti-Gang Violence Act in 2010, criminal offences committed by a
      gang or group were not recognized as a distinct category of criminal offences. Section 1 of the act
      specifically criminalizes and sets out specific penalties for the creation, operation and the carrying
      out of criminal offences by a group or a gang of individuals.

      Section 23 of this act defines a gang as “any group or team created with a primary objective of conducting a
      criminal activity.” 1 However, according to the Asia Foundation’s Rapid Assessment of Gangs in
      Malé study, “youth make the choice of joining a group or a gang for a number of reasons that may or may not
      include the intention to carry out criminal acts. In a situation where an individual commits a criminal offence,
      however minor, he/she is faced with the dilemma of not only being penalized for the commission of the offence but
      also for his affiliations with a group or gang that may have no connection with the offence that has been committed.”
      The report concludes that the Anti-Gang Violence Act in 2010 further marginalizes and pushes
      convicted individuals into a life of crime rather than supporting and rehabilitating them.




Violence Against Young Women and Girls

Consistent with other countries in the region, young Maldivian women face high levels of
violence in public spaces, in schools, in their communities and within their homes.149
Aggregate data from a 2007 Women’s Health and Life Experiences study shows that 14.5%
of girls aged 15-17 had experienced some form of sexual violence at least once in their
lifetime; sexual abuse before the age of 15 was found to be relatively common. The same
study indicates that at the national level, 12.2% of women aged 15-49 had been sexually
abused before the age of 15, and in Malé the rate - 16.3% - was even higher.150 There are also
reports of the abuse and rape of 18-24 year old women, which resulted in unwanted
pregnancy, which is particularly serious given that premarital relations are illegal.151 The issue
of pregnancy due to the sexual abuse of young children with disabilities is an even further
disturbing social reality.152

Intimate partner violence is the most prevalent form of violence against women in the
country. Initial results from a study on prevalence, health outcomes and women’s responses
to violence show that 1 in 5 women aged 15-49 experience physical or sexual violence by an
intimate partner, and 1 in 8 (12%) women aged 15-49 reported experiencing childhood



149 Findings from the study on Maldivian women’s health and life experiences clearly indicate that the problem lies within the space of the
family: male family members, in particular fathers or step-fathers, were the most commonly mentioned perpetrator of non-partner physical
violence among women ages 15-49. Please see: Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial
results on prevalence, health outcomes and women’s responses to violence.” Government of Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family; and
Fulu, E. 2004. “Gender-based Violence in the Maldives: What We Know So Far - A report on the findings of qualitative research on GBV
carried out by the Ministry of Gender, Family Development and Social Security in 2004.”
150 Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial results on prevalence, health outcomes and

women’s responses to violence.” Government of Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family.
151 These reports have been compiled through the review of evidence from medico-legal records at the IGMH for the purpose of the

UNFPA report. Please see: United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young
Unmarried Women in the Maldives.” Malé: UNFPA.
152 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the

Maldives.” Malé: UNFPA.
                                                                   42
sexual abuse before reaching 15 years of age.153 Combining physical and/or sexual violence
by partners and non-partners, from the age of 15, the study found that more than 1 in 4
women (28.4%) have experienced partner or non-partner violence, or both.154 Additionally,
among girls under 18 years of age who took part in the study, 7.3% reported physical and/or
sexual partner violence, 22% reported emotional abuse by a partner, and 2.7% reported
physical violence by someone other than an intimate partner after the age of 15.155

Focus-group discussions conducted for this report further revealed a phenomenon referred
to as “revenge porn.” According to focus-group discussions in Malé, Maalhos and in the
Dharavandoo Islands, this form of violence involves the blackmailing of young women for
sexual favors by their former partners who possess intimate videos or photos of them.
Young women have expressed “emotional distress” related to such blackmailing.156 School
officials and parents are generally unaware of this problem, and the current legal framework
does not protect these victims who are mainly young women.

VAWG in the Maldives is a complex, multifaceted issue. Factors which contribute to its
prevalence and acceptance in society include the following:

          Concepts of family honor, sexual purity, fear of re-victimization and shame from
           disclosure often justify even the most violent or discriminatory actions against
           Maldivian women and girls. There is broad tolerance towards violence at home,
           school and in the community.157 In the focus-group discussions conducted for this
           report, in Mahibadhoo Island for instance, young women stated that ‘forced’ sexual
           contact or exposure to sexually inappropriate behavior happens very frequently
           among young people, but “many of these incidents are quickly dismissed due to the stigma
           associated with being involved.” 158 Some forms of VAWG are fully denied; for example,
           in 2012, a Maldivian academic at the Maldives National University proclaimed, “There
           is no such thing as marital rape. This is as clear as ‘black and white.’” 159

          Even when acknowledged or recognized, there is general public acceptance that
           VAWG is a private issue rather than one which is public.160 According to statistics
           from UNICEF relating to the period 2001-2007, 70% of girls and women aged 15-49


153 Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial results on prevalence, health outcomes and
women’s responses to violence.” Government of Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family.
154 Ibid.
155 Ibid.
156 Several youth from Malé, Mahibadhoo, Maalhos and Dharavandoo referred to “revenge porn” in focus group discussions. Focus-group

discussions in Malé and in Mahibadhoo were conducted by Piotr Pawlak, independent consultant for the World Bank, while focus-group
discussions in Maalhos and in Dharavandoo were conducted by Natasha Leite, independent consultant for UNICEF. For more
information, please see also: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the Maldives: Challenges and
Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).
157 For more information on the acceptance of disciplinary approaches in school settings in South Asia, please see Pawlak, P. and J. Sass.

2014. “School-related Gender-Based Violence in the Asia-Pacific Region.” Bangkok: UNESCO.
158 Abdulghafoor, H. 2012. “Maldives NGO Shadow Report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.”

Malé: Hope for Women.
159 The Domestic Violence Prevention Act was described as a law that will exacerbate issues, rather than offer solutions, by an academic at

a lecture which was given at the Maldives National University, Faculty of Sharia and Law on April 25, 2012, a few weeks after the passage
of the DV Prevention Act. Described in: Abdulghafoor, H. 2012. “Maldives NGO Shadow Report to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women.” Malé: Hope for Women.
160 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2004. “Gender Issues in the Criminal Justice System of the Maldives.” University of

Melbourne, 2 September 2004.
                                                                   43
           surveyed think that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under certain
           circumstances.161 Consequently, in the Maldives violence against women perpetrated
           by an intimate partner is perceived as a private matter only and as an issue that
           should remain in the family.162

          There are widespread cultural taboos surrounding the discussion of sexual
           experiences, whether forced or not, including the extreme societal reluctance to
           recognize that young unmarried women engage in premarital sex. The legal
           consequences of premarital sex and criminalization of pregnancy outside the
           marriage are also a deterrent. For instance, on February 25, 2013, the Juvenile Court
           sentenced a 15-year-old victim of sexual abuse to 100 lashes and eight months of
           house arrest after she confessed to having sex outside of marriage. The man with
           whom the girl said she had sexual relations denied the charges and received no
           sentence. The girl’s confession to extramarital sex occurred during an investigation
           into reports that her stepfather had repeatedly abused her sexually, and had fathered
           the child whose dead body was found in the outside toilet of their home. Authorities
           charged the stepfather with sexual abuse and murder, and the girl’s mother was
           charged with concealing a crime. On August 21, after an appeal from the
           government following domestic and international pressure, the High Court annulled
           the sentence against the girl.163

          According to some, increasing levels of religious fundamentalism and conservative
           thinking has worsened the situation of women and young girls in the Maldives,
           including VAWG. As Shadiya Ibrahim, currently UNFPA Assistant Representative
           and a member of the newly formed Gender Advocacy Working Group164 said, “being
           a woman is harder now. The religious Wahhabist scholars preach more forcefully than anyone else
           can….[…]…and no one can make the argument to have a more liberal, a more positive attitude
           towards women. Day by day, it is becoming harder for women to live in this country.” 165

          Interrelated factors such as gender inequalities, discrimination and stereotypes,
           national and international policies and economics, globalization, poverty, organized
           crime, war and conflict and media have been shown to contribute to the risks of


161 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2009. “Progress for Children: A Report Card on Child Protection. New York: UNICEF.
162 United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “ICPD Beyond 2014. Maldives Operational Review 2012. Progress, Challenges and
the Way Forward.” Malé: UNFPA and the Government of Maldives, Department of National Planning. Available:
http://www.planning.gov.mv/publications/2013/ICPD%20Beyond%202014%20-%20Maldives%20Operational%20Review%202012-
13.05.2013.pdf (last accessed on January 30, 2014). Also, see conclusion from focus group discussions conducted with women ages 15-49
in Malé, between April and July 2004: Fulu, E. 2004. “Gender-based Violence in the Maldives: What We Know So Far - A report on the
findings of qualitative research on GBV carried out by the Ministry of Gender, Family Development and Social Security in 2004;” also in
Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial results on prevalence, health outcomes and women’s
responses to violence.” Government of Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family.
163 U.S. Department of State. 2013. “Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor

Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2013.” Available:
http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsreport/index.htm#wrapper (last accessed on March 20, 2014).
164 Gender Advocacy Working Group is a group of women and men promoting gender equality and women's participation in the areas of

economic, political and legal development in the Maldives. Through advocacy and capacity building, the group also works to eliminate
violence against women in the country. For more information, please see:
http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/filemanager/files/maldives/gawg_guidelines__form_3.pdf
165 The Sunday Morning Herald. 2012. “Maldives Women Face More Repression Under a Rising Tide of Religious Fundamentalism,

Reports Ben Doherty from Male.” 25 January 2012. Available: http://www.smh.com.au/world/female-circumcision-fear-as-
fundamentalists-roll-back-womens-rights-20120124-1qflv.html (last accessed on March 12, 2014).
                                                                  44
           violence for women and girls.166 In the case of the Maldives, in her recent book
           examining issues of domestic violence, globalization, gender and Islam in the
           Maldives, Emma Fulu argues, “the country, a previously economically and politically insular
           country, has opened up to the world and global flows of ideas, discourses, capital and people are
           having an impact on all levels of society – and such social changes are most profound for women,
           exposing them to greater discrimination and oppression.” 167 She also notes that “domestic
           violence in the Maldives is increasing and will continue to do so if the current patterns for social
           changes persist.”

          Protocols and mechanisms to deal with issues of domestic violence have recently
           been developed but are still limited in their effectiveness. The Domestic Violence
           Prevention Act, which was passed by the People’s Majlis on 9th April 2012, was a
           milestone in this regard; according to gender experts working in the Maldives, the act
           meets international standards. However, numerous challenges to the implementation
           of this law exist, including a lack of capacity and resources, and social resistance to
           the law.168 169 Moreover, the law does not specifically address the issue of marital rape.
           The new Child Sex Abuse Act (2009) categorizes child sex offences for the first time
           in the Maldives; however, under Article 14, if an adult is legally married to a child
           under Islamic Sharia, none of the offences specified in the act will be considered a
           crime.170




166 Joe-Cannon, I. (Ed.) and the Coalition against Trafficking in Women 2006. “Primer on the Male Demand for Prostitution.” North
Amherst, MA: Coalition against Trafficking in Women. Available: http://action.web.ca/home/catw/attach/PRIMER.pdf.
167 Fulu, E. 2013. “Domestic Violence in Asia: Globalization, Gender and Islam in the Maldives.” Abingdon and New York: Routledge.


168 Abdulghafoor, H. 2012. “Maldives NGO Shadow Report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.”
Malé: Hope for Women.
169 Ibid.
170 Fulu, E. 2013. “Domestic Violence in Asia: Globalization, Gender and Islam in the Maldives.” Abingdon and New York: Routledge.

                                                                 45
                                           Box 7. Corporal Punishment at Home

      Corporal punishment is lawful in the home. There is no legal defense for its use by parents in the
      Penal Code 1968 (amended 2002), but legal provisions against violence and abuse are not
      interpreted as prohibiting corporal punishment of children. In information provided to the
      Human Rights Committee in 2012, the Government asserted that the Law on the Protection of
      the Rights of the Child (1991) “prohibits corporal punishment in homes, schools and the penal system of any
      person under the age of 18.”

      In fact, article 18 of the Law prohibits only punishment of a degree which is considered harmful
      to a child: “No child shall, even as a measure of discipline, be subjected to punishment which may cause physical
      injury or which may be detrimental to the health of the child.” In addition to stating that all corporal
      punishment is prohibited, the Government confirmed that it had “identified the actions and measures to
      prohibit all corporal punishment in all settings including law reform and an anti-corporal punishment campaign is
      planned for 2013.”
      Source:   5 July 2012, CCPR/C/MDV/Q/1/Add.1, Written replies to the Human Rights Committee.


Violence Against Young Men and Boys

Although less visible and understood, young men and adolescent boys are also at risk, and
do experience various forms of violence.171 Like women, young men typically do not seek
help when they experience violence, because of the stigma associated with being seen as
weak, and more specifically in case of the Maldives, due to the general lack of youth-focused
services and health centers available to them. In the focus-group discussions in Mahibadhoo,
young men noted the prevalence of physical abuse, referring not only to fights among male
peers, but also to the physical punishments they face from their own families so that they
may to comply with certain norms and behavior. Violence against adolescent boys and
young men stems from many of the same underlying causes as violence against women and
girls: social norms, gender roles and relations, and gendered or generational power
inequalities.

Violence at Home

Young people in the Maldives experience various forms of violence at home. Findings from
the 2007 Women’s Health and Life Experiences study indicate that the problem of violence
lies in the family: the most commonly mentioned perpetrators of non-partner physical
violence among women ages 15-49 were male family members, particularly fathers or step-
fathers.172 The data also shows that girls are at greatest risk of sexual abuse by male family
members and male acquaintances.173

Violence experienced by young people at home has serious consequences. Several theories
support a link between the family environment and violent behavior. For instance,
attachment theory argues that children with insecure and negative attachment with their
caregiver at home may develop interpersonal problems outside the home.174 Additionally,
social learning theory contends that children who observe and experience violence within the




  Barker, G. and P. Pawlak. 2012. “Hidden Violence Preventing and Responding to Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse of Adolesc ent
171

Boys.” Briefing Paper. Washington, D.C.: MenCare.
172 Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial results on prevalence, health outcomes and
women’s responses to violence.” Government of Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family.
173 Ibid.
174 Muuss, R.E. 1996. “Theories of Adolescence (6th Edition).” New York: McGraw -Hill.

                                                                  46
family are likely to accept aggression as a legitimate way to interact with others.175 The
International Labour Organization lists family related risks, including weakened family or
community networks, the absence of parental figures, a history of sexual abuse within
families, witnessing or being victim to domestic violence, HIV/AIDS infection in the family,
and practices of prostitution among family members as vulnerability factors for young men
and women’s’ risks of sexual exploitation and abuse.176 Too often, violence remains
undetected, unreported, overlooked or even tolerated and accepted in school and at home -
the very social institutions where young people are expected to be safe, protected and
empowered.

Violence in Schools

There is some evidence suggesting that schools in the Maldives are often a space where
young people are exposed to rigid, violent, and inequitable attitudes and behaviors, resulting
in physical or emotional violence, bullying, discrimination, harassment and other forms of
violence. An unpublished large scale UNICEF study (2009) found that 47% of children had
experienced physical or emotional punishment, including at school.177 Some 30% of children
at secondary school had been hit by at least one of their caregivers, 21% with an object, and
8% of school students had been physically punished by their teachers.178 According to field
research conducted for this this report, 8% of respondents stated that someone from school
had physically abused them.

In many settings across the region, violence in schools is seen as inevitable,179 and
disciplinary actions such as verbal discrimination, corporal punishment, and actions that
exclude or isolate students are seen as a means of discipline, and are often taken for granted
as an excuse to enforce obedience.180 According to the survey conducted for this report, 1 in
4 surveyed youth reported being sent home from school as a result of carrying a mobile
phone to school, not maintaining the rule on short hair (for boys), or for using
disrespectful language with teachers and school fights. A disproportionately high number
of young males (40%) reported that they were sent home in comparison to young
females (12%). Of the young people surveyed, 7% stated that they were suspended from
school at least once. More young males (12%) were suspended from school at least once
in comparison to young females (4%).



175 Simons, R.I., Lin, K.H., and L.C. Gordon. 1998. “Socialization in the Family of Origin and Male Dating Violence: A Prospective Study.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 60: Pg. 467–478.
176 International Labour Organization (ILO). 2012. “Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children.” Available:

http://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/CSEC/lang--en/index.htm (last accessed on February 8, 2014).
177 The study involved almost 17,035 people in 2,500 households and 2,000 children in schools.
178 The Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children. 2013. “The Maldives – Country Report.” Available:

http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/progress/reports/maldives.html refers to these statistics as reported in a Minivan News
article from 21 February, 2011.
179 Leach, F., Dunne, M. and F. Salvi. 2013. “School-related Gender-based Violence: A Global Review of Current Issues and Approaches in

Policy, Programming and Implementation Responses to School-related Gender-based Violence (SRGBV) for the Education Sector.”
Background research paper prepared for UNESCO. University of Sussex; Contreras, M., Heilman, B., Barker, G., Singh, A., Verma, R.,
and J. Bloomfield. 2012. “Bridges to Adulthood: Understanding the lifelong influence of men’s childhood experiences of violen ce.
Analyzing data from the International Men and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES).” Washington DC: International Center for Research
on Women.
180 Mishra, N., Thakur, K.K., Koirala, R., Shrestha, D., Poudel, R. and R. Jha. 2010. “Corporal Punishment in Nepalese School Chi ldren:

Facts, Legalities and Implications.” Journal of Nepal Pediatric Society, Vol. 30 Issue 2, Pg. 98-109.
                                                                   47
Focus-group discussions conducted for this report in Malé, and in Mahibadhoo, Maalhos
and Dharavandoo Islands revealed that there were concerns about strict and conservative
school management, as well as conservative teachers who do not encourage progressive
ideas and independent thinking among students, but rather utilize the “suspension order” - a
policy of exclusion towards students with views that are “too liberal.” 181 In this way,
students are deterred from participating actively in class and seeking academic excellence.
This in turn creates a stressful and intimidating learning environment, lowers concentration
and motivation, and contributes to lower academic achievement and overall poor
performance. As a result, such students simply do not return to school. Even the threat of
violence often results in irregular attendance, dropout, truancy, poor school performance,
and low self-esteem.

                 Box 8. Corporal Punishment in Schools and Alternative Care Settings

There is no explicit prohibition of corporal punishment in schools. Article 10 of the Law on the
Protection of the Rights of the Child 1991 states that punishment in school “must be appropriate to
the age of the child and should not be physically or psychologically harmful to the child.” The
Ministry of Education has stated that corporal punishment should not be used, but the draft Penal
Code introduces a legal defense for the use of corporal punishment by teachers. An Education Bill
has been under discussion since 2009: it was reviewed by the Committee on National Development
in October 2012, and recommendations for further amendments were made but no detailed
information on the proposed provisions is available. Corporal punishment is also lawful in alternative
care settings. In 2010, regulations for children’s homes were being drafted, which would reportedly
prohibit corporal punishment, but as of today, no actions have been taken.

Source: National Action Plan to Prohibit All Corporal Punishment, SAIEVAC Workshop on Legal Reform and Corporal Punishment,
November 2010, Kathmandu.


Bullying

In the Maldives, bullying captured the attention of the media in 2005, following the suicide
of a student who had been bullied. A person is bullied when she or he is exposed repeatedly
over time to aggressive behavior that intentionally inflicts injury or discomfort through
physical contact, verbal attacks, and fighting or psychological manipulation.182 Boys are more
likely to be both the perpetrators and targets of bullying, especially direct (i.e. physical)
bullying, in addition to indirect bullying.183 The survey conducted for this report revealed


181 Focus-group discussions in Malé and Mahibadhoo were conducted by Piotr Pawlak, independent consultant for the World Bank, while
focus-group discussions in Maalhos and in Dharavandoo were conducted by Natasha Leite, independent consultant for UNICEF. For
more information, please see: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the Maldives: Challenges and
Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).
182 Bullying involves an imbalance of power and can include teasing, taunting, and use of hurtful nicknames, physical violence or social

exclusion. A bully can operate alone or within a group of peers. Bullying may be direct, such as one child demanding money or possessions
from another, or indirect, such as a group of students spreading rumors about another. Cyber bullying is harassment through e-mail, cell
phones, text messages and defamatory websites. Children may be more vulnerable to bullying if they live with a disability, express a sexual
preference different from the mainstream, or come from a minority ethnic or cultural group or a certain socio-economic background.
Source: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (n.d.) “Health Education - Homophobic Bullying.”
Available: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/health-education/homophobic-
bullying/bullying/
183 Forero, R., McLellan, L., Rissel, C. and A. Bauman. 1999. “Bullying Behavior and Psychosocial Health Among School Students in New

South Wales, Australia: Cross Sectional Survey.” British Medical Journal, 319, 344-334; Olewus, D. 1993. “Bullying at School.” Oxford:
Blackwell.
                                                                   48
that 1 out of 5 young people surveyed stated that they have been bullied in schools. Of 223
15-19 year olds interviewed who are currently in school or have recently finished, 6%
indicated that have been bullied on most days (this was much higher than the percentage of
those in the 20-24 age group who have been bullied – 1%).

Further, the 2012 Rapid Assessment of Gangs in Malé revealed that seeking revenge for
being bullied at school was a reason why gang members joined such organizations.
According to one of the gang members interviewed, teachers are often not aware of what is
happening in classrooms, and even if they are aware, they often do not do much in response.
The same study indicates that discrimination between poor and rich students in schools
often isolates and increases resentment among students whose parents are not so wealthy.
When these students grow up, they often join gangs in order to overcome feelings of
powerlessness and inferiority that began in school.184

Little is known about Internet victimization and its relationship with youth, especially in
regards to cyber-bullying in the Maldives. The tele-density of the population shows a rapid
increase in mobile subscriptions, and the Maldives has more mobile phones than mainline
phones, with text messaging and mobile-based Internet use popular among youth.185 With
easy access to, and ownership of smart cell-phones, cyber-bullying – harassment through e-
mail, cell phones, text messages and defamatory websites – has become increasingly
common among younger generations. Findings from the survey conducted for this report
show that 15% of surveyed young people were sent offensive, nasty, threatening or
pornographic messages on their mobile phones. Although the Internet has many positive
benefits, it also poses threats by making illicit materials more freely available and by
challenging social structures through widening the gap between generations.186

Bullying and cyber-bullying affects adolescents and young people deeply. Research suggests
that bullying can lead to a wide range of problems, including loss of self-esteem and feelings
of shame and/or anxiety. Many will carry lifelong emotional scars, fall into depression or
even take their own lives. Students may come to dislike school and become truant in order
to avoid victimization, have concentration problems or learning difficulties, or face increased
stress and serious psychological problems.187




184 Asia Foundation and Maldives Institute for Psychological Services, Training and Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in Malé.”
Colombo: The Asia Foundation. Available: http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last accessed on
January 31, 2014).
185 Department of National Planning. 2012. “Statistical Yearbook of Maldives - 2012.” Malé: Department of National Planning,

Government of the Maldives.
186 Labont, R., Mohindra K. and T. Schrecker. 2011. “The Growing Impact of Globalization for Health and Public Health Practice.”

Annual Review of Public Health 2011; 32: 263–83.
187 Reid, K. 1989. “Bullying and Persistent School Absenteeism.” In Tattum, D. and D. Lane D. (Eds.) Bullying in Schools. Stoke on Trent:

Trentham Books; Balding, J., Regis, D., Wise, A., Bish, D., and J. Muirden. 1996. “Bully Off: Young People Who Fear Going to School.”
Exeter: Schools Health Education Unit; Blaya, C. and C. Hayden. 2004. “Décrochages scolaires et absentéismes en France et en
Angleterre.” In D. Glasman and F. Oeuvrard (Eds). La déscolarisation. Paris: La Dispute; Sharp, S. 1995. “How Much Does Bullying Hurt?
The Effects of Bullying on the Personal Well-being and Educational Progress of Secondary Aged Students.” Educational and Child
Psychology, 12; Sharp, S. 1996. “Self Esteem, Response Style and Victimisation: Possible Ways of Preventing Victimisation Through
Parenting and School Based Training Programmes.” School Psychology International, 17; Smith, J., Twemlow, S. W., and D.W. Hoover.
1999. “Bullies, Victims and Bystanders: A Method of In-school Intervention and Possible Parental Contributions.” Child Psychiatry and
Human Development, 30, 29-37.
                                                                  49
                   3.6 YOUTH CIVIC ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION
Youth are recognized as having the right to make informed and responsible decisions about
issues that affect their lives, as acknowledged in the resolution on youth and adolescents
adopted by the Commission on Population and Development (2012) and the Bali Global
Youth Forum Declaration (2012).188 The Guiding Principles on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights
(2012) also highlight the importance of citizens – including youth – in policy making.189

Globally and in the region, the relationship between youth civic engagement and positive
development outcomes has been the subject of attention.190 Studies show that youth who are
engaged in their communities are less likely to use drugs and alcohol, to drop out of high
school, or to be involved in criminal behavior. Furthermore, youth engagement is associated
with fewer behavioral problems, improved academic performance, and lower rates of
pregnancy and drug use.191 This recognition of youth as actors in civic life has led to the
formulation of youth specific policies and the design and implementation of youth-focused
programs in many countries around the world.192

The Government of the Maldives has placed special emphasis on bringing young people into
the fora of civic life. One of the salient features of the Maldives first youth policy, dating
back to the early 1980s, is a focus on encouraging youth to participate more actively in
development projects and activities of national interest. Promoting youth volunteerism has
been a consistent theme of youth policy and programming since that time. Yet, there appears
to be a resounding chorus among young people that there is no public space for them, nor is
there real interest in their views and concerns, despite youth being increasingly more
connected through social media. These issues are discussed below.

Youth Engagement with NGOs and CSOs

Independent youth-focused civil society organizations and active non-government
organizations can play an important role in youth development and engagement. Research
shows that positive youth development is related to the development of civic knowledge and
skills at an early age.193 Increased youth participation in civic activities also benefits

188 United Nations (UN). 2014. “Framework of Actions for the follow-up to the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development Beyond 2014.” Available: http://icpdbeyond2014.org/about/view/29-global-review-report (last accessed on
February 20, 2014).
189 Ibid.
190 For example: Ludden, A. B. 2011. “Engagement in School and Community Civic Activities in Rural Adolescents.” Journal of Youth

Violence, 40, 1254-1270; Crooks, C. V., Chiodo, D. and D. Thomas. 2010. “Strengths-Based Programing for First Nations Youth in
schools: Building Engagement through Healthy Relationships and Leadership skills.” International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction,
8 (160), 160-173; and Pearrow, M.M. 2008. “A Critical Examination of an Urban-based Youth Empowerment Strategy: The Teen
Empowerment Program.” Journal of Community Practice, 16 (4), 509-525.
191 Crooks, C. V., Chiodo, D. and D. Thomas. 2010. “Strengths-Based Programing for First Nations Youth in schools: Building

Engagement through Healthy Relationships and Leadership skills.” International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction, 8 (160), 160-173.
192 United Nations (UN). 2005. “World Youth Report: Young People Today, and in 2015.” Pg.73-4 Available:

http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unyin/documents/wyr05book.pdf (last accessed on March 7, 2014).
193 Lerner, R.M., Alberts, A.E. and D. L. Bobek. 2007. “Thriving Youth, Flourishing Civil Society – How Positive Youth Development

Strengthens Democracy and Social Development.” A Report for the Carl Bertelsmann-Prize, 2007. Institute for Applied Research in Youth
Development, Tufts University. Available: http://www.bertelsmann-stiftung.de/cps/rde/xbcr/SID-1E41F40A-
F4F5D67A/bst_engl/xcms_bst_dms_20913_20914_2.pdf
                                                                  50
governments, families and societies as a whole by providing civic role models for other
youth, whilst counteracting the immense potential social costs that can be created through
the apathy, frustration and social exclusion of young people.194

Only a handful of youth-focused organizations promote civic engagement in the Maldives,
including: Strength of Society, which aims to create awareness of youth rights and related issues;
Utopian Culture, which supports individuality, peace and unity; Youth for Equality, which
promotes youth participation in the community and awareness of issues; CARE Society
addresses the needs of the disabled, including youth, and; The Vibe, which focuses on
adolescent and youth health, including healthy lifestyles, awareness of HIV/AIDS and STIs,
and youth development and volunteerism. A small number of organizations and networks
focus on larger thematic areas (e.g. emergency response, democracy building, conflict
resolution, human rights work, cultural preservation, environmental activism), and within
this work, they include and engage young people. Such organizations include Journey, which
provides aftercare and peer support for recovering drug users; Maldivians Against Drug Abuse,
a network of 16 associations working together to provide a national civil society approach to
minimizing drug abuse; and Society of Women Against Drugs, which provides after care support
for drug recovery. According to the NGO Capacity and Need Assessment conducted in
2011, the majority of Malé-based NGOs (whether youth-focused or not) are largely unaware
of each other’s activities and areas of focus; a sizable number are also not fully operational
due to limited or irregular funding, do not implement activities consistently, and have only a
few regular volunteers or active members.195

In the Maldives, although registration for civil society organizations is easy, their
sustainability is difficult due to a lack of support from the government, limited capacity, and
a lack of continuous funding. Current donors for NGOs in the Maldives are mostly local
private sector businesses and various local donors, although such opportunities for funding
are limited. Informal networking between various NGOs exists, but there is limited
collaboration on service provision.

Islamic charities are active within civil society in the Maldives, and offer services to
communities, especially for the most disconnected and vulnerable on the islands. These
charities, which rely on Zakat (almsgiving), provide an informal safety net in Muslim
communities by, for example, helping poor families obtain textbooks, uniforms for their
children, health services, and engaging communities and youth in Islamic studies programs.
According to the ADB Maldives Country Report (2007), an average charity would collect a
modest amount each year (e.g. Rf. 7.4 million in 2002), which is distributed based on
eligibility determined by island chiefs. More than approximately 60,000 individuals receive
benefits each year.196




194 International Labour Oranization (ILO). (n.d.). “Why Should Youth be Engaged in Policy-Making. Joining Forces with Young People.”
Available: http://www.ilo.org/public/english/employment/yen/downloads/youthguide/part2_why.pdf
195 Raajje Foundation. 2009. “NGO Capacity and Need Assessment.” Malé: Raajje Foundation.
196 Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2007. “Social Protection Index for Committed Poverty Reduction, Volume 16. Maldives Country

Report.”
                                                                 51
Engagement in Civic and Political Life

Youth civic engagement has been described in terms of pro-social behaviors exhibited by
youth through involvement in activities that provide benefit both to them and to the
institutions to which they belong, such as local community-based, civil society and voluntary
organizations.197 Involvement in community-based service groups, school and non-school-
based sport activities, arts and literary groups all represent identified indicators of civic
engagement among youth.198

Findings from the survey conducted for this report however show that only 1 in 10
respondents were members of voluntary organizations. This low level of participation is a
missed opportunity given the large number of voluntary civil society organizations with
extensive geographic coverage across all of the inhabited islands of the Maldives.199 Problems
that persist include:

          Although the right to vote and run for public office is guaranteed by the 2008
           Constitution of the Maldives for anyone who is 18 years of age, few young people
           have an interest in politics. Findings from the field research show that 90% of young
           people surveyed do not participate in the country’s political life. Reasons for this
           which were cited include disappointment and frustration with public institutions and
           the performance of elected and appointed officials, declining societal values and
           increasing mistrust and corruption in the country.

          In 2012, the Maldives experienced a decline in its political rights rating due to the
           forcible removal of democratically elected president Mohamed Nasheed, the violence
           perpetrated against him and his party, the suspension of the parliament’s summer
           session, and the role of the military in facilitating these events.200 Consequently, in
           2013, the Maldives scored poorly on some indices of freedom. The “Freedom in the
           World” index, which is a measure of political rights and civil liberties published by
           Freedom House, evaluated the Maldives as being only ‘partly free.’ 201 The
           “Worldwide Press Freedom Index” ranks the Maldives 103 out of 179 countries, just
           above Uganda.202 This crackdown on political freedoms has affected young people’s
           attitudes towards politics.

          A recent World Bank report addressing challenges and prospects for the education
           sector in the Maldives shows that Maldivian youth are not offered a comprehensive


197 Lerner, R. M. 2004. “Liberty: Thriving and Civic Engagement Among America’s Youth.” Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
198 For example, please see: Hauser, S.M. 2000. “Education, Ability, and Civic Engagement in the Contemporary United States.” Social
Science Research, 29, 556–582; Minkoff, D. C. 1997. “Producing Social Capital: National Social Movements and Civil Society.” American
Behavioral Scientist, 40(5), 606–619; Youniss, J., Bales, S., Christmas-Best, V., Diversi, M., McLaughlin, M. and R. Silbereisen. 2002.
“Youth Civic Engagement in the Twenty-first Century.” Journal of Research on Adolescence, 12, 121–148.
199 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2011. “Summary Report - Comprehensive Study of the Maldivian Civil Society.”

Male: UNDP in the Maldives and the Government of Maldives. Available: http://homeaffairs.gov.mv/files/Summary-Comprehensive-
Study-of-the-Maldivian-Civil-Society.pdf (last accessed on February 17, 2014).
200 Freedom House. 2013. “Freedom in the World 2013. Democratic Breakthroughs in the Balance Selected Data From Freedom House’s

Annual Survey Of Political Rights And Civil Liberties.”
201 Ibid.
202 Reporters without Borders. 2013. “2013 World Press Freedom Index: Dashed Hopes after Spring.” Available: http://en.rsf.org/press-

freedom-index-2013,1054.html (last accessed on February 10, 2014).
                                                                  52
           school-based knowledge of democracy or democratic reform, nor are they provided
           with courses that focus on concepts such as personal freedoms, human rights, the
           political and civic responsibilities of individuals, participatory decision-making or
           non-violent conflict resolution.203

          Research has shown that youth report a greater likelihood of becoming involved if
           parents, teachers and community leaders value their participation.204 However,
           focus-group discussions conducted for this report in Mahabadhoo Island revealed
           that youth feel as if they are, ‘left on their own,’ as there are no societal or institutional
           support mechanisms to support them. Focus-group discussions also indicate that
           youth lack opportunities outside of school settings, as well as encouragement from
           the community to ‘step outside the box,’ and first and foremost, ‘to be heard.’ 205

Youth Engagement Through Social Media

Information and communications technologies and social media platforms and networks
have played a huge role globally in increasing the voice of youth in civil, social and political
life.206 Social media such as Facebook, YouTube and blogging sites have become a key part
of the daily lives of millions of young people in Asia.207 Facebook has become one of the
most common uses of the Internet in the Maldives, while Twitter and MySpace are also
accessed regularly; for its part, Twitter is the 18th most accessed site in the Maldives.208

These online social networks and other cyberspace-based platforms have served to increase
youth connectivity and have also increased the exposure of youth to the outside world.209
Young people have established Facebook pages and groups as a way to connect with and
meet others from their own island communities, to foster civic association in the islands and
to express and debate issues of cultural importance. There is also evidence of socio-political
and rights-based activism on Facebook and Twitter. Maldivian youth have played an active
role in bringing democracy to the Maldives, and they participated actively in the first election
that followed the adoption of the new constitution in August 2008. Facebook, Twitter and
YouTube were used to mobilize young people, call for democratic elections and to share on-


203 World Bank. 2011. “Higher Education in the Maldives: An Evolving Seascape.” South Asia Human Development Sector. Report No.
36. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
204 Camino, L. A. and S. Zeldin. 2002. “From periphery to center: Pathways for youth civic engagement in the day -to-day life of

communities.” Applied Developmental Science, 6, 213-220; Fogel, S. J. 2004. “Risks and Opportunities for Success: Perceptions of Urban
Youths in a Distressed Community and Lessons for Adults.” Families in Society, 3, 335-344; Jarrett, R. L., Sullivan, P. J. and N.D. Watkins.
2005. “Developing Social Capital Through Participation in Organized Youth Programs: Qualitative Insights From Three Programs.”
Journal of Community Psychology, 33, 41-55.
205 Information obtained in focus-group discussions held with youth in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll. Discussions held

on January 11, 2014. Additional information was obtained in focus-group discussions with youth in Malé, as conducted by Piotr Pawlak,
independent consultant for the World Bank, and in focus-group discussions in Maalhos and Dharavandoo, as conducted by Natasha Leite,
independent consultant for UNICEF. For more information, please see: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the
Maldives: Challenges and Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).
206 For example, please see: David, C. 2013. “ICTs in Political Engagement Among Youth in the Philippines.” International

Communication Gazette. April 2013, Vol. 75 Issue 3, Pg. 322-337.
207 Liou, C. 2013. “Using Social Media for the Prevention of Violence against Women. Lessons Learned From Social Media

Communication Campaigns to Prevent Violence against Women in India, China and Viet Nam.” Working Paper 6. Bangkok:
Partners4Prevention
208 Information obtained from: www. alexa.com (accessed on January 10, 2014).
209 United Nations (UN). 2005. “World Youth Report: Young People Today, and in 2015.” Pg.73 -4 Available:

http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unyin/documents/wyr05book.pdf (last accessed on March 7, 2014).
                                                                    53
the-ground reports, footage and photos of events in the country, and young women also sat
at the front of these movements.210

Youth Engagement in Sports

According to the survey conducted for this report, the most common extra-curricular
activity in the Maldives is school-based sports teams. More than half of the 402 young
people interviewed (58%) reported that they have participated in various school-based
teams, 28% reported participation in environment or nature clubs, and 21% in activities
related to literary associations. More than 1 out of 4 young people surveyed stated they had
the opportunity to actively engage as school leaders, school captains, sports captains, and
house captains. Participation however is based along gender lines. For instance, young men
tend to partake in and excel in sports and physical activities, and young women tend to
participate in art and humanities-related activities. According to the survey, 27% of young
women, as compared with only 12% of young men, engaged in literary activities; young
males (60%) engaged in sports much more than females (30%).

As for the engagement of youth in sports and physical activities, the highest percentage of
participants was observed in Laamu (57%), followed by Haa Dhaalu (42%). In contrast,
young people’s participation in sports and physical activities was lowest in Malé (35%) and
Addu (27%). Young people were most active in sports and physical activities between the
ages of 15 to 19 years; 48% of surveyed individuals who participated in sports belonged to
this age group. The proportion of young people participating in sports or physical activities
declines to 33% in the 20-24 year old age group.

Focus-group discussions with youth in Malé and Mahibadhoo Island revealed that support
structures and an environment of mentorship, encouragement and empowerment simply do
not exist outside of school settings, and as result, many young people do not engage in
sports or physical activities beyond school because they are ‘not interested.’

Overall, 53% of surveyed youth reported that they do not play a sport or take part in any
extra-curricular physical activities in schools, and the number was even lower in terms of
participation in sports and physical activities outside of school. Part of the problem, as
revealed in discussions held with Parent Teachers Associations and young people
themselves, is a mismatch in the quality and already limited availability of sporting facilities
and types of sporting activities in schools, in comparison to those available outside of school
settings. For instance, Malé has the most well developed sport facilities in the Maldives, but
it is home to only 42% of the entire youth population in the country. Research points to the
importance of increasing the availability of facilities as a means of promoting physical
activity, particularly in minority and remote communities, where the availability of such
resources is disproportionally limited. Yet, studies show that while availability is important,




210   Fulu, E. 2013. “Domestic Violence in Asia: Globalization, Gender and Islam in the Maldives.” Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
                                                                   54
additional characteristics for facilities should be considered when promoting their use for
physical activity.211

Gendered attitudes and perceptions, cultural norms and social factors also affect young men
and women’s active participation in sports. For instance, the pressure and expectation for
boys and young men to be competitive and excel, and for young women and girls to be well-
behaved, may result in preventing such youth from seeking engagement; for young men and
boys, a fear of “not being good enough,” and for young women and girls the need to preserve
their ‘lady-like’ image are impeding factors. Focus-group discussions conducted for this
report revealed that boys and girls feel that “ they are not good enough” to participate in sports
and physical activities.212 Young women in the focus-group discussions in Mahibadhoo
Island also expressed frustration that in terms of recreational facilities, they are not provided
with the same space as boys, and the very few limited spaces which they have are constantly
taken over by their male peers.213

To address the lack of access to sporting facilities, the Ministry of Human Resources, Youth
and Sports undertook a project to develop youth centers throughout the country to cater to
the various social and vocational needs of the youth population. The main objective of these
centers was to provide facilities for youth development programs at the island level.
However, in the development of facilities and services offered, consultation and input was
not sought from young people and community members at large, and hence the centers
suffer from a lack of local ownership. Services available at these youth centers are also
limited to a few indoor games such as billiards, table tennis, chess and garlando.
Furthermore, under the privatization policy of the government, the management and
operation of those youth centers was outsourced to local private parties in the atolls. As a
result, most youth centers are now running on a commercial basis, rather than as an initiative
to target youth.

Young Women’s Participation and Engagement

Numerous socio-economic, cultural and geographic factors limit youth in the Maldives from
accessing and benefiting from existing or new opportunities for socio-economic, civic or
political engagement. Gender is one such factor.

Almost all of the political parties in Maldives maintain Women’s Wings (consisting of all
women, with an elected president, vice president and a council), but there are major
challenges in engaging young women to run for local council elections. For example, the
proportion of seats held by women in national parliament was 7% in 2013 (of 77 members, 5
were women). 214 At the local level, out of 1,091 local council members, 58 are women and


211 Ries, A.V., Gittelsohn, J., Voorhees, C.C., Roche, K.M., Clifton, K.J and N.M. Astone. 2008. “The Environment and Urban
Adolescents' Use of Recreational Facilities for Physical Activity: a Qualitative Study.” American Journal of Health Promotion, 2008 Sep-
Oct; 23(1):43-50.
212 Information obtained in focus group discussions held with youth in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll. Discussions
held on January 11, 2014.
213 Information obtained in focus group discussions held with youth in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll. Discussions
held on January 11, 2014.
214 Please see the World Bank’s online statistical database, available at: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/maldives; and the

United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals Indicators, available at: http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/data.aspx
                                                                   55
the majority of these are below the age of 35 years.215 Women also account for only 28% of
State Ministers and 8.9% of Deputy Ministers. In the Civil Service, over 52% of the total
employees are female, but the majority are within the junior employment category.216
Discussions with atoll and island council members in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif
Dhaal Atoll, revealed that most local councils are comprised of men only, and if a woman is
elected, they almost always hold low-ranking administrative positions.217

Recent developments, however, indicate a shift in the role that young women can play in the
political life of the Maldives. Women led protests calling for new democratic elections, and
hundreds of women marched across the capital on February 24, 2012, and later on March
6th, a group of women marched to the President’s Office to deliver a set of letters
requesting President Waheed’s resignation, while others sat outside the office holding boards
with slogans such as “Where is my vote?” and “Justice now.” Even more women
participated in a protest on International Women’s Day.218

Focus-group discussions conducted for this report in Mahibadhoo Island confirmed that
young Maldivian women can be driven, ambitious and politically motivated; however, they
must constantly navigate societal constraints in order to actively participate in socio-
economic, civic and political developments, such as running for office. A young woman who
was interviewed stated, “the current socio-political establishment does not take my voices and aspirations
into consideration,” while others expressed feelings of political disinterest and disengagement.219




215 UN. 2012. Emerging Theme: Engaging Young Women And Men, Girls And Boys, To Advance Gender Equality Emerging Issues,
Trends And New Approaches To Issues Affecting The Situation Of Women Or Equality Between Women And Men: A Political And
Legislative Approach. Rozaina Adam, Member Of Parliament, Maldives. Interactive Expert Panel. United Nations Commission on the
Status of Women. Fifty-Sixth Session, 27 February – 9 March 2012; New York. Available at:
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/csw56/panels/panel5-emerging-theme-Adam.pdf
216 Ibid.
217 Interview with Council President of the Alif Dhaal Atoll and Council Director of the Alif Dhaal Atoll. Interview held on January 11,

2014 in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll.
218 Fulu, E. 2013. “Domestic Violence in Asia: Globalization, Gender and Islam in the Maldives.” Abingdon and New York: Routledge .
219 This is in relation to the current socio-political establishment on Mahibadoo Island only. Information obtained in focus group

discussions held with a group of young women ages 19-35 in Mahibadhoo, the capital island of Alif Dhaal Atoll. Discussions held on
January 11, 2014.
                                                                    56
          4. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
                                SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
For some years, concern has grown with regard to the issues facing youth in the Maldives,
mostly over the increase in gangs, drug use and violence. Findings presented in this report
confirm that young Maldivians are indeed facing new challenges and serious risks as they
transition into adulthood. Unemployment and a lack of economic opportunities, idleness,
disconnectedness with family and community, as well as geographical isolation all contribute
to this situation. Perhaps of greatest concern is the disenfranchisement and loss of hope felt
by many youth today, coupled with a lack of encouragement from their families and
communities to seek solutions and search for new opportunities. This is adversely impacting
Maldivian youth, and will have a detrimental effect on the future of the nation.

Overall, the report finds the following:

       Thwarted expectations. Despite the spatial isolation of many Maldivians, youth
        today are better educated and more connected to the outside world than ever before.
        Social media in particular is exposing young people to new ideas and values. The
        country’s graduation to middle-income status is leading young people to aspire to
        more expensive lifestyles and higher social status. Social norms and the perceptions
        among parents and communities, however, are holding young people back and
        limiting youth from pursuing new opportunities and pursuing their goals. This has
        led to the creation of a large cohort of disenfranchised youth.

       Physical isolation. The youth population is geographically dispersed. Over a
        quarter of the entire population resides in Malé, while some 200 other islands have
        less than 1,000 inhabitants. Furthermore, the physical isolation has added to the
        disconnect between Malé and the rest of the islands, leading to a limited trickling
        down of information and services to other localities. As a consequence, Maldives
        faces high costs of transportation and citizens experience difficulties with regard to
        mobility and accessing public services, thereby limiting opportunities for young
        people, particularly for females. The separation of married couples for long periods
        of time, when husbands leave the atolls to seek jobs, is another negative effect of
        geographic isolation.

       Labor market constraints. Youth unemployment is pronounced in the Maldives,
        particularly for women, although it is unclear whether the problem is one of demand
        or supply. On the one hand, young people lack the socio-emotional and other skills
        which are required in the job market, and schools are not equipping youth with such
        skills. On the other hand, the reservation wage appears to be high (young people

                                                                                             57
       have high or unrealistic expectations in terms of acceptable jobs). Added to this
       reality are the perceptions and expectations of parents as to what constitutes
       acceptable employment and wages for their children, leading to limited support and
       encouragement for youth to be economically active. This in turn, results in a national
       challenge referred to in the Maldives as “youth voluntary unemployment.” In the
       atolls specifically, many young women are keen to work and earn a living, but lack
       opportunities due to cultural norms. For men, fishing and the tourism industry are
       the main sources of livelihoods, but many young men aspire to new types of
       employment.

      The health care system fails to meet the needs of youth. This is inherent for a
       number of reasons. First, health care is often curative rather than preventative; and
       secondly, the subject of sexual and reproductive health among youth, particularly
       unmarried youth, remains taboo and sensitive.

      Stresses on families and family breakdown. Divorce rates in Maldives are
       relatively high, as is the proportion of female-headed households. One problem is
       that Maldivian youth are often ill prepared for the duties and responsibilities of
       parenthood, even though social norms place a significant emphasis on childbearing –
       a marker of adulthood for women. A lack of suitable housing in urban spaces, and
       unemployment or underemployment, place further stresses on families. Family issues
       and family breakdown, as well as unemployment, drug use, the desire for protection
       and a need to belong and form brotherhood, are connected to youth gang
       membership.

      Gang participation and violence is a relatively new phenomenon but has been
       on the rise. Youth are joining gangs for a variety of reasons, including inactivity and
       apathy, unemployment, drug use, a desire for a sense of belonging, and the need for
       young men to prove their masculinity. Moreover, high levels of domestic violence,
       divorce and broken homes have led young people to look outside of traditional
       family structures for the support and protection that gangs can provide. A further
       problem is that people with drug or criminal offenses experience difficulties in
       reintegrating into society and finding jobs; access to counseling and rehabilitation
       services, especially for young people, is limited and inadequate. As such, young
       people with a criminal past are often left with few alternative options and end up
       reengaging in gang activity.

The report revealed the following risk and protective factors that influence the
development of Maldivian youth as they transition into adulthood:

      Family. Family and relationships are especially important for youth in the Maldives,
       as they also provide customary and financial support. Conversely, lack of adult
       encouragement and support to continue education and search for employment,
       parental displays of negative attitudes and behaviors (including physical and
       emotional abuse by family members), the absence of parental guidance, and high
       rates of divorce and family break up negatively impact youth and their development.



                                                                                            58
      Schools. Engagement in schools protects youth against a number of negative
       behaviors, including drug and alcohol use and engaging in violence and unsafe sexual
       practices. Unfortunately, when schools do not provide quality services, or do not
       foster a healthy environment for youth – because they expose them to rigid, violent,
       and gender inequitable attitudes and behavior, corporal punishment, bullying,
       discrimination, harassment and other forms of violence – not only is their
       development hindered, but they are more likely to engage in negative behaviors.

      Health. The health sector can play a significant role in achieving positive outcomes
       for youth development. However, as the number of young people entering their
       reproductive years in the country is on the rise, youth continue to lack access to
       quality services, particularly in regard to sexual and reproductive health, and
       adolescents and youth are not provided with sufficient knowledge about preventative
       health, which places them at risk. As rates of drug use amongst Maldivian youth
       continue to rise, the nation also faces challenges in providing sufficient and
       appropriate rehabilitation and support services to these individuals.

      Gender Norms. While the Maldives ranks relatively high in terms of education and
       health, it scores poorly in political empowerment and economic opportunity for
       women, and high levels of gender-based violence are prevalent. In recent years,
       gender inequality appears to have worsened in the Maldives, and civil society groups
       have reported significantly increasing restrictions on women’s dress, mobility,
       autonomy, forms of employment, voice and their ability to make independent
       decisions.

In light of the challenges facing Maldivian youth, as well as the key factors which strongly
impact their development, it is evident that action must be taken in order to not only secure
their well-being, but also to ensure their full development into adulthood. As the nation’s
single largest demographic today, these youth will be the nation’s leaders of tomorrow.




                                                                                           59
             MOVING FORWARD – SHAPING A NEW FUTURE FOR YOUTH
                                                   Recommendations

Engaging youth to be productive and content
                                                                                  “Young people are empowered when they
members of society will first and foremost require a
                                                                                  acknowledge that they have or can create choices in
radical shift in the way that youth are perceived and
                                                                                  life, are aware of the implications of those choices,
valued by adults, policy makers and society-at-large.
This is a long-term process that will require                                     make an informed decision freely, take action
attitudinal, structural, and cultural change, whereby                             based on that decision and accept responsibility for
young people can build their capacity and are given                               the consequences of those actions. Empowering
the authority and agency to make decisions,                                       young people means creating and supporting the
implement change, and to be actors in their own lives                             enabling conditions under which young people can
and in the lives of others. In short, the Maldives                                act on their own behalf, and on their own terms,
needs to adopt a broad strategy of youth                                          rather than at the direction of others.”
empowerment.220
                                                                                  – The Commonwealth Plan of Action for Youth
With this objective in mind, the report makes five                                Empowerment (PAYE) 2006-2015
recommendations, some which are long term and
others that can be achieved in the short term. These are discussed in turn.

#1. Conducting a National Youth Campaign

A first priority for the government would be to reach out to the youth population, engage
them, and send a strong message that they are central to the future of the country. Specific
objectives of the campaign would be to: (a) start a national dialogue about the need to
change perceptions and attitudes regarding youth challenges; (b) publicly commit the
government to work with youth on their issues; (c) present a new vision of youth as
productive assets and citizens in society; and (d) launch a platform for youth programming.
Such a campaign could have captivating slogans such as “We Need YOUth” or “we care for
YOUth,” with a view to reaching different segments of society, including parents and peer
groups. An ICT monitoring tool would be established to assess progress and identify how
attitudes are changing vis-à-vis the campaign.

The proposed campaign would be novel in its messaging, but would also be based on
effective and tested mechanisms used to change attitudes, norms, and behaviors on issues
including public health and safety, such as the “LoveLife” HIV prevention campaign in South
Africa, “100% Jeune” - a youth targeted public health campaign in Cameroon, and the
“TruthCampaign” - a youth-driven anti-smoking media campaign in the U.S.221 The campaign
would also involve more targeted activities such as campaigns in schools and universities, the
use of radio programs to reach out to all islands, the use of positive role models, and social
media campaigns.



220 For more information, please see: The Commonwealth Plan of Action for Youth Empowerment (PAYE) 2006-2015. Available at:
http://www.youthpolicy.org/library/wp-content/uploads/library/2006_Commonwealth_PAYE_Eng.pdf
221 Truth Campaign (USA) had a 15% rise in the number of adolescents who agreed with negative statements about smoking, a 19.4%

decline in smoking among 14–16 year olds, and an 8% decline among 16-18 year olds.

                                                                                                                                  60
#2: Developing new spaces for youth programming and participation -
YouthConnect

A second priority would be to develop spaces where young women and men can assemble to
connect with others, discuss issues of importance to them, access relevant information and
build networks and skills. These spaces would not necessarily entail the construction of new
buildings or new locations, which could be costly, but rather would build upon existing
youth centers and utilize or transform existing
structures into youth spaces. Types of youth programs       “Social and emotional competence is
that could be developed and implemented in these            the ability to understand, manage, and
spaces could include: (a) skills training, including socio- express the social and emotional
emotional skills required for employment; (b) public        aspects of one's life in ways that enable
health education and support for youth; (c) parenting       the successful management of life
education programs; (d) ICT and basic computer              tasks such as learning, forming
training; (d) English language training; and (e) civic      relationships, solving everyday
education and leadership. The centers would be linked       problems, and adapting to the complex
to local governing bodies in order to ensure quality        demands of growth and development.
delivery of services within the centers, as well as         It includes self-awareness, control of
adequate maintenance and support.
                                                            impulsivity, working cooperatively, and
                                                            caring about oneself and others. Social
A number of World Bank-financed projects are
                                                            and emotional learning is the process
examples of good practices in developing safe spaces
for youth, such as the “North Caucasus Youth                through which children and adults
Empowerment and Security Project,” and “Georgia Youth       develop the skills, attitudes, and values
Inclusion and Social Accountability.” Within the South Asia necessary to acquire social and
region, the state of West Bengal in India has invested      emotional competence.” – Promoting
in youth resource centers, which are youth friendly,        Social and Emotional Learning (1997)
non-threatening spaces – often led by youth
themselves – where young people can meet, discuss social issues, develop skills and organize
and implement collective actions.222 For instance, the “Thoughtshop Foundation” in Kolkata has
transformed traditional neighborhood clubs into youth resource centers. Others have used
existing buildings, applying a youth participatory approach to make them more youth
friendly and inclusive of both males and females.

In the case of the Maldives, the immediate first steps would be to conduct a stock taking of
existing youth centers and related initiatives in the Maldives, to identify other potential sites
that could be developed into the proposed youth spaces, to identify lessons to date in
implementing these centers, and to design new models based on international good
practices.


#3: Supporting preventative health care for young women and men



  Information obtained from: Innovations in Civic Participation. (n.d.) “India.” Available: http://www.icicp.org/resource-library/icp-
222

publications/global-youth-service-database/asia-and-the-pacific/south-asia-2/india/

                                                                                                                                     61
   A third priority is providing youth friendly health care services (see Box 9). Young people
   need health services that help them make sound choices, that are free of stigma and
   discrimination, and that take into account the differentiated needs of male and female
   patients. In the long term, this implies, among other things, shifting from health care
   services that are curative, to those that are preventative. It also implies: (a) paying attention
   to the location of services; (b) ensuring confidentiality; (c) involving young people in the
   design and operation of health care provision; and (d) changing attitudes so that young
   people are treated with respect.

   In the short term, the report recommends that the Ministry of Health:

            Assess the potential of health and social workers located in the atolls, with the
             objective of strengthening and/or establishing protocols for working with youth
             clients, both women and men. Currently each atoll is served by at least one of these
             employees, but little is known about their capacity to serve their youth clientele.

            Design and roll out social media aimed at bridging knowledge gaps amongst youth
             and health issues, shifting societal norms vies-a-vies sexual and reproductive health
             services for young people, and reducing the stigma associated with accessing
             psychological health services.

                       Box 9. Lessons on Developing ‘Youth Friendly’ Health Services

In Designing Facilities
 Locate clinics where public transportation is available and close to places where young people gather,
such as schools, markets, and community centers.
 To assure youth's privacy, set aside a separate space for their services, or, if that is not possible, set aside
some hours just for youth, in the late afternoon and evening and on weekends. Within the space and times set
aside for youth, create an atmosphere that is welcoming, youthful, informal, and culturally appropriate for all
the youth using the services.
In Designing Services
 Involve young people in designing and running services. Youth may be more able than adults to
accurately identify the needs of their peers and can propose appropriate ways to meet those needs. Train
youth as peer educators.
 Offer youth free or low cost services.
 Ensure that counseling spaces are private and that others cannot overhear.
 Maintain adequate supplies and a wide variety of contraceptive methods.
 Whenever possible, provide contraception to young women without requiring a pelvic examination and
blood tests.
 Welcome young men. Recruit and train male staff to meet the sexual health needs of young men.
 Welcome clients' partners, when they wish their partners to accompany them
 Inform youth about available services and assure them of confidentiality.
In Addressing Attitudes
 Treat young people as respectfully as adults. Avoid judging youth's behavior. Work to develop solid,
mutually trusting relationships with them.
 Provide all staff with ongoing training in adolescent development, understanding young people's needs
and concerns, and treating youth confidentially and respectfully. Staff may need assistance in recognizing and
changing attitudes that pose barriers to youth.
 Encourage counselors to spend as much time as necessary with each adolescent client in order to address
all of her/his concerns.                                                                                62
Source: Moya, Cecilia. 2012. “Creating Youth-Friendly Sexual Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Advocates for Youth
Publications. Available: http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/publications/publications-a-z/549-creating-youth-friendly-sexual-health-
services-in-sub-saharan-africa
        
# 4: Preparing young people for jobs

A fourth priority would be to better understand the dynamics of supply and demand for
youth labor in the Maldives. According to report findings, very little is known about labor
markets and the causes of high unemployment among youth, however, it is likely due to
both unrealistic expectations among youth and a mismatch of skillsets. The report thus
proposes the following:

             In the immediate term, a “Training PLUS” type program (see Box 10), which
              involves (a) conducting a (low cost, rapid) Employer Skills Demand Survey; 223 (b)
              based on the findings of the survey, developing and delivering a short-term (4-6
              months) training program to build both socio-emotional and technical skills, as
              needed, for young people; and (c) establishing links, networks and internships for
              gainful employment. The
              Training PLUS approach has                            Box 10. What is Training PLUS?
              been tested in countries such
              as Afghanistan, Haiti,            It is comprised of a three stage process as follows:
              Jordan, Morocco, Nepal and
                                                1. A Quick Employer Skills Demand Survey, which entails:
              South Sudan. Such a
                                                      (a) identifying immediate skills needs of employers; (b)
              program should target young             mobilizing high school graduates (youth in transition from
              people who are neither                  high school to university) to enroll in training; and (c)
              studying nor employed.                  developing a curriculum for training with input from
              Similar skills training                 potential employers.
              programs in East Asia have        2. Training (4-6 months), which involves: (a) providing job
              also yielded promising                  skills training in addition to socio-emotional skills and life
              results. Samoa’s “Opportunity           skills; and b) keeping employers engaged in the training.
              for Vulnerable Poor Youth”        3.    Support for Employment, which involves: (a) building
              program, which provides                 connections between future employers and trainees; (b)
              informal and vocational                 helping trainees with their resume and assisting them in
              training to unemployed                  their interviews; and (c) working with future employers to
                                                      provide gainful employment and/or internships
              young people, in order to
              increase their earning            Source: Compiled from the Adolescent Girls Initiative (Jordan, Haiti, Afghanistan,
                                                Laos, Nepal, Liberia, South Sudan), and report on promoting youth opportunities in
              opportunities as well as their    Morocco (World Bank, June 2012).
              self-esteem, has been found
              to have increased
              beneficiaries’ employability. Similarly, the Philippines’ “Working Youth Center” has
              yielded positive results in terms of employability.

             In the longer term, the government needs to strengthen the school to work
              transition by: (a) reassessing curriculums and textbooks to establish continuity
              between graduates’ skills and labor market needs, and (b) broadening the scope of
              after school programs to include the preparation of students for universities and the
              job market. In the case of Training PLUS, as highlighted in the Toolkit for Youth at



223   In Tonga, the cost of the survey was $US 20,000 (World Bank, personal communications).

                                                                                                                       63
          Risk,224 the single most important skill demanded by private sector firms was found
          to be socio-emotional skills, which can be taught through the educational system.
          Lastly, looking to the future and following on examples from countries such as
          Colombia, Jamaica, Lebanon, and Pakistan, the government, together with the
          private sector, should look at developing entrepreneurship and innovation programs
          for youth using ICT (see Box 11).

#5 Implementing “Youth Score Cards” in schools

Finally, this report recommends piloting Youth Score Cards in the World Bank financed
“Enhancing Education Development in the Maldives” Project. This is a low cost intervention that
can show positive results in
the short term.                            Box 11. Creating an Ecosystem for Innovation and
                                                      Entrepreneurship in Lebanon
Experience has proven that an
                                     Lebanon is officially classified as an Upper Middle Income Country,
effective way to engage young        but its economy lags behind that of other similar countries due to
people is to connect them with serious deficiencies in the labor market: youth unemployment is high
things that are important to         (34%), and women account for only 24% of the work force.
them, such as schools. A
World Bank pilot program             In 2013, Lebanon initiated the World Bank financed Mobile Internet
initiated in 2010, in the            Ecosystem Project to open innovation and crowdsourcing
Ismailia governorate in Egypt,       mechanisms among the young population, spur innovation and
achieved this objective              entrepreneurship among youth, and to boost skills and talent creation
through “Youth Score                 among young people. Other objectives include enhancing the local
Cards,” which through                talent pool’s skills to meet global standards of the Information and
                                     Communications Technology (ICT) industry; and to increase ICT-
participatory methods allows
                                     enabled services and extend the use of ICT tools to traditionally
young people and their parents competitive industries in Lebanon, which will in turn increase their
to monitor the quality of local      competitiveness in international markets.
schools in order to create
accountability among school          Components of the project include: (a) entrepreneurial skills and
management.225 Preliminary           practical training; (b) an innovation forum for Lebanese actors to
assessments of the project           meet, coordinate, learn, and adopt the international knowledge and
have been positive. Students         best practices that are currently missing in Lebanon; and (3) policy
and parents found the                reforms.
methodology to be
participatory, transparent and
easy to understand, and moreover, they appreciated learning about and influencing the
quality of education in schools. This methodology has been widely tested through different
World Bank and international NGOs’ projects, within a variety of public services, and it has
proven to be crucial for eliciting social and public accountability and participation, and in
increasing the responsiveness of end users (students, parents, and others).226



224 Cunningham, W., Cohan, L.M., Naudeau, S. and L. McGinnis. 2008. “Supporting Youth at Risk, A Policy Toolkit for Middle Income
Countries.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
225 For more information, please see: World Bank. (n.d.) “Social Accountability Case Examples: Education.” Available at:

https://saeguide.worldbank.org/sites/worldbank.org.saeguide/files/documents/Edu%20MENA%20Egypt.pdf
226 Thindwa, J., Edgerton, J. and R. Forster. 2005. Community Based Performance Monitoring (CBPM): Empowering and Giving Voice to

Local Communities.Washington, D.C: World Bank.

                                                                                                                              64
                  A Final Word on Approaches to Youth Programming

Research conducted for this report uncovered numerous youth initiatives led by the
Government of the Maldives; however, there is almost no information on their nature or
effectiveness. Interviewees often mentioned a youth program that began and ended within
the span of a year or two, without a clear idea on (1) the factors that led to the closure of the
program; and (2) the impact of the program, including limitations and challenges which were
faced. Hence, moving forward, initiatives of youth programming require quality impact
evaluations with gender disaggregated data, in order to understand effectiveness and results,
as well as to inform future interventions and strategies. Such measures may prove costly,
however, in the long term they reduce costs by ensuring that resources for youth are
allocated to effective programs.

Finally, international experience has shown that the needs of youth are best met through
inter-sectoral coordination and collaboration – as well as with public-private sector
involvement. Many countries and states have established inter-agency youth structures, with
the objective of planning, coordinating, monitoring and in some cases funding youth
development interventions. Others have moved beyond coordination and are experimenting
with an integrated services model for youth development – which involves establishing a
collaborative arrangement between service providers (governmental, non-governmental and
private sector) and the communities in which youth and their families live. This integrated
model has the objectives of: (a) reforming the usually fragmented system of services and
support for youth and their families; (b) providing an integrated and comprehensive range of
services for youth and their families; (c) increasing community participation, ownership and
control over local initiatives; and (d) increasing transparency. The Maldives should consider
these types of institutional arrangements and integrative approaches.




                                                                                              65
                           RECOMMENDATIONS AT-A-GLANCE
Recommendation              Short Term           Medium and Long         Responsibility
                              Actions             Term Actions
Conducting a                 Launch a             Utilize yearly          Primary:
National Youth                 national               youth                  Ministry of
Campaign.                      youth                  campaigns as a         Youth and
                               campaign to            platform to            Sports
                               prioritize             assess                Ministerial
                               issues of              programming            Coordination
                               youth.                 in previous
                                                      years.
                                                   Develop a
                                                      monitoring
                                                      tool to assess
                                                      progress and
                                                      identify how
                                                      the campaign
                                                      is changing
                                                      attitudes.
Developing new spaces          Conduct a          Establish               Primary:
for youth programming           stocktaking           YouthConnect           Ministry of
and participation -             of existing           spaces that            Youth and
YouthConnect.                   youth                 provide skills         Sports
                                centers and           training, public      Ministerial
                                related               health                 Coordination
                                initiatives in        education, and
                                the                   access to other
                                Maldives.             important
                                                      resources for
                                                      youth.
                                                   Develop a
                                                      participatory
                                                      approach to
                                                      engaging
                                                      young people
                                                      in the
                                                      development
                                                      of
                                                      YouthConnect
                                                      .
Supporting                     Assess the         Shift from the          Primary:
preventative health care        potential of          provision of           Ministry of
for young women and             atoll-based           healthcare             Health and
men.                            health and            services that          Gender
                                social                are curative, to      Ministerial
                                workers for           those which            coordination




                                                                                            66
                             better              are                    primarily with
                             assisting           preventative in        Ministry of
                             young men           nature.                Youth and
                             and women.         Strengthen             Sports
                            Use social          health care
                             media to            services for
                             bridge              youth by
                             knowledge           paying
                             gaps                attention to
                             amongst             the location of
                             youth and           services,
                             health              ensuring
                             issues, and         confidentiality,
                             to positively       involving
                             shape norms         young people
                             regarding           in the design
                             the use of          and operation
                             sexual,             of health care
                             reproductive        provision, and
                             and                 changing
                             psychologica        attitudes
                             l health            towards youth.
                             services.
Preparing young people      Pilot a            Develop a             Primary:
for jobs.                    “Training           strategy to            Ministry of
                             PLUS” type          strengthen the         Education
                             program to          school to work        Ministerial
                             deliver a           transition,            coordination
                             market-             which includes         primarily with
                             aligned             strengthening          Ministry of
                             short-term          education              Youth and
                             training            systems and            Sports,
                             program, as         after school           Ministry of
                             well as to          programs.              Economic
                             establish          Support public         Development,
                             links               and private            Ministry of
                             between             sector                 Tourism
                             youth and           partnership to
                             potential           design
                             employers.          innovative
                                                 strategies for
                                                 youth
                                                 employment.




                                                                                         67
Implementing “Youth      Rapidly            Integrate an in-      Primary:
Score Cards” in           deploy a            school                 Ministry of
schools.                  youth score         monitoring             Education
                          cards               tool to ensure        Ministerial
                          program to          continuous             coordination
                          enable              feedback from          primarily with
                          young               students and           Ministry of
                          people and          parents,               Youth and
                          their parents       actively engage        Sports,
                          to monitor          students for           Ministry of
                          the quality         quality                Economic
                          of local            enhancement,           Development,
                          schools, and        and to enable          Ministry of
                          to develop          schools to             Tourism
                          accountabilit       effectively
                          y amongst           respond to
                          school              student needs.
                          management
                          .




                                                                                      68
                                 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abdulghafoor, H. 2012. “Maldives NGO Shadow Report to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women.” Malé: Hope for Women.

Ahmed, S.K. 1998. “Report of the Preparatory Mission for Rapid Assessment Study in
Maldives.” New Delhi: UNDCP, ROSA.

The Asia Foundation and Maldives Institute for Psychological Services, Training and
Research. 2012. “Rapid Assessment of Gangs in Malé.” Colombo: The Asia Foundation.
Available: http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/GangViolenceReportFINAL.pdf (last
accessed on January 31, 2014).

Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2007. “Maldives: Gender and Development Assessment.”

Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2007. “Social Protection Index for Committed Poverty
Reduction, Volume 16. Maldives Country Report.”

Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2012. “Laying the Groundwork for Gender Equality in
the Maldives – 2012.” Available: http://www.adb.org/themes/gender/gdcf-case-
studies/laying-groundwork-gender-equality-maldives (last accessed on January 29, 2014).

Asian-Pacific Resource & Research Centre for Women (ARROW). 2011. “Maternal Health,
Sexual Reproductive Health and Rights, Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment: A
Rapid Situation Assessment of the Maldives.” Malaysia: ARROW (unpublished).

Aturupane, H. and M. Shojo. 2012. “Enhancing the Quality of Education in the Maldives.
Challenges and Prospects.” South Asia: Human Development Unit. Report No. 51.
Discussion Paper Series. World Bank. Available: http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/04/05/000406
484_20120405155733/Rendered/PDF/679180NWP00PUB07903B0Report00No.510.pdf
(last accessed on February 2, 2014).

Balding, J., Regis, D., Wise, A., Bish, D., and J. Muirden. 1996. “Bully Off: Young People
Who Fear Going to School.” Exeter: Schools Health Education Unit.

Balsano, A.B. 2005. “Youth Civic Engagement in the United States: Understanding and
Addressing the Impact of Social Impediments on Positive Youth and Community
Development.” Applied Developmental Science. 2005, Vol. 9, Issue 4, p. 188-201.

Barker, G. 2005. “Dying to Be Men: Youth, Masculinity and Social Exclusion.” London:
Routledge.

Barker, G. and C. Ricardo. 2005. “Young Men and the Construction of Masculinity in Sub-
Saharan Africa: Implications for HIV/AIDS, Conflict and Violence.” Social Development
Working Paper No. 26. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

                                                                                             69
Barker, G., and P. Pawlak. 2011. “Men’s Participation in Care Work, in Families, and in
Gender Equality in the Contemporary World.” In Men and Families and Policy in a
Changing World. New York: United Nations.

Barker, G., Contreras, J.M., Heilman, B., Singh, A.K., Verma, R.K., and M. Nascimento.
2011. “Evolving Men: Initial Results from the International Men and Gender Equality
Survey (IMAGES).” Washington, D.C.: International Center for Research on Women
(ICRW) and Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Promundo.

Barker, G. and P. Pawlak. 2012. “Hidden Violence Preventing and Responding to Sexual
Exploitation and Sexual Abuse of Adolescent Boys.” Briefing Paper. Washington, D.C.:
MenCare.

Barker, G., Verma, R., Crownover, J., Segundo, M., Fonseca, V., Conteras, J.M., Heilman, B.
and P. Pawlak. 2012. “Boys and Education in the Global South: Emerging Vulnerabilities
and New Opportunities for Promoting Changes in Gender Norms.” THYMOS Journal of
Boyhood, Vol. 6, Issue 2, Year 2012. Harriman, TN: The Men’s Studies Press.

Belfast Telegraph. 2013. “Darker side of the Maldives: Public Lashings, Religious Extremists
and a Gay Blogger with his Throat Slashed.” 11 April 2013. Available:
http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/world-news/darker-side-of-the-maldives-public-
lashings-religious-extremists-and-a-gay-blogger-with-his-throat-slashed-29189177.html (last
accessed on February 7, 2014).

Benson, P. 1997. “All Kids Are Our Kids.” San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Blaya, C. and C. Hayden. 2004. “Décrochages scolaires et absentéismes en France et en
Angleterre.” In D. Glasman and F. Oeuvrard (Eds.). La déscolarisation. Paris: La Dispute.

Blum, R. 1998. “Healthy Youth Development as a Model for Youth Health Promotion: A
Review.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 22, 368-375.

Blum, R.W. 2007. “Youth in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Adolescent Health; 41: 230–38.

Blum, R.W., Bastos, F., Kabiru, C., and L. Le. 2012. “Adolescent Health in the 21st
Century.” The Lancet. Vol. 379, April 28, 2012.

Brennan, M. A., Barnett, R. V. and E. Baugh. 2007. “Youth Involvement in Community
Development: Implications and Possibilities for Extension.” Journal of Extension, 45 (4),
203-213.

Brennan, M. A., Barnett, R. V. and M. Lesmeister. 2007. “Enhancing local capacity and
youth involvement in the community development process.” Journal of Community
Development, 38 (4), 13-27.




                                                                                            70
Bronfenbrenne, U. 1994. “Ecological model of human development.” International
Encyclopedia of Development, Vol. 2, Second Edition. Oxford: Elsevier. Available:
http://www.psy.cmu.edu/~siegler/35bronfebrenner94.pdf.

Caldwell, L. L. and N. Darling. 1999. “Leisure context, parental control, and resistance to
peer pressure as predictors of adolescent partying and substance use: An ecological
perspective.” Journal of Leisure Research, 31(1), 57-77.

Camino, L. A. and S. Zeldin. 2002. “From periphery to center: Pathways for youth civic
engagement in the day-to-day life of communities.” Applied Developmental Science, 6, 213-
220.

Chandra-Mouli, V., Bloem, P. and J. Ferguson. 2013. “The World Health Organization’s
Work on Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health.” Bundesgesundheitsblatt
Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz 56 (2), February 2013, Pg. 256-61.

Chevannes, B. 2006. “The role of men in families in the Caribbean: A historical perspective.”
In Bannon, I. and Correia, M.C. (Eds.) The Other Half of Gender: Men’s Issues in
Development. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Pg. 73-92.

Cohall, A. 1999. “Strategies for health care providers to address adolescent dating violence.”
American Medical Women's Association, 144, 144-145.

Commerce Development and Environment Pvt Ltd. (CDE). 2003. “Reproductive and
Sexual Health of Adolescents in the Maldives.” Available:
http://www.unfpa.org.mv/downloads/RSHA_2003.pdf

Connolly, K. 2013. “Angela Merkel: Youth unemployment is most pressing issue facing
Europe.” The Guardian. 2 July 2013. Available:
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/angela-merkel-youth-unemployment-
europe

Contreras, M., Heilman, B., Barker, G., Singh, A., Verma, R., and J. Bloomfield. 2012.
“Bridges to Adulthood: Understanding the lifelong influence of men’s childhood experiences
of violence. Analyzing data from the International Men and Gender Equality Survey
(IMAGES).” Washington DC: International Center for Research on Women.

Correia, M. and I. Bannon (Eds.). 2012. “The Other Half of Gender: Men’s Issues in
Development.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Pg. 73-92.

Crooks, C. V., Chiodo, D. and D. Thomas. 2010. “Strengths-Based Programing for First
Nations Youth in schools: Building Engagement Through Healthy Relationships and
Leadership skills.” International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction, 8 (160), 160-173.

Cunningham, W., Cohan, L.M., Naudeau, S. and L. McGinnis. 2008. “Supporting Youth at
Risk, A Policy Toolkit for Middle Income Countries.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.



                                                                                              71
David, C. 2013. “ICTs in Political Engagement Among Youth in the Philippines.”
International Communication Gazette. April 2013, Vol. 75 Issue 3, Pg. 322-337.

De Castro, E., Zenaida, A., Camacho, V., Faye, A., Balanon, G. and M.T. Galang. 2012.
“Children Caught in Conflicts: Assessing the Psychosocial Impact of Armed Conflict on
Children in the Philippines.” International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies, 9(3):
249–265 (2012).

Department of National Planning. 2011. “Maldives Statistical Yearbook 2011.” Malé:
Department of National Planning, Government of Maldives. Available:
http://planning.gov.mv/YearBook2011/MDG.pdf

Department of National Planning. 2011. “National Planning, Household and Income and
Expenditure Survey, 2009-2010.” Malé: Department of National Planning, Government of
Maldives.

Department of National Planning. 2012. “Statistical Yearbook of Maldives - 2012.” Malé:
Department of National Planning, Government of the Maldives.

Duerden, M.D. and P. A. Witt. 2010. “An Ecological System Theory. Perspective on Youth
Programming.” Journal of Park and Recreation Administration, Summer 2010. Volume 28,
Number 2. Pg. 108-120.

Ellis, B.J., Bates, J.E., Dodge, K.A., Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., Pettit, G.S. and L.
Woodward. 2003. “Does Father Absence Place Daughters at Special Risk for Early Sexual
Activity and Teenage Pregnancy?” Child Development. Vol. 74, No. 3 (May-June), Pg. 801-
821.

Farr, V. 2006. “Gender Analysis as a Tool for Multilateral Negotiators in the Small Arms
Context.” In Disarmament as Humanitarian Action: From Perspective to Practice. Borrie, J. and V. M. Randin
(Eds.). Geneva: United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research. Pg. 117–118.

Feldman, S., and G. Elliot. 1997. “At the Threshold: The Developing Adolescent.”
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Ferber, T. and Pittman, K. (with Marshall, T.). 2002. “State Youth Policy: Helping All Youth
to Grow up Fully Prepared and Fully Engaged.” Takoma Park, MD: The Forum for Youth
Investment.

Fogel, S. J. 2004. “Risks and Opportunities for Success: Perceptions of Urban Youths in a
Distressed Community and Lessons for Adults.” Families in Society, 3, 335-344.

Forero, R., McLellan, L., Rissel, C. and A. Bauman. 1999. “Bullying Behavior and
Psychosocial Health Among School Students in New South Wales, Australia: Cross Sectional
Survey.” British Medical Journal, 319, 344-334.




                                                                                                         72
Foundation for Advancement of Self Help in Attaining Needs (FASHAN) and Narcotics
Control Board (NCB). 2003. “Rapid Situation Assessment of Drug Abuse in Maldives
2003.” Malé: UNESCAP and UNDP.

Freedom House. 2013. “Freedom in the World 2013. Democratic Breakthroughs in the
Balance Selected Data From Freedom House’s Annual Survey Of Political Rights And Civil
Liberties.”

Fulu, E. 2004. “Gender-based Violence in the Maldives: What We Know So Far - A report
on the findings of qualitative research on GBV carried out by the Ministry of Gender,
Family Development and Social Security in 2004.”

Fulu, E. 2007. “The Maldives Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences. Initial results
on prevalence, health outcomes and women’s responses to violence.” Government of
Maldives, Ministry of Gender and Family.

Fulu, E. 2007. “Gender, Vulnerability, and the Experts: Responding to the Maldives
Tsunami.” Development and Change, 38(5): 843–864 (2007).

Fulu, E. 2013. “Domestic Violence in Asia: Globalization, Gender and Islam in the
Maldives.” Abingdon and New York: Routledge.

Fulu, E., Warner, X., Miedema, S., Jewkes, R., Roselli, T. and J. Lang. 2013. “Why Do Some
Men Use Violence Against. Women and How Can We Prevent It? Quantitative Findings
from the UN Multi-country Study on Men and Violence in Asia and the Pacific.” Bangkok:
UNDP, UNFPA, UN Women and UNV.

Garmezy, N. 1991. “Resiliency and Vulnerability to Adverse Developmental Outcomes
Associated with Poverty.” American Behavioral Scientist, 34:416-430.

Garmezy, N. 1985. “Stress Resistant Children: The Search for Protective Factors.” In J.E.
Stevenson (Ed.), Recent Research in Developmental Psychopathology, supplement 4:213-33
of the Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines. Oxford: Pergamon
Press.

The Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children. 2013. “The Maldives –
Country Report.” Available:
http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/progress/reports/maldives.html.

Goldstein, A.P. 1991. “Delinquent Gangs: A Psychological Perspective.” Champaign, IL:
Research Press.

Government of Maldives. 2008 “The Constitution of the Republic of Maldives.” Available:
http://www.maldivesinfo.gov.mv/home/upload/downloads/Compilation.pdf

Government of Maldives. 2009. “Presidential Address 2009.” Malé: President’s Office,
Government of the Maldives.


                                                                                        73
Government of the Maldives. 2010. “Activities Addressing Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, Human Rights Commission of the Maldives.” Malé: Government of the
Maldives. Available:
http://www.hrcm.org.mv/publications/otherreports/DisabilityReport13April2010.pdf

Greene, M., Robles, O., Stout, K., and T. Suvilaakso. 2012. “A Girl’s Right to Learn Without
Fear: Working to End Gender- Based Violence at School.” Toronto: Plan Canada.

Hair, E. C., Jager, J. and S.B. Garrett. 2002. “Background for Community-level Work on
Social Competency in Adolescence: Reviewing the Literature on Contributing Factors.”
Washington, DC: Child Trends.

Hameed, S. 2012. “Sexual Health Policies and Youth: A Case Study of the Maldives.” Thesis
submitted to the Department of Social Policy at the London School of Economics for the
degree of Doctor of Philosophy, London, June 2012. London School of Economics and
Political Science.

Hanushek, E. and F. Welch (Eds.). 2006. “Handbook of the Economics of Education -
Volume 1.” Amsterdam: Elsevier Science and Technology Books.

Hanushek, E. and L. Woessmann. 2008. “The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic
Development.” Journal of Economic Literature, 46 (3): 607-668.

Hardoon, D. and F. Heinrich. 2011. “Daily Lives and Corruption: Public Opinions in the
Maldives.” Berlin: Transparency International. Available:
http://transparencymaldives.org/transparency/wp-
content/uploads/2013/03/corruption.pdf (last accessed on January 12, 2014).

Harris, D., and T. Sass. 2011. “Teacher Training, Teacher Quality, and Student
Achievement.” Journal of Public Economics. 95: 798-812.

Hauser, S.M. 2000. “Education, Ability, and Civic Engagement in the Contemporary United
States.” Social Science Research, 29, 556–582.

Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., Kosterman, R., Abbott, R. And K.G. Hill. 1999. “Preventing
Adolescent Health-risk Behaviors by Strengthening Protection During Childhood.” Archives
of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 153, 226–234.

Huang, H., Hong, J.S. and D.L. Espelage. 2013. “Understanding Factors Associated with
Bullying and Peer Victimization in Chinese Schools Within Ecological Contexts.” Journal of
Child and Family Studies, Vol. 22, Pg. 881–892.

Ibrahim, A. and A. Hameed. 2006. “Mental health and psychosocial support aspects of
disaster preparedness in the Maldives.” International Review of Psychiatry, December 2006;
18(6): 573–578.




                                                                                         74
Innovations in Civic Participation. (n.d.) “India.” Available: http://www.icicp.org/resource-
library/icp-publications/global-youth-service-database/asia-and-the-pacific/south-asia-
2/india/

International Labour Organization (ILO). 2012. “Commercial Sexual Exploitation of
Children.” Available: http://www.ilo.org/ipec/areas/CSEC/lang--en/index.htm (last
accessed on February 8, 2014).

International Labour Oranization (ILO). (n.d.). “Why Should Youth be Engaged in Policy-
Making. Joining Forces with Young People.” Available:
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/employment/yen/downloads/youthguide/part2_why.p
df

International Labour Organization. (n.d.) “Youth Employment.” Available:
http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/youth-employment/lang--de/index.htm

International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF). 2008. “Socio-cultural Factors and
Unsafe Abortions in Maldives.” London: IPPF. Pg 3.

International Trade Union Confederation. 2009. “Internationally Recognized Core Labor
Standards in the Maldives.” Report For the World Trade Organization General Council
Review Of The Trade Policies Of Maldives. Executive Summary. Geneva, 26 and 28
October, 2009. Available: http://www.ituc-
csi.org/IMG/pdf/Trade_Policy_Review_Maldives_final_october_09_.pdf

ICPD 2014 Beyond – Maldives. (n.d.). “Workshop for the Maldivian Civil Society.”
Available: http://icpd20maldives.wordpress.com/ (last accessed on February 24, 2014).

Jarrett, R. L., Sullivan, P. J. and N.D. Watkins. 2005. “Developing Social Capital Through
Participation in Organized Youth Programs: Qualitative Insights From Three Programs.”
Journal of Community Psychology, 33, 41-55.

Joe-Cannon, I. (Ed.) and the Coalition against Trafficking in Women 2006. “Primer on the
Male Demand for Prostitution.” North Amherst, MA: Coalition against Trafficking in
Women. Available: http://action.web.ca/home/catw/attach/PRIMER.pdf.

Jorys, S. 2005. “Muslim by Law: A Right or a Violation of Rights? A Study About the
Maldives.” Pg. 14. Available:
www.maldivesculture.com/pdf_files/shirley_jorys_dissertation_muslim_by_law.pdf

Labont, R., Mohindra K. and T. Schrecker. 2011. “The Growing Impact of Globalization for
Health and Public Health Practice.” Annual Review of Public Health 2011; 32: 263–83.

Leach, F., Dunne, M. and F. Salvi. 2013. “School-related Gender-based Violence: A Global
Review of Current Issues and Approaches in Policy, Programming and Implementation
Responses to School-related Gender-based Violence (SRGBV) for the Education Sector.”
Background research paper prepared for UNESCO. University of Sussex.


                                                                                             75
Lerner, R. M. 2004. “Liberty: Thriving and Civic Engagement Among America’s Youth.”
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Lerner, R.M., Alberts, A.E. and D. L. Bobek. 2007. “Thriving Youth, Flourishing Civil
Society – How Positive Youth Development Strengthens Democracy and Social
Development.” A Report for the Carl Bertelsmann-Prize, 2007. Institute for Applied
Research in Youth Development, Tufts University. Available: http://www.bertelsmann-
stiftung.de/cps/rde/xbcr/SID-1E41F40A-
F4F5D67A/bst_engl/xcms_bst_dms_20913_20914_2.pdf

Levy, B. 1990. “Abusive Teen Dating Relationships: An Emerging Issue for the 90s.”
Response to the Victimization of Women and Children, 13 (1), 59.

Liou, C. 2013. “Using Social Media for the Prevention of Violence against Women. Lessons
Learned From Social Media Communication Campaigns to Prevent Violence against
Women in India, China and Viet Nam.” Working Paper 6. Bangkok: Partners4Prevention.

Lloyd C.B. (Ed.). 2005. “Growing Up Global: the Changing Transitions to Adulthood in
Developing Countries.” Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

Ludden, A. B. 2011. “Engagement in School and Community Civic Activities in Rural
Adolescents.” Journal of Youth Violence, 40, 1254-1270.

Lundgren, R. 2013. “Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Among Adolescents: Reviewing
the Evidence and Identifying the Way Forward.” Paper for Expert Group Meeting on
Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health, 4-6 February.

Maldives Police Service. “Crime Statistics 2012.” Available:
http://www.police.gov.mv/#eservice (last accessed on February 13, 2014).

Masten, A.S., and M.G.J. Reed. 2000. “Resilience in Development.” In C.R. Snyder and S.J.
Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of Positive Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.

Mathers, M., Toumbourou, J.W., Catalano, R.F.., Williams, J.,and G.C. Patton. 2006.
“Consequences of Youth Tobacco Use: a Review of Prospective Behavioural Studies.”
Addiction. 2006 July; 101(7):948-58.

McLanahan, S.S. and L. Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of Family
Disruption.” The American Journal of Sociology. Vol. 94, No. 1 (July), Pg. 130-152.

Ministry of Education. 2009. “Global School-based Student Health Survey.” Centre for
Disease Control and the World Health Organization.

Ministry of Education. 2012. “School Statistics 2012.” Malé: Ministry of Education,
Government of the Maldives.

Ministry of Education. 2013. “Education Statistics 2012.” Malé: Ministry of Education.


                                                                                         76
Ministry of Education. 2014. “Education Statistics 2013.” Malé: Ministry of Education.

Ministry of Education. 2014. “School Statistics 2013.” Malé: Ministry of Education.

Ministry of Health. 2001. “The Maldives Health Report 2001.” Available:
http://www.health.gov.mv/publications.asp?id=1

Ministry of Health. 2004. “National Reproductive Health Strategy 2005-2007.” Available:
http://www.health.gov.mv/latest%20publications/e-books.asp

Ministry of Health. 2004. “The Reproductive Health Survey.” Malé: Government of
Maldives and the United Nations Population Fund. Pg. 32.

Ministry of Health. 2005. “Emergency Preparedness and Response Health Sector Plan
(Draft).” Malé: Ministry of Health.

Ministry of Health and Family. 2009. “Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey.” Malé:
Ministry of Health and Family.

Ministry of Health and Family and ICF Macro. 2009. “Maldivian Demographic and Health
Survey. Preliminary Data.” Malé: Ministry of Health and Family. Available:
http://www.health.gov.mv/publications/MDHS%202009%20Preliminary%20Report_LAT
EST.pdf (last accessed on January 27, 2014).

Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2004. “Population Policy of the Maldives.”
Malé: Ministry of Planning and National Development.

Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2006. “Preliminary Results From the
Population and Housing Census 2006.” Malé: Ministry of Planning and National
Devlopment.
Ministry of Planning and National Development. 2007. “7th National Development Plan
2006-2010.” Malé: Ministry of Planning and National Development.

Minivan News. 2010. “Abortion in the Maldives.” 7 January, 2010. Available:
http://minivannews.com/society/abortion-in-the-maldives-the-untold-story-2191 (last
accessed on January 22, 2014).

Minkoff, D. C. 1997. “Producing Social Capital: National Social Movements and Civil
Society.” American Behavioral Scientist, 40(5), 606–619.

Mishra, N., Thakur, K.K., Koirala, R., Shrestha, D., Poudel, R. and R. Jha. 2010. “Corporal
Punishment in Nepalese School Children: Facts, Legalities and Implications.” Journal of
Nepal Pediatric Society, Vol. 30 Issue 2, Pg. 98-109.

Mott, F.L. 1994. “Sons, Daughters and Fathers’ Absence: Differentials in Father-leaving
Probabilities and in Home Environments.” Journal of Family Issues, Vol. 15, No. 1 (March),
Pg. 97-128.

                                                                                          77
Moya, Cecilia. 2012. “Creating Youth-Friendly Sexual Health Services in Sub-Saharan
Africa.” Advocates for Youth Publications. Available:
http://www.advocatesforyouth.org/publications/publications-a-z/549-creating-youth-
friendly-sexual-health-services-in-sub-saharan-africa

Muuss, R.E. 1996. “Theories of Adolescence (6th Edition).” New York: McGraw-Hill.

Naaz, A.A. 2002. “Country Report on Maldives.” Presented at the First Regional Meeting of
Technical Committee on Social Development, Kathmandu, Nepal.

Narcotics Control Board (NCB). 2003. “Rapid Situation Assessment of Drug Abuse in
Maldives 2003.”

National Archives and Records Administration. “Background Notes on Countries of the
World: Maldives.” Washington, D.C.: National Archives and Records Administration.
Available http://www.gpo.gov/ (Last accessed on January 18, 2014).

O’Keefe, M. 2005. “Teen Dating Violence: A Review of Risk Factors and Prevention
Efforts.” Harrisburg: National Resource Center on Domestic Violence.

Olewus, D. 1993. “Bullying at School.” Oxford: Blackwell.

Osorio, C. G. and D.E. Fonseka. 2013. “Maldives Development Update.” Washington,
D.C.: World Bank. Available:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/10/18612521/maldives-development-
update (last accessed January 22, 2014).

Patterson, J., and R.W. Blum. 1996. “Risk and resilience among Children and Youth with
Disabilities.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 150:692-98.

Pawlak, P. and J. Sass. 2014. “School-related Gender-Based Violence in the Asia-Pacific
Region.” Bangkok: UNESCO.

Pearrow, M.M. 2008. “A Critical Examination of an Urban-based Youth Empowerment
Strategy: The Teen Empowerment Program.” Journal of Community Practice, 16 (4), 509-
525.

Pereznieto, P., Harper, C., Clench, B. and J. Coarasa. 2010. “The Economic Impact of
School Violence.” Woking and London: Plan International and Overseas Development
Institute.

Plan International. 2008. “Learn Without Fear: The global campaign to end violence in
schools.” Woking: Plan International.

The President’s Office and Television Maldives. 2005. “The Tsunami disaster in the
Maldives.” Male: Government of Maldives. DVD.


                                                                                          78
Raajje Foundation. 2009. “NGO Capacity and Need Assessment.” Malé: Raajje Foundation.

Rasheed, Z. “Maldives Holds Guinness World Record for Divorce Rate.” Minivan News. 22
January, 2014. Available: http://minivannews.com/society/maldives-holds-guinness-world-
record-for-divorce-rate-75770

Reporters without Borders. 2013. “2013 World Press Freedom Index: Dashed Hopes after
Spring.” Available: http://en.rsf.org/press-freedom-index-2013,1054.html (last accessed on
February 10, 2014).

Reid, K. 1989. “Bullying and Persistent School Absenteeism.” In Tattum, D. and D. Lane D.
(Eds.) Bullying in Schools. Stoke on Trent: Trentham Books.

Resnick, M. and M. Hojat. 1998. “Protecting Adolescents from Harm: Findings from the
National Longitudinal Study on Adolescent Health.” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 278(10): 823-32.

Ricardo C., Eads, M., and Barker, G. 2011. “Engaging Boys and Men in the Prevention of
Sexual Violence.” Pretoria: Sexual Violence Research Initiative and Promundo. Available:
http://www.svri.org/menandboys.pdf (last accessed on March 5, 2014).

Ries, A.V., Gittelsohn, J., Voorhees, C.C., Roche, K.M., Clifton, K.J and N.M. Astone. 2008.
“The Environment and Urban Adolescents' Use of Recreational Facilities for Physical
Activity: a Qualitative Study.” American Journal of Health Promotion, 2008 Sep-Oct;
23(1):43-50.

Roth, J., Brooks-Gunn, J., Murray, L. and W. Foster. 1998. “Promotion of Healthy
Adolescents: Synthesis of Youth Development Program Evaluations.” Journal of Research
on Adolescence, 8(4):423-59.

Rothman, E. and D. Hemenway. 2005. “Batterers’ Use of Guns to Threaten Intimate
Partners.” Journal of the American Medical Women’s Association, 2005, 60:62–68.

Rutter, M. 1993. “Resilience: Some Conceptual Considerations.” Journal of Adolescent
Health, 14:626-31.

Shakoor, A. 2001. “Country Report on Maldives.” Presented at the Twenty Fifth meeting of
Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, Asia and Pacific, 15-18 October 2001.

Sharp, S. 1995. “How Much Does Bullying Hurt? The Effects of Bullying on the Personal
Well-being and Educational Progress of Secondary Aged Students.” Educational and Child
Psychology, 12.

Sharp, S. 1996. “Self Esteem, Response Style and Victimisation: Possible Ways of Preventing
Victimisation Through Parenting and School Based Training Programmes.” School
Psychology International, 17.



                                                                                           79
Simons, R.I., Lin, K.H., and L.C. Gordon. 1998. “Socialization in the Family of Origin and
Male Dating Violence: A Prospective Study.” Journal of Marriage and the Family, 60: Pg.
467–478.

Smith, J., Twemlow, S. W., and D.W. Hoover. 1999. “Bullies, Victims and Bystanders: A
Method of In-school Intervention and Possible Parental Contributions.” Child Psychiatry
and Human Development, 30, 29-37.

The Sunday Morning Herald. 2012. “Maldives Women Face More Repression Under a
Rising Tide of Religious Fundamentalism, Reports Ben Doherty from Male.” 25 January
2012. Available: http://www.smh.com.au/world/female-circumcision-fear-as-
fundamentalists-roll-back-womens-rights-20120124-1qflv.html (last accessed on March 12,
2014).

Thalagala, Neil. 2008. “Sociocultural Factors and Unsafe Abortions in Maldives: Qualitative
Perspectives.”

Thindwa, J., Edgerton, J. and R. Forster. 2005. Community Based Performance Monitoring
(CBPM): Empowering and Giving Voice to Local Communities.Washington, D.C: World
Bank.

Transparency International. 2013. “Global Corruption Report: Education.” London and
New York: Transparency International. Available:
http://www.transparency.de/fileadmin/pdfs/Wissen/Korruptionsindices/Global_Corrupti
on_Report_2013__Education.pdf

United Nations (UN). 2005. “World Youth Report: Young People Today, and in 2015.”
Pg.73-4 Available: http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unyin/documents/wyr05book.pdf (last
accessed on March 7, 2014).

United Nations (UN). 2012. “Emerging Theme: Engaging Young Women And Men, Girls
And Boys, To Advance Gender Equality Emerging Issues, Trends And New Approaches To
Issues Affecting The Situation Of Women Or Equality Between Women And Men: A
Political And Legislative Approach.” Rozaina Adam, Member Of Parliament, Maldives.
Interactive Expert Panel. United Nations Commission On The Status Of Women, Fifty-
Sixth Session, 27 February – 9 March 2012; New York. Available:
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/csw/csw56/panels/panel5-emerging-theme-
Adam.pdf

United Nations (UN). 2012. “Millennium Development Goals Indicators: Data for the
Maldives.” Available: http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/data.aspx, updated July 2012 (last
accessed on January 22, 2014)

United Nations (UN). 2014. “Framework of Actions for the follow-up to the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development Beyond 2014.”
Available: http://icpdbeyond2014.org/uploads/browser/files/93632_unfpa_eng_web.pdf



                                                                                          80
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and United Nations Department of Social
Affairs (DESA). 2002. “Abortion Policy: Maldives.”

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2004. “Gender Issues in the Criminal
Justice System of the Maldives.” University of Melbourne, 2 September 2004.

United Nations Devleopment Programme (UNDP). 2008. “Biological and Behavioral Survey
on HIV and AIDS.” Available:
http://www.health.gov.mv/HIV/BBS%20Maldives%202008.pdf (Last accessed on Jan 26,
2014).

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2011. “Prison Assessment and
Proposed Rehabilitation and Reintegration of Offenders Report.” Government of Maldives
and UNDP.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2011. “Summary Report -
Comprehensive Study of The Maldivian Civil Society.” Male: UNDP in the Maldives and the
Government of Maldives. Available: http://homeaffairs.gov.mv/files/Summary-
Comprehensive-Study-of-the-Maldivian-Civil-Society.pdf (last accessed on February 17,
2014).

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (n.d.) “Health
Education - Homophobic Bullying.” Available:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-
agenda/health-education/homophobic-bullying/bullying/

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 2013. “What
do we mean by youth?” Available:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/youth/youth-
definition/

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 2013. “Joint
Statement on the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women.” 25
November, 2013. Available: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/resources/in-
focus-articles/international-day-for-the-elimination-of-violence-against-women/ (last
accessed on January 15, 2014)

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (n.d.). The
Education for All Movement.” Available:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-
agenda/education-for-all/ (last accessed on February 6, 2014).

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 1994. “First Country Programme.” Malé:
Maldives.

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2003. “Reproductive and Sexual Health of
Adolescents in the Maldives.” Report submitted to UNRC and prepared by Simad Saeed,


                                                                                         81
Ibrahim Naseem, Dheena Moosa, Ahmed Afaal. Available:
http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/maldives/drive/RSHAintheMaldives20June2003.pdf

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2004. “IPCD + 10 and Beyond: Progress,
Achievements and Challenges in the Maldives 1994-2004.” Pg. 5. Available:
http://countryoffice.unfpa.org/maldives/drive/Brochure_on_IPCD+10_Review_Report_2
004.pdf

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2005. “Maldives: Youth Voices Report 2005.”
Malé: UNFPA.

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 2006. “Policy and Programming for
HIV/AIDS & Reproductive Health of Young People in South Asia.” Kathmandu, Nepal:
UNFPA CST for South and West Asia.

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2011. “Reproductive Health Knowledge and
Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the Maldives.” Malé: UNFPA.

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2012. “ICPD Beyond 2014. Maldives
Operational Review 2012. Progress, Challenges and Way forward.” Malé: UNFPA and the
Government of Maldives, Department of National Planning. Available:
http://www.planning.gov.mv/publications/2013/ICPD%20Beyond%202014%20-
%20Maldives%20Operational%20Review%202012-13.05.2013.pdf (last accessed on January
30, 2014).

United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). 2013. “Child Marriage in South Asia: Realities,
Responses and the Way Forward.” Paper prepared by Tina Khanna, Ravi Verma and Ellen
Weiss. Available:
https://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Child_marriage_paper%20in%20South%20Asia.2
013.pdf

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2002. “Working For and With Adolescents –
Some UNICEF Examples.”

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2009. “Progress for Children: A Report Card
on Child Protection. New York: UNICEF.

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2009. “Overcoming Barriers to Girls’
Education in South Asia. Deepening the Analysis.” Kathmandu: UNICEF Regional Office
for South Asia (ROSA). Available: http://www.unicef.org/rosa/whole_book_b.pdf.

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2009. “State of the Worlds Children 2009.”

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2011. “The State of the World’s Children
2011.” New York: UNICEF.

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). 2014. “Youth in the Maldives: Challenges and
Recommendations.” Draft. Malé: UNICEF (unpublished).

                                                                                       82
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA). 2012. “Strategy on Adolescents and Youth.”

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2013. “National Drug Use Survey.
Maldives - 2011/2012.” Malé: UNODC.

United Nations Women (UN Women). 2012. “Working With Men and Boys to Promote
Gender Equality: A Review of the Field and Emerging Approaches.” Expert paper prepared
by Dean Peacock and Gary Barker for the Expert Group Meeting on the Prevention of
Violence Against Women and Girls. Bangkok, Thailand; 17-20 September 2012.

U.S. Census Bureau. International Database. Available:
http://www.census.gov/population/international/data/idb/informationGateway.php (last
accessed on March 8, 2014).

U.S. Department of State. 2010. “U.S. Department of State’s 2010 Human Rights Reports.”
Available: http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/

U.S. Department of State. 2013. “Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2013.” Available:
http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/hrrpt/humanrightsreport/index.htm#wrapper (last
accessed on March 20, 2014).

U.S. Department of State. 2014. “Maldives Factsheet 2014.” Available:
http://www.state.gov/p/sca/ci/mv/ (last accessed on March 8, 2014).

Volunteer Service Overseas (VSO). 2005. “Learning from Listening - A policy report on
Maldivian teachers’ attitudes to their own profession.” London: VSO.

Wenk, D., Hardesty, C.L., Morgan, C.S. and S.L. Blair. 1994. “The Influence of Parental
Involvement on the Well-Being of Sons and Daughters.” Journal of Marriage and Family,
Vol. 56, No. 1 (February), Pg. 229-234.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2002. “Fact Sheet on Youth Violence.” Available:
http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/global_campaign/en/youthviole
ncefacts.pdf (last accessed on March 5, 2014).

World Health Organization (WHO). 2005. “Mental health and psychosocial relief efforts
after the tsunami in South-East Asia.”

World Health Organization (WHO). 2012. “Making Health Services Adolescent Friendly:
Developing National Quality Standards for Adolescent Friendly Health Services. WHO:
Geneva. Available:
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/75217/1/9789241503594_eng.pdf

World Bank. 2000. “Trinidad and Tobago. Youth and Social Development. An Integrated
Approach for Social Inclusion.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

                                                                                          83
World Bank. (n.d.) Online Statistical Database. Available:
http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/maldives (last accessed on January 22,
2014).

World Bank. (n.d.) “Social Accountability Case Examples: Education.” Available at:
https://saeguide.worldbank.org/sites/worldbank.org.saeguide/files/documents/Edu%20M
ENA%20Egypt.pdf

World Bank, Asian Development Bank and the United Nations System. 2005. “The Impact
of the Tsunami: Joint Needs Assessment.”

World Bank. 2010. “The Challenge of Youth Employment in Sri Lanka.” R. Gunatilaka, M.
Mayer and M. Vodopivec (Eds.). Washington D.C.: World Bank. Pg. 4-5. Available:
http://www.unicef.org/srilanka/challenge_youth_unemployment.pdf (last accessed on
February 25, 1014).

World Bank. 2010. “Challenge of Youth Unemployment.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Pg. 189.

World Bank. 2011. “Higher Education in the Maldives: An Evolving Seascape.” South Asia
Human Development Sector. Report No. 36. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

World Bank. 2013. “Project Information Document. Education Sector Development
Project. South Asia, Maldives.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
World Bank. 2014. “Maldives - Interim strategy note for the period FY14-FY16.”
Washington, D.C. ; World Bank.

World Food Programme (WFP). 2005. “Rapid Assessment Report of the Impact of the
Tsunami in the Maldives.” Rome: WFP.
Ybarra, M. and K. Mitchell. 2004. “Online Aggressor/targets, Aggressors and Targets: A
Comparison of Associated Youth Characteristics.” Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 45:7 (2004), Pg. 1308-1316.

Youniss, J., Bales, S., Christmas-Best, V., Diversi, M., McLaughlin, M. and R. Silbereisen.
2002. “Youth Civic Engagement in the Twenty-first Century.” Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 12, 121–148.




                                                                                              84
                     ANNEX 1. OTHER DATA SOURCES
     2004, In-Depth Study on All Forms of Violence Against Women, which was a qualitative
      research study carried out by the Ministry of Gender, Family Development and Social
      Security, and included 6 FGD with men and women ages 15-49 in 3 age categories (15-20,
      20-35, 35-49). Each group consisted of 8-10 participants. The research also included three
      FGDs in three hospitals with nurses and doctors, discussions with police were held, and
      three in-depth interviews with survivors of GBV were conducted.
     2005, A Policy Report on Maldivian Teachers Attitudes to Their Own Profession,
      involved a total of 11 schools, including small island community schools, atoll schools,
      atoll education centers and schools on the capital island, and a total of 104 participants
      were interviewed, including 79 teachers, 13 supervisors, 3 VSO teachers and 9 head
      teachers.
     2011, Reproductive Health Knowledge and Behavior of Young Unmarried Women in the
      Maldives study, which included FGDs and in-depth interviews with women of
      reproductive age above 18. A total of 3 FGDs were conducted, consisting of 27
      participants, including a youth group of eight participants between the ages of 18 and 22
      (FGD-1), a mixture of 10 young and older participants ranging between 19 and 48 (FGD-
      2), the majority of whom were in their twenties and thirties; and an older group of nine
      participants between 44 and 62 years (FGD-3).
     2012, ICPD BEYOND 2014 Maldives Operational Review included 19 stakeholder
      meetings and in-depth interviews, as well as FGDs in 13 islands with members of the
      community, including migrants, vulnerable people including single mothers, the elderly
      and youth. 27 officials were consulted from line ministries, consultations were held with 4
      key figures from the community, and FGDs were conducted with 200 individuals.
     2012, Workshop, part of the Maldives Country Review for the ICPD 2014 Survey,
      included 20 participants. Youth and adults representing various NGOs in the Maldives
      and representatives from the stakeholder ministries and institutions took part in the
      workshop.
     2012, ICPD+20 Review, which included FGDs at Hdh. Kulhudhufushi, Hdh.
      Neykurendhoo, Hdh. Kurinbee, Hdh. Nolhivaram and Hdh. Nolhivaramfaru in Haa
      Dhaal Atoll as part of the review process, and included interviews with youth and adult
      participants representing the education sector, health sector, island councils, women’s
      development committees, youth development committees, NGO’s and residents of the
      island. An average of 15 participants joined the discussion from each island.

In addition, the following Maldives-specific surveys, statistics, reports and publications were
     reviewed

     2005, Emergency Preparedness and Response Health Sector Plan (draft) (Ministry of
      Health)
                                                 85
   2006, Population and Housing Census 2006 (Ministry of Planning and National
    Development)
   2007, Maldives: Gender and Development Assessment conducted by the Asian
    Development Bank
   2009, Internationally Recognized Core Labor Standards In The Maldives - Review Of
    The Trade Policies Of Maldives (International Trade Union Confederation)
   2009, Global School-based Student Health Survey (Ministry of Education, Centre for
    Disease Control, and WHO)
   2009, Maldivian Demographic and Health Survey 2009 (Ministry of Health and Family)
   2010, U.S. Department of State’s 2010 Human Rights Report - Maldives (U.S.
    Department of State)
   2010, Activities Addressing the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Human Rights
    Commission of the Maldives 2010)
   2011, Comprehensive Study of the Maldivian Civil Society (UNDP and the Government
    of Maldives)
   2011, Maternal Health, Sexual Reproductive Health and Rights, Gender Equality and
    Women’s Empowerment: A Rapid Situation Assessment of the Maldives (Asian-Pacific
    Resource & Research Centre for Women)
   2011, Maldives Statistical Yearbook 2011 (Department of National Planning)




                                           86
 ANNEX 2. CURSORY SCAN OF YOUTH POLICIES AND
           PROGRAMS IN THE MALDIVES
Youth Policy (2003) (only available in the Dhivehi language)

The Maldivian Government, in an attempt to address the issues faced by the youth, issued
the “Youth Policy 2003.” Since then, the Maldives has gone through significant changes,
such as the enactment of a new constitution in 2008, the creation of political parties, and the
first multi-party election in 2008. Further, the report found that a number of structural
changes may have had an impact on youth since then, including the general presence of an
increasing youth population, increased engagement of young people in various areas, an
increase in drug use and peddling, and involvement in serious and organized crimes, traffic
violations and gang activities. However the country still lacks appropriate legislation related
to youth.

With the majority of the population belonging to youth groups, special emphasis is given by
the government to youth development. The National Youth Council (NYC) was created in
1980 to coordinate and advise on youth activities, and to plan and implement youth
development programs. NYC acts as an advisory body to the Minister of Human Resources,
Youth and Sports. NYC membership is by appointment by the Minister. It is the national
coordinating body for youth affairs, advising the Minister in collaboration with the Youth
Department, YHC and other concerned organs of MHRYS. Its main functions are the
following:

      Advocate active youth citizenry- engagement, leadership and voice for issues through
       programming, resources, funding and recognition.
      Connect the youth sector for increased youth outreach, through creating
       opportunities and access, both local and overseas.
      Enable the development of youth and the youth sector, through training and
       capacity building.
NYC advises the Minister on Youth Day activities, the National Youth Awards, the Youth
Challenge and the Youth conference, and is the liaison body with the Commonwealth Youth
Caucus and other international partners. NYC advises the Minister on ways to strengthen
and support the programs and activities of youth clubs, associations and NGOs. NYC
stresses that MHRYS focus on youth friendly services, as well as harmonizing and
prioritizing youth participation and voice at sectoral level discussions. NYC advises on
compiling a National Youth Policy and Youth Act. NYC liaises with the UNFPA, UNICEF
and other multilateral bodies.

Civic Engagement

                                              87
Youth Centers and Youth Health Café

To address the lack of access to sporting facilities in the islands, the Ministry of Human
Resources, Youth and Sports undertook a project to develop youth centers in the atolls.
Youth centers have been established throughout the country during the last two decades to
cater to the various social and vocational needs of the youth population. The main objective
of these centers is to provide facilities for youth development programs at the island level.
The Youth Health Café (YHC), established in Malé under the Ministry of Human Resources,
Youth and Sports (MHRYS), has provided skills training programs, awareness programs on
sexual, reproductive and mental health issues, and has fostered youth volunteerism.
Additionally, the Youth Health Café has facilitated youth career guidance programs, different
outreach programs in several thematic areas, and offers counseling services for youth.
Currently however, this is countered by a lack of support at policymaking levels within the
Ministry of Youth and Sports, leading to slow progress in addressing youth health issues,
insufficient human resources, few training opportunities, and an inadequate allocation of
funding.

Further, under the privatization policy of the government, the management and operation of
those youth centers was outsourced to local private parties in the atolls. However, in the
development of facilities and services at the youth centers, they have not consulted or sought
contribution from young people and community members at large. As a result, in some
islands, youth centers are running more on a commercial basis than as youth target
initiatives. The services available at these youth centers are limited to few indoor games such
as billiards, table tennis, chess and garlando. The existing youth centers do not have youth
ownership and fail to serve as community connectors.

Employment

Program Example: Technical and Vocational Education Programme (TVET)

To address the critical issue of inadequate employment opportunities for youth, the
government established the Technical and Vocational Education Programme (TVET) in
2005. The main objective of TVET is to create a skilled workforce to meet labor market
demands. Since its inception, the program has been diversified to offer trainings on
hospitality and tourism, construction and building, agriculture, electrical wiring and
engineering and handicrafts. As of 2010, a total of 1,351 people had graduated from TVET
and an additional 4,767 students were being trained through 82 training providers.


Health

Youth Reproductive Health

        Population Policy identifies Goal 14: “Provide population education to children,
         adolescents and adults.”
        ICPD+10 and Beyond: Progress, Achievements and Challenges in the Maldives
         (1994-2004) identifies priority actions that include “[a]dressing the needs of youth through
                                                88
           the provision of information and services, promoting responsible behaviour through strengthening life
           skills education in schools and out of school youth and carrying out awareness campaigns through
           media on issues of drug use, unsafe sex, gender based violence etc. and their implications.”
          National Reproductive Health Strategy 2005-2007 identifies adolescent sexual and
           reproductive health as a thematic area, with the goal to “improve the sexual and
           reproductive health of adolescents (10-19) and young people (15-24) in the Maldives.” 227
          7th National Development Plan 2006-2010 identifies the need to promote awareness
           of RH among adolescents.
          Health Master Plan 1996-2005 reports that ‘adolescent health’ has only been
           addressed within the framework of maternal and child health, and has not been
           differentiated as a focus area within the health sector… The plan contains reports of
           premarital sexual activity, unsafe sexual practices, and unsafe abortion among
           adolescents, but restricts strategies to raising awareness on SH needs in schools.228
          SH policies continue to consistently reflect commitment to promoting awareness
           despite persistent reports and research findings showing the need for services to deal
           with STIs, unwanted pregnancies, and unsafe abortions. Similarly, there are
           numerous strategies targeting HIV/AIDS, despite low incidence and high levels of
           knowledge of HIV/AIDS, and low knowledge of other STIs. For instance, National
           Youth Policy notes youth health as one of 9 key issues: [Unofficial translation as
           offered in Hameed, 2011] “The most serious issues affecting the health of young men and
           women are because of their habits and lifestyles. Low consumption of healthy food, smoking, and
           drug abuse may be noted in particular. Also the importance of family planning.” 229


Abortion

Abortion is criminalized in the Maldives, although the practice is permitted in the case of
pregnancies where the fetus is diagnosed with thalassemia.

Drug and Substance Abuse

In light of the high prevalence of drug use among youth in the Maldives and the early age of
initiation and first injection, the Government of Maldives launched a one of its kind policy.
The new Drug Act 17/2011 launched in by the Government of Maldives has been a major
milestone for addressing drug abuse in the country. The law clearly has a provision for
treating drug users, rather than simply promoting incarceration. Under this act, the National




227 The strategy also identifies the following objectives: (1) 50% of adolescents and youth (10-24 years) have access to age appropriate
information related to SRH, (2) ASRH Life Skills Education provided to at least 75% of adolescents/young people in selected schools in
Malé, (3) Develop and pilot youth-friendly services on SRH” (P.13)
228 Quoted from Hameed, S. 2012. “Sexual Health Policies and Youth: A Case Study of the Maldives.” Thesis submitted to the Department

of Social Policy at the London School of Economics for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, London, June 2012. London School of
Economics and Political Science.
229 Among the strategies: (1) Promote awareness about HIV/AIDS and other STIs, (2) Promote awareness about nutrition, family

planning, and early marriage.

                                                                  89
Drug Agency has been mandated as the lead agency dealing with all issues related to drug
prevention, harm reduction and treatment.230

Other Health-related Information

There is a complete lack of national policy, nor is there any form of legislation on
occupational health and safety. There is no national legislation to the protect health and
safety of the workers. The National Employment Act refers only to the notification of work-
related injuries requiring medical attention. There is no provision for punitive action for
non-compliance.

Youth with Disabilities

Action Plan for Children with Disabilities (2008 – 2013) includes provisions addressing
youth with disabilities. For instance, to tackle the issue of employment for youth with
disabilities (Article 27 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the
Draft National Policy on Disability, Goal 8 of the 7th National Development Plan – Social
Security, strategy 3.1.) the policy calls on the following actions to be undertaken within the
framework:

            Development of vocational education training schemes for students graduating from
             Special Education Needs (SEN) units, which could be done by expanding existing
             mechanisms for vocational training within the Ministry of Higher Education,
             Employment and Social Security to include a mandatory intake of youths with
             disabilities.
            Advocacy efforts by the Ministry of Gender and Family for the Civil Service
             Commission to consider starting a traineeship program for youths with disabilities, in
             order to train them to work within government Ministries.

To address issues related to access to sports and social activities for youth with disabilities
(Article 7, 30 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Draft
National Policy on Disability. Goal 4 of 7th National Development Plan – Leisure and
Recreation, policies 1 and 2, Goal 2 of 7th National Development Plan – Sports, policies
3.2/4.2.), it suggests the basic target of one major sporting event to be held and televised for
children or youths with disabilities by the end of 2010. Further it recommends the following
actions to be undertaken:

            The Ministry of Youth and Sports will work with the Ministry of Education to
             provide sporting and social opportunities for the students attending SEN units.
            Mentoring programs will be introduced in association with either guides/scouts or
             with Youth Empowerment projects. These will be extended to include social clubs
             for children and youths with disabilities and holding sporting events for children
             with disabilities alongside other major sporting events.
            The ministry responsible for gender supports any groups of children or youths with


230   United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2013. “National Drug Use Survey. Maldives - 2011/2012.” Malé: UNODC.
                                                               90
        disabilities by providing information and materials in accessible formats.

Violence and Crime

Gender-Based Violence

Legislation does not exist to protect young women, or all women for that matter, from
sexual harassment in the workplace, custodial violence and elderly abuse in the Maldives.
Rape, when it occurs within the marital context, is not a criminal offense. Legislative
frameworks in the Maldives currently enable, to varying degrees, the prosecution of zina
crimes pertaining to extra-marital sexual relations. Penalties for such crimes may include
public lashings, which are typically considered inhumane by the international community.
Maldives should move immediately towards abolishing laws pertaining to zina, which
disproportionately harm women. Inheritance law in the Maldives is inherently based upon
Sharia law, and does not enable women to acquire shares of inheritance equal to male heirs.
Such discriminatory inheritance law has harmful economic implications for women, and
must be critically assessed and reformed.

Existing laws and policies which seek to address various types of violence against women
and girls, as well as men and boys, have several inherent shortcomings. Such laws are not age
specific, and they generally do not take into consideration different stages of the life cycle.
Existing protocols and mechanisms to deal with issues of domestic violence, including the
Domestic Violence Prevention Act, have yet to be fully implemented. The Child Sex Abuse
Act (2009) does not recognize, for instance, sexual offences perpetrated by an adult who is
legally married to a child under Sharia as a crime. Further, the Sexual Harassment Bill has
been drafted but not passed.

Corporal Punishment (Selection from the “The Maldives –Country Report,” Global Initiative to End All
Corporal Punishment of Children, 2013)

Corporal punishment is lawful in the home. There is no legal defense for its use by parents
in the Penal Code 1968 (amended 2002), but legal provisions against violence and abuse are
not interpreted as prohibiting corporal punishment of children. In information provided to
the Human Rights Committee in 2012, the Government asserted that the Law on the
Protection of the Rights of the Child 1991 “prohibits corporal punishment in homes,
schools and the penal system of any person under the age of 18” (5 July 2012,
CCPR/C/MDV/Q/1/Add.1, Written replies to the Human Rights Committee, para. 73). In
fact, article 18 of the Law prohibits only punishment of a degree which is considered to
harm the child: “No child shall, even as a measure of discipline, be subjected to punishment
which may cause physical injury or which may be detrimental to the health of the child.”
Furthermore, at the same time as stating that all corporal punishment is prohibited the
Government confirmed that it had “identified the actions and measures to prohibit all
corporal punishment in all settings including law reform and an anti-corporal punishment
campaign is planned for 2013” (5 July 2012, CCPR/C/MDV/Q/1/Add.1, Written replies to
the Human Rights Committee, para. 74).


                                                 91
There is no explicit prohibition of all corporal punishment in schools. Article 10 of the Law
on the Protection of the Rights of the Child 1991 states that punishment in school “must be
appropriate to the age of the child and should not be physically or psychologically harmful to
the child”. The Ministry of Education has stated that corporal punishment should not be
used, but the draft Penal Code introduces a legal defence for the use of corporal punishment
by teachers (see under “Home”). An Education Bill has been under discussion since 2009: it
was reviewed by the Committee on National Development in October 2012 and
recommendations for further amendments were made but we have no detailed information
on the proposed provisions.

Corporal punishment is lawful in alternative care settings. The draft Penal Code would
provide a legal defence for the use of force to punish children in institutions and other care
settings. In 2010 regulations for children’s homes were being drafted which would reportedly
prohibit corporal punishment (National action plan to prohibit all corporal punishment,
SAIEVAC workshop on Legal Reform and Corporal Punishment, November 2010,
Kathmandu).


Education

         Concerned with the quality of school teachers as being central to the improvement
          of education in the Maldives, the Ministry of Education introduced a policy initiative
          for the establishment of a sound quality assurance framework for the national school
          system.231 The MOE has developed a quality assurance mechanism, which now needs
          to be pilot tested, refined and scaled up throughout the country. The government
          established pre-service teacher education that is offered by several institutions in the
          Maldives, including the Faculty of Education and the Centre for Open Learning of
          the Maldives National University, as well as in private higher education institutions
          such as Mandhu College and Villa College. The number of teachers graduating from
          these institutions, however, is too low to meet the needs of the national education
          system.232

         Further, the government has established a professional development policy for
          teachers. The professional hubs for teacher development in the Maldives are the
          Centre for Continuing Education (CCE) at the central level, and the Teacher
          Resource Centers (TRCs) at regional levels, respectively. In-service teacher training is
          aimed at the following categories of teachers: (a) unqualified teachers (mainly
          certification courses); (b) teachers requiring skills upgrading; (c) teachers needing
          preparation for new roles, such as teacher educators or principals; and (d) curriculum
          related training, particularly when there are curriculum changes in the education
          system or when teachers require refresher courses. The in-service teacher training
          programs are mainly off-site programs, delivered through the TRCs or in Malé (off-


231 Osorio, C. G. and D.E. Fonseka. 2013. “Maldives Development Update.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Available:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/10/18612521/maldives-development-update (last accessed January 22, 2014).
232 Ibid.

                                                              92
           site in-service teacher training is known to have limited impact internationally).233

          In order to improve teachers’ motivation and performance, a hardship allowance was
           introduced in 2005 in order to promote local teachers in the atolls. This incentive
           encouraged some local teachers and principals to work in schools in remote atolls.

          While a conceptual framework for quality assurance in the Maldives has been
           prepared, it has not been implemented effectively. A comprehensive tool kit for the
           evaluation of school performance was developed, which is intended to facilitate the
           assessment of educational processes by schools, self-assessment, provincial and
           national level authorities, and by external assessments.

          Another policy worth considering is the Professional Development Policy, which is
           intended to offer extra training and aid for employees working in the field of
           education. The policy is available at:
           http://www.cce.edu.mv/uploads/CCE/policies/Professional%20Development%20
           Policy%20of%20Education.pdf).


Gender

The Ministry of Health and Gender oversees the institutional mechanism for the
advancement of women in the Maldives. Traditional gender roles continue to exist in the
Maldives and hinder women and men from fully enjoying the benefits of a gender equitable
society. Gender sensitization work is consistently carried out by the Ministry of Health and
Gender at various levels and through different mediums, including media advocacy and
social interaction.

          The Maldives ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
           Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in July 1993.
          The Maldives has also acceded to the Optional Protocol of CEDAW on March 13,
           2006.
          The Maldives is party to the Beijing Platform for Action, the Commonwealth Plan of
           Action on Gender and Development, the SAARC Plan of Action on the Girl Child,
           and the SAARC Convention on Preventing and Combating Trafficking in Women
           and Children for Prostitution.

A Gender Management System based on the Commonwealth model was put in place in
2001 under the government policy of gender mainstreaming. The basic structures for this
system are in place, with the establishment of a Gender Equality Council in December 2001,
and the appointment of focal points in all sectors. Work continues in regard to strengthening
the system through capacity building and advocacy. The Seventh National Development



  Harris, D., and T. Sass. 2011. “Teacher Training, Teacher Quality, and Student Achievement.” Journal of Public Economics. 95: 798-
233

812.
                                                                 93
Plan reaffirms gender mainstreaming as a priority and incorporates gender as a cross-cutting
issue.

The National Policy on Gender has been formulated, and it came into effect on April 5,
2006. The following steps have been taken to establish gender equity and equality in the
Maldives:

      Gender mainstreaming for the effective inclusion of gender concerns in all policies,
       programs and projects.
      Empowerment of women to ensure the participation of women in the political,
       social and economic spheres.
      Advocacy and gender sensitization.
      Combating gender-based violence.
      Implementation of CEDAW.
      Collecting sex-disaggregated data, and analyzing this data from a gender perspective.
      Legal review and reform with a focus on gender in the criminal justice system.
      Establishing a decentralized social protection service for women.




                                             94
                       Protecting Rights of Children Framework

Policies and activities carried out to protect the rights of children include:

      The signing of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child on August 21, 1990
       (the Convention was ratified on February 11, 1991 and two optional protocols to the
       Convention were ratified by the Maldives on May 10, 2002).
      Designing and commemoration of the Year of the Maldivian Child in 1991.
      Convening of the National Conference on Children in 1991.
      The enactment in 1991 of a law entitled the Protection of the Rights of Children.
      The preparation of a National Plan of Action based on the Declaration and the goals
       set for the 1990s by the World Summit for Children.
      The establishment in 1992 of a National Council consisting of senior representatives
       of Government Ministries and civil society to provide policy directions and guidance
       in the monitoring and implementation of the provisions of the law on the Rights of
       the Children and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
      The establishment in 1992 of a Unit for the Rights of Children (URC) to monitor the
       implementation of the provisions of the Law on the Rights of Children and the
       Convention on the Rights of the Child. The URC is also responsible for providing
       counselling services to children and families, extending technical support to
       rehabilitation efforts at institutions for children in difficult circumstances and
       collecting data regarding vulnerable children.
      On the Maldives initiative, SAARC member countries formulated a SAARC
       Convention on Regional Arrangements for the Promotion of Child Welfare in South
       Asia. The Convention was adopted during the 11th SAARC Summit.
      Developments in the area of juvenile justice include the establishment of a Juvenile
       Court on August 1, 1997, and the establishment of the Family and Child Protection
       Unit (FCPU) at the Police Headquarters. The URC, the FCPU and the Juvenile
       Court continue to build a multi-disciplinary approach to juvenile delinquency at
       island and atoll levels, and they strive to mainstream child protection through the
       inclusion of child protection awareness by training island/atoll leaders.
      Some national laws have been reviewed and amended in line with the Convention on
       the Rights of the Child. These include regulations in relation to juvenile justice that
       have been amended to restrict criminal proceedings against children in favor of
       rehabilitation, and the rules and regulations related to the employment of children.
      A family law was enacted in 2000 and came into effect in July 2001.
      Additional mechanisms are being piloted since December 2000 to strengthen child
       protection nation- wide.
      A special website of the URC was launched on May 10, 2001.
      A National Plan of Action (NPA) towards the wellbeing of children in the Maldives
       for the decade 2001-2010 was prepared through a consultative process with
       participation by stakeholders, including children. The NPA was based on the
       recommendations outlined by a 2002 UN General Assembly report “A World Fit for
       Children.”

                                             95
   Future priorities to strengthen child protection measures in the Maldives include:

          Reviewing the existing Law on the Protection of the Rights of Children.
          Assessing the situation of children regularly, to identify and target services for
           vulnerable groups.
          Further training of child protection workers in all the islands, who assist children
           in difficult circumstances.
          Conduct situational analysis for all atolls, through island-level consultations, to
           evaluate the needs of the community prior to the establishment of the Child
           Protection System.
          Create awareness on child protection issues through the media and print
           material.
          Develop clear and standard procedures and protocols in consultation with all
           stakeholders, in working towards the protection of children in vulnerable
           situations.
          Establish a decentralized National Child Protection System.
          A National Conference on Strengthening the Family was held in 1995. The
           Conference endorsed a Plan of Action, the implementation of which is
           underway.
          A Family Law had been enacted and came into force in July 2001.
          The International Day of Families is marked in the Maldives on May 15 of every
           year.
          Drafting a Family Policy.


New developments in the area of child protection include:

      Since the beginning of the year 2006, the Ministry of Gender and Family has
       integrated its service provision to women, children and families. Hence the URC,
       established in 1992, has been renamed, and a Child and Family Protection Authority
       has been established to oversee the rights of the child, women and the policies and
       legislation related to families.
      Protection services, including counseling and social work, are now being provided by
       Child and Family Protection Services. The Family and Community Development
       section undertakes the implementation of international instruments such as the
       CEDAW, CRC, Commonwealth Plan of Action, Sanya Declaration and others,
       including related advocacy. The Planning, Monitoring and Research Section
       undertakes research with regard to children, women and families, and monitors and
       reports on the implementation of these instruments in addition to policy planning
       and implementation.
      Similarly, a project was undertaken to establish Social Protection Services Centers, in
       order to provide decentralized social services for children, women and families in the
       atolls.


                                             96
