94014
 Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia




Serbia Judicial Functional Review
         Executive Summary with Recommendations




                        October 2014
Table of Contents
OBJECTIVE, SCOPE & STRUCTURE ....................................................................................................................1
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTED PRIORITIES ....................................................................................4
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................................... 12
   EXTERNAL PERFORMANCE: EFFICIENCY, QUALITY AND ACCESSIBILITY OF JUSTICE SERVICES.................................................. 12
      i. In Context: Assessing Performance in Light of Caseloads and Workloads ........................................... 13
   A. EFFICIENCY IN JUSTICE SERVICE DELIVERY ........................................................................................................... 15
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 15
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 20
   B. QUALITY OF SERVICES DELIVERED ..................................................................................................................... 26
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 26
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 31
   C. ACCESS TO JUSTICE SERVICES ........................................................................................................................... 37
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 37
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 42
   INTERNAL PERFORMANCE: GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES FOR SERVICE DELIVERY ................................... 49
   A. GOVERNANCE AND MANAGEMENT ................................................................................................................... 49
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 49
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 53
   B. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT .............................................................................................................................. 59
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 59
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 62
   C. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT .................................................................................................................. 66
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 66
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 70
   D. ICT MANAGEMENT ....................................................................................................................................... 76
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 76
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 78
   E. INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT ..................................................................................................................... 85
      i. Main Findings ....................................................................................................................................... 85
      ii. Recommendations and Next Steps ...................................................................................................... 87
Acronyms and Abbreviations
A2J              Access to Justice
ADB              Asian Development Bank
ADR              Alternative Dispute Resolution
AVP              Automated Case Management System
BEEPS            Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey
BPMIS            Budget Planning and Management Information System
CCJE             Consultative Council of European Judges
CCPE             Consultative Council of European Prosecutors
CEPEJ            The European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
CPC              Criminal Procedure Code
                 Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
CPT
                 Degrading Treatment or Punishment
EBRD             European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EC               European Commission
ECA              Europe and Central Asia
ECHR             European Convention on Human Rights
ECtHR            European Court of Human Rights
EU               European Union
EUR              Euro
FLA              Free Legal Aid
FY               Fiscal Year
GDP              Gross Domestic Product
HJC              High Judicial Council
ICT              Information and Communication Technology
IFMIS            Integrated Financial Management Information System
IMF              International Monetary Fund
IMG          International Management Group
IPSOS        IPSOS Global Market Research
JA           Judicial Academy
JAS          Judges Association of Serbia
LURIS        Software Application for International Legal Assistance
             Multi Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia,
MDTF-JSS
             administered by the World Bank
MOJ          Ministry of Justice (formerly the Ministry of Justice and Public
             Administration, MOJPA)
NBS          National Bank of Serbia
NALED        National Alliance for Local Economic Development
NJRS         National Judicial Reform Strategy
OECD         Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OSCE         Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
PAS          Prosecutors’ Association of Serbia
PPO          Public Prosecutor's Office
RPPO         Republic Public Prosecutor's Office
RSD          Serbian Dinar
SAPA         Standardized Software Application for Prison Administration
SAPO         Standardized Application for the Prosecution Organization
SAPS         Standardized Software Application for the Serbian Judiciary
SCC          Supreme Court of Cassation
SIPRES       Software System for the Misdemeanor Courts
SPC          State Prosecutorial Council
UNODC        United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
USAID        United States Agency for International Development
USAID SPP    USAID Separation of Powers Project
USAID JRGA   USAID Judicial Reform and Government Accountability Project
USD          US Dollars
Acknowledgements
The Serbia Judicial Functional Review analyzes the functioning of the Serbian justice system to
provide an objective and data rich basis for Serbia’s EU accession negotiations under the Chapter 23
of the Aquis Communautaire. The data collection was undertaken in the first half of 2014, and the
preliminary findings were discussed with stakeholders and international partners through July,
August and September of 2014. This report was funded by the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice
Sector Support in Serbia (MDTF-JSS), which has been established with generous contributions from
EU Delegation in Serbia, the United Kingdom Department for International Development (DfID), the
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands,
Slovenia, Spain, and Switzerland. The full report, including raw data, and more information about the
MDTF-JSS is available at www.mdtfjss.org.rs.

The Functional Review Report was prepared by a World Bank Team composed of Mr. Klaus Decker
(Senior Public Sector Specialist and Task Team Leader), Ms. Georgia Harley (Justice Reform
Specialist) and Mr. Srdjan Svircev (Public Sector Specialist). The Bank team was supported by an
exceptional group of Serbian consultants throughout the process, including Ms. Marina Matic, Mr.
Dragan Obrenovic, Mr. Jovanka Manic, Ms. Olga Sipka and the survey team at IPSOS Consulting. The
team was also supported by international consultants in specialized areas at various stages,
including Ms. Kate Harrison, Ms. Linn Hammergren, Mr. Alexey Proskuryakov, Mr. Pim Albers and
Ms. Maja Hadzi-Jordanova. The production of this report would not have been possible without the
excellent support of Ms. Hermina Vukovic-Tasic and Mr. Kornel Drazilov in organizing missions,
processing manuscripts and providing valuable insights along the way. Special thanks also go to our
translators, Ms. Nives Papovic Ivackovic, Ms. Masa Acimovic and Mr. Dragan Popovic, who worked
tirelessly to produce a high-quality Serbian report.

The team also benefited from guidance from World Bank peer reviewers Mr. Paul Prettitore (Senior
Public Sector Specialist), Ms. Lubomira Zimanova Beardsley (Senior Counsel) and Mr. Lewis Hawke
(Lead Public Sector Specialist). The team worked in close consultation with Mr. Tony Verheijen
(Country Manager for Serbia) and under the general guidance of Ms. Ellen Goldstein (Country
Director) and Mr. Adrian Fozzard (Practice Manager).
The team would like to thank the Serbian stakeholders for their engagement in the Functional
Review process. Particular appreciation goes to officials from the Ministry of Justice, High Judicial
Council, State Prosecutorial Council, Supreme Court of Cassation, Republic Prosecutor’s Office,
judges, prosecutors, and judicial staff for their time, hospitality, and willingness to discuss the issues
raised in the Functional Review in a frank and open manner. Their intensive engagement throughout
the process improved the depth of analysis and quality of the report. Particular thanks go to the
many officials who provided detailed comments on drafts. The team is also grateful to the
international partners active in the reform of Serbian judiciary for their support, comments and
suggestions.
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                             Objective, Scope & Structure



Objective, Scope & Structure
 “The accession process today is more rigorous and comprehensive than in the past. This reflects the
 evolution of EU policies as well as lessons learned from previous enlargements . (…) The rule of law is now
 at the heart of the enlargement process. The new approach, endorsed by the Council in December 2011,
 means that countries need to tackle issues such as judicial reform (…) early in accession negotiations. This
 maximizes the time countries have to develop a solid track record of reform implementation, thereby
 ensuring that reforms are deeply rooted and irreversible. This new approach (…) will shape the
 Commission’s work with the enlargement countries.”

 Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2013-2014, European Commission, Brussels, 2013.

This Functional Review presents a comprehensive assessment of the current functioning of
Serbia’s judicial system, along with options and recommendations to inform Serbia’s justice
reform initiatives in view of the requirements of Chapter 23 of the Acquis Communautaire. The
Functional Review was jointly requested by the European Commission (EC) and Serbian authorities
ahead of the commencement of negotiations for Chapter 23 to better inform the negotiation
process, and its design and structure were based on extensive consultations with both parties. The
Functional Review provides the basis for the Serbian authorities to develop their Chapter 23
Accession Action Plan and to update the existing Action Plan for the implementation of the National
Judicial Reform Strategy 2013-2018 (NJRS). In doing so, the Functional Review also presents an
objective baseline of current sector performance, which enables Serbia to assess the impact of
future justice reform initiatives.

The Functional Review comprises an external performance assessment and an internal
performance assessment. The external performance assessment (Part 1) examines how well the
Serbian judicial system serves its citizens in terms of efficiency, quality, and access to justice services.
The internal performance assessment (Part 2) examines the inner workings of the system, and how
governance and management, financial and human resources, ICT, and infrastructure are managed




                                                      1
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Objective, Scope & Structure


for service delivery.1 The two assessments highlight different aspects of sector performance and
should be read together.2 The Functional Review does not make assessments of Serbia’s compliance
with European law and is not for the purpose of providing legal advice.

The structure of the Functional Review follows the indicators set out in the Performance
Framework (matrix at Annex 2 of the Functional Review Report), and the content is driven by the
relevant European benchmarks, standards and references. The Performance Framework was
developed in close consultation with Serbian and EC authorities, building on European and
international best practices for justice sector performance measurement, and specifically tailored to
the Serbian context, including the institutional environment, distinctive Chapter 23 challenges, and
the prevailing data environment. The Framework’s matrix outlines:
 a. performance measurement areas (efficiency, quality, access etc.);
 b. performance indicators, against which assessments are made (indicators correspond to sub-
     headings throughout the Functional Review Report);
 c. relevant Chapter 23 references; and
 d. data sources within the Serbian system.

The Functional Review is sector-wide but focuses primarily on the courts because they are the
main vehicle for justice service delivery and the primary institutions of justice in Serbia. The scope
includes all types of services and covers litigious and non-litigious aspects of civil, commercial,
administrative, and criminal justice. The focus is on the actual implementation and day-to-day
functioning of the sector institutions that deliver justice to people, rather than the ‘law on the
books’. The scope includes other institutions in the sector to the extent that they enable or impede
service delivery by the courts, including: the Ministry of Justice (MOJ)3, the High Judicial Council
(HJC), the State Prosecutorial Council (SPC), the courts, the Public Prosecutor Offices (PPOs), the
Judicial Academy, the Ombudsperson’s Office, the police, prisons, and justice sector professional


1
  The internal performance assessment (Part 2) is similar in structure and methodology to a Justice Sector
Public Expenditure Review (JPER) or standard Functional Review.
2
  For example, some paradoxes of external performance are explained by the internal workings of the system,
such as caseloads which is an issue affecting efficiency and management.
3
  Prior to May 2014, the MOJ was the Ministry of Justice and Public Administration (MOJPA). In this report, it
will be referred to as the MOJ.

                                                      2
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                               Objective, Scope & Structure


organizations (such as the Bar, notaries, bailiffs, and mediators).4 The Functional Review prioritizes
aspects within this scope based on data availability, relevance to the achievement of the Acquis, and
national policy objectives. The reporting period for the Functional Review was January 1st, 2010, to
June 30th, 2014.

A distinct feature of this Review is its emphasis on data and analysis. Assessments draw on a mix of
quantitative and qualitative data, including statistical analysis of case management, finance and
human resource data, a multi-stakeholder perception survey, an access to justice survey, process
maps, legal analysis, a desk review, focus group discussions, workshops and key informant
interviews. For each assessment made in the Functional Review, multiple sources are triangulated to
present the most objective and realistic picture as possible.5

The recommendations are designed to be actionable and specific with the objective of aligning the
performance of the Serbian judiciary with that of EU Member States. Each recommendation notes
how its implementation links to the NJRS Action Plan and Chapter 23 requirements. In each case, a
‘main’ recommendation is highlighted, accompanied by a series of practical next steps to implement
it. Each step also notes the institution that would be responsible for taking the recommendation
forward, as well as the other institutions whose collaboration is necessary for effective
implementation. Timeframes are indicated for each step, from short term (12 months), medium
term (2-3 years) and long term (5 years), commencing from October 2014 in order to synchronize
with the NJRS Action Plan.

The precise prioritization and sequencing of the implementation of recommendations will be
made by the Serbian authorities as part of their Chapter 23 Accession Action Plan. Even so, the
Functional Review Team was requested to provide an overview list of top priorities, on which
progress would be essential to improve performance in line with European benchmarks. This is
provided in the following section, Overall Conclusions and Priorities.



4
  Where a question arose as to whether a certain issue facing an institution falls within the scope of the
Functional Review, the test applied was ‘ whether and how the issue contributes, either directly or indirectly, to
the delivery of justice services by the courts in Serbia’ .
5
  For further discussion of the Functional Review methodology, see Annex 1 of the Functional Review Report.

                                                        3
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                       Overall Conclusions



Overall Conclusions and Suggested Priorities
Overall, Serbia’s judicial system performs at a lower standard than that of EU Member States. In
terms of efficiency, the system struggles with a legacy of bureaucracy and red tape. New cases
proceed at an improved pace, and several efficiency parameters are within or close to the range
currently found among EU Member States. However, courts are clogged with old cases that go
unattended. Arcane processes cause delays, and procedural abuses by parties go largely unchecked.
The quality of justice services is affected by poorly drafted legislation, inconsistent jurisprudence and
high appeal rates. Rudimentary tools to standardize quality in service delivery, such as templates
and checklists for routine procedures, do not exist. The judiciary remains marred by perceptions of
corruption and undue influence, and while performance in this area is improving, it continues to lag
EU Member States and regional neighbors. Access to justice services is constrained by high court and
attorney fees, and attorney fees blow out further due to delays and inefficiencies in case processing.
Support for indigent court users is inadequate. Access to basic legal information, such as
consolidated legislation and lay formats of basic laws, is insufficient. The prospect of alternative
dispute resolution holds promise but remains elusive after a series of failed reforms.

In recent years, one could reasonably have expected the judicial system to have performed much
better than it has. Workloads decreased dramatically due to reductions in incoming caseloads and
increases in resources, including massive and growing arrears  With lighter workloads and more
and further appointments of hundreds judges and staff. With         judges and staff, there lay
lighter workloads and more judges and staff, there lay             significant opportunities to
significant opportunities to improve sector performance.
                                                                  improve   sector performance.
However, these opportunities were not realized.6 In the path     However, these opportunities
towards EU accession, the Serbian judicial system can ill               were not realized.
afford to miss such opportunities again.


6
  For example, during the period when more than 600 judges were stood down in a failed ‘reappointment’
process, clearance rates for most court types and case types remained around 100%. Yet following their return
to work by 2013, if workloads among all judges had been maintained, clearance rates should have risen
dramatically, resulting in significant backlog reduction. However, this did not occur. Instead, it appears that
judges and staff reduced workloads. Clearance rates fell and backlog remained largely unattended.

                                                      4
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                 Overall Conclusions


Instead, the sector embarked on successive reforms which have caused much upheaval but
produced limited results in terms of performance improvement. These included two network
reorganizations, the dismissal and reappointment of more than 800 judges and prosecutors, massive
file transfers, changes in roles and responsibilities between actors, and the passage of ill-conceived
laws that have quickly become ‘stillborn’ and required successive changes. These efforts consumed
the energy of stakeholders and generated much work. However, they have done little to alter
performance, which remained lackluster. Meanwhile, simpler reforms that could generate higher
impact have not been prioritized, such as critical ICT upgrades, continuing training, lay guides,
process simplification and managerial support for Court Presidents. Now, the sector craves stability
and requires a more measured approach to reform that focuses on practical improvements to
services for users.

There is excessive variation across courts in terms of service delivery, which undermines access to
justice and uniformity in the application of law. Several courts perform extremely well against
many of the agreed indicators in the Performance Framework, but there are pockets of under-
performing courts that reflect poorly on the rest of the sector and fail to deliver the services people
need. Workloads are not equitably distributed, leaving some courts are very busy, and others
demonstrably less so. Court practices differ across the country in areas of importance for court
users, such as complaints handling and the application of court fee waivers for indigent court users.
                                          Progress has been noted in some areas of court
        There are isolated sites of       management, such as ICT improvements and procedural
   innovation, often in courts outside    reforms. However, gains are fragile and have yet to instill
    of Belgrade. However, innovators      changes in behavior among judges, prosecutors, attorneys
    have rarely been recognized and       and court staff. There are isolated sites of innovation in
     lessons have not been shared or      service delivery, often in courts outside of Belgrade, where
               replicated.                progress has been made in specific areas, such as backlog
                                          reduction, service of process and stakeholder coordination.
However, these innovations have been driven by the personal initiative of individuals or with donor
support. Innovators have rarely been recognized and the lessons from innovations have not been
shared in a systemic way or replicated in other courts. As a result, averages and generalizations
about the Serbian judiciary are misleading. The Functional Review Report attempts to document key
variations and inconsistencies across the jurisdiction and possible drivers for these.


                                                  5
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                        Overall Conclusions


The extraordinary heterogeneity highlights the need for a more consistent and coherent approach
to performance management. The sector lacks a framework to measure and manage performance.7
Reforms are often initiated in a haphazard manner, without analysis of fiscal or operational impacts,
and implementation is rarely monitored. Decision-makers describe how they lurch from crisis to
crisis, addressing the symptoms rather than the causes of
systemic under-performance, and this is particularly                  The quantity and quality of
prevalent in human resource and financial management.                available data has improved
The fragmentation of governance and management                    significantly in recent years – the
responsibilities stalls progress and dilutes accountability,     next  step will be for leaders to use
including in much needed areas such as budget planning,         this  data to inform decision making
process re-engineering, ICT investments and infrastructure             and drive performance.
improvements. In a positive development, the quantity and quality of available data has improved
significantly in recent years – the next step will be for leaders to use this data to inform decision
making and drive performance.

Serbia’s judicial sector is not under-resourced, but resources are not allocated effectively nor are
they executed efficiently. The overall level of budgetary funding is consistent with EU averages,
both on a per capita basis and as a share of GDP. However, budget planning fails to take account of
service delivery needs, recent reforms, or Serbia’s Chapter 23 accession aspirations. The large wage
bill crowds out other expenditures, leaving little room for much-needed investments in training,8
ICT, and infrastructure.9 Human resources are mismatched with needs – there is an excessive
number of judges at the top10 and low-skilled ancillary staff at the bottom,11 but a ‘missing middle’ of

7
  The Functional Review team developed the Performance Framework (at Annex 2 of the Functional Review
Report) together with stakeholders for the purpose of the Review. That framework could be adapted by local
stakeholders to serve as an ongoing tool for performance management. See Recommendation 1 and next
steps.
8
   Despite a huge stock of human resources, there is very little investment in ongoing training and staff
development, even in basic areas such as training on the rollout of new laws or the use of case management
systems.
9
  The sector is also accumulating massive and growing arrears, largely due to a lack of financial planning and
poor commitment control. Meanwhile, disbursements are low in much-needed areas of capital investment.
10
   Serbia has one of the highest judge-to-population ratios in Europe, notwithstanding falling caseloads and the
transfer of several functions from courts to external actors.

                                                       6
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                  Overall Conclusions


mid-level specialist staff that will be necessary to support judicial modernization. And despite a huge
stock of human resources, there is very little investment in ongoing training and staff development.
Resources are not programed jointly, and there is little coordination, and occasional competition,
among fragmented stakeholders responsible for different resources. As a result, sector productivity
is low and the judiciary represents poor value-for-money for the State. The judiciary is thus poorly
placed to argue for a larger resource envelope, and in the current fiscal environment, budget cuts
could be expected. The sector will need to learn to ‘do more with less’ through better planning and
coordination in resource allocation and execution. Without significant changes in these areas, the
sector will be incapable of delivering on the many reforms that will be necessary to meet EU
accession requirements.

Looking ahead, a series of tough decisions will be required to align the sector’s performance with
EU benchmarks. Serbia is entering the negotiation phase for Chapter 23 with a sound knowledge
    Serbia is entering the negotiation      base. With the requisite commitment and will, alignment
   phase for Chapter 23 with a sound        with EU levels of performance is achievable in the longer
             knowledge base.                term. The Functional Review provides a comprehensive set
                                            of recommendations that are administratively and
financially feasible, and which align with the NJRS goals and Chapter 23 accession requirements.

Just as the challenges analyzed in the Functional Review are inter-related, the recommendations
are mutually reinforcing. Serbian authorities can take comfort in that, at this current stage of
development, they need not trade off one performance dimension against the other. Improvements
in efficiency would yield higher quality of services and vice-versa, and improvement in either would
improve access to justice. However, the implementation of recommendations would require a level
of coordination among stakeholders that has yet to be demonstrated.

Of the many findings and recommendations outlined in the Report, the Functional Review team
suggests that leaders focus on the following seven priorities which can set the Serbian judiciary on
a critical path to performance improvement. Without significant progress in these seven priority



11
  Serbia has high staff-to-judge ratio compared with EU Member States, as well as a large scaffolding of
temporary staff, contractors and volunteers.

                                                   7
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                      Overall Conclusions


areas, the sector will likely be unable to achieve the kind of transformation that would be necessary
to align performance with that of EU Member States.

 a. Develop a performance framework that tracks the performance of courts and PPOs against a
    targeted list of key performance indicators. The Performance Framework Matrix (at Annex 2 of
    the Functional Review Report) could provide a starting point for selecting a targeted list of
    indicators to drive performance. To reduce excessive variation and lack of uniformity, efforts
    should focus on lifting the performance of the worst-performing courts to the current average,
    while rewarding high-performing courts. Court Presidents and Heads of PPOs should be
    required to monitor and report periodically on their performance against a small number of key
    performance indicators, and onerous reporting in other areas could be reduced. The SCC and
    RPPO can play a motivational role with courts and PPOs respectively, by recognizing fast-
    improvers and high-performers through non-financial awards and by showcasing their work.
    They could also facilitate more intensive dialogue among their respective managers (Courts
    Presidents, Heads of Departments, Court Managers, and Heads of PPOs etc.) to exchange good
    practices and apply lessons in the course of addressing key performance challenges. User
    satisfaction will be an important aspect of performance measurement, so the Councils should
    prepare to conduct user surveys in the medium term. (See Recommendations 1 and 26 and
    next steps.)

 b. Ensure that courts use the full functionality of their case management systems to improve
    consistency of practice and support evidence-based decision-making.12 Some courts are
    already using most of the functionality available to them and have seen first-hand the benefits
    in terms of performance improvement. The SCC could issue instructions to require consistency
    in practice across all courts. Court staff should be required to enter case data into relevant
    fields and scan documents to the maximum extent possible. All courts should be required to
    allocate cases using the existing random case assignment functionality and report on instances
    when overriding the algorithm was necessary. Scheduling of hearings should be done


12
   This applies to all case management systems, including AVP (which operates in Basic, Higher and
Commercial Courts) and SAPS (which operates in Appellate and Administrative Courts and the SCC). The same
could apply to SAPO (for PPOs) and SIPRES (for Misdemeanor Courts) and SAPA (for prisons), once their rollout
has been completed.

                                                     8
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                               Overall Conclusions


    electronically. With a more consistent approach to case management, Court Presidents could
    monitor results in their courts through periodic managerial reports, including Ageing Lists. To
    support courts in meeting these requirements, training would be necessary for Court
    Presidents, judges and court staff on the functionalities and benefits of systems, in addition to
    ICT literacy courses. For its part, the MOJ should fund increases in server capacity and critical
    upgrades to existing systems so that relevant data fields are mandatory and managerial reports
    are easy to produce. (See Recommendations 6, 25, 49 and next steps.)

c. Develop a comprehensive continuing training program for judges, prosecutors and court staff.
   Despite the massive stock of human resources, the sector invests too little in training and staff
   development. The Judicial Academy could spearhead the initiative to boost the capacity of the
   sector’s existing human resources and become the hub for learning across the sector. The
   Academy could start by rebalancing its existing resources (i.e. reducing the budget for initial
   training activities and increasing the budget for continuing training) and shifting the work
   programs of its staff more towards continuing training activities. A training needs assessment
   should be conducted as a priority. Based on it, a comprehensive program of training for judges,
   prosecutors and court staff could be launched, covering both substantive topics and practical
   skills, with a particular emphasis on aligning the judiciary with European practice. Tailored
   trainings should be provided to meet the specific needs of key actors, including Court
   Presidents, Heads of PPOs, court secretaries and advisors. (See Recommendation 38 and next
   steps.)

d. Reform procedural laws to simplify the service of process, and start simplifying business
   processes. Service of process is currently a severe bottleneck in case processing across all court
   types and case types. This could be eased by reducing the number of services that are required
   in each case and creating a presumption of continual service after the first service. Internal
   procedures in courts could also be streamlined, applying lessons from the Subotica Basic Court.
   The MOJ could work closely with courts to analyze options for improving the modality of
   delivery and incentivizing the performance of servers, applying lessons from the Novi Sad
   Misdemeanor Court, the Uzice Basic Court and the Vrsac Basic Court. This will likely involve
   either amending MOUs with the Postal Service or moving away from the Postal Service
   altogether. Data on frequency, success rates and costs should be collected and monitored.
   Training should be provided to support judges, court staff and process servers to ensure

                                                 9
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                               Overall Conclusions


     effective implementation of a simplified system for service of process. Following reform in this
     bottleneck, simplification and streamlining of other business processes should be pursued to
     reduce red tape in courts and PPOs. In the meantime, user checklists could be developed to
     assist court users to navigate procedures, applying lessons from the Vrsac Basic Court. (See
     Recommendations 8, 27 and next steps.)

e. Eliminate the backlog of old utility bill enforcement cases. Mass resolution of backlogged
   enforcement cases in Basic Courts is unlikely to change service delivery in real terms because
   most cases are inactive and enforcement involves little judicial work. However, resolution will
   be necessary as Serbia embarks on the Chapter 23 process. Clearing the desks of around 1.7
   million pending enforcement cases would also signal a fresh start for many courts. This would
   likely boost morale and dramatically improve Serbia’s performance metrics among EU
   comparator countries. Basic Courts should dedicate more staff and effort to working through
   the enforcement backlog, applying lessons from the Vrsac Basic Court’s evidence-based
   approach. They should also identify all available opportunities to purge old inactive utility bill
   cases, applying lessons from Belgrade First Basic Court’s experience with Infostan. Meanwhile,
   Basic and Higher Courts should analyze the backlog of non-enforcement cases using
   comprehensive Ageing Lists and prioritize the resolution of those cases. Close monitoring and
   ongoing support from the SCC will continue to be required. Recognition by the SCC of high-
   performers may also motivate Basic Courts to complete the task. (See Recommendation 2 and
   next steps)

f.   Develop a more realistic budget within the existing resource envelope. As the resource
     envelope is highly unlikely to increase in the tight fiscal environment, performance
     improvement will require that the sector ‘does more with less’. Sector leaders in the HJC, SCC,
     MOJ, SPC and RPPO could coordinate the preparation of future annual work plans and
     negotiate trade-offs within the existing resource envelope to prioritize expenditures that boost
     productivity and performance (such as training, ICT upgrades, process re-engineering and
     procedural efficiency reforms) and forego expenditures in other areas. Leaders should clarify
     responsibilities for capital and current expenditure to overcome paralysis and low
     disbursement in those areas. The HJC and SPC will require technical assistance and some
     software to assume their functions. For example as a priority, the SPC and HJC should automate
     their financial management functions to enable greater flexibility in mid-year reallocations of

                                                 10
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                   Overall Conclusions


     resources for courts and PPOs. The MOJ, together with the HJC and SPC, should develop a plan
     to reduce arrears over time, including through better sector coordination and greater
     commitment control in individual courts and PPOs. (See Recommendations 32, 33, 34 and next
     steps.)

 g. Adjust the resource mix over time by gradually reducing the wage bill and increasing
    investments in productivity and innovation. The HJC should freeze judicial appointments, as
    the judiciary already has an over-supply of permanent judges, particularly in light of falling
    trends in incoming cases, shrinking mandates for courts and European benchmarks. The HJC
    can gradually reduce the number of judges by not replacing retiring judges and promoting
    judges from within the system where needs arise.13 For its part, the MOJ should maintain the
    recruitment freeze on staff positions, phase out the ‘shadow workforce’ of temporary staff and
    volunteers, and implement a staff reduction program, focused on low-skilled ancillary staff,
    including registry staff in verification roles. With the savings, the Council and the courts should
    invest in mid-level technical staff with specialized skills (ICT, research, analysis, court
    management etc.) to support the creation a modern administration capable of delivering to
    European standards. The sector also has significant needs for infrastructure improvements and
    ICT upgrades. The MOJ could start by conducting ICT and infrastructure stock takes and building
    capacity within its Investment Department. In exchange for progress in the implementation of
    other Functional Review recommendations, donors may be willing to contribute funds in
    support of the implementation of this plan. Adjusting the resource mix will require a
    coordinated approach by sector leaders and the approval of the MOF but it is critical to re-
    shaping the structure of the judiciary to drive performance. (See Recommendation 24, 25, 35
    and next steps.)




13
  Once appointed permanently, judges cannot generally be removed and may not be transferred without their
consent, and they generate high costs, including salaries, allowances, accompanying staff, etc.

                                                   11
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                 Summary of Findings >> In Context



Summary of Findings and Recommendations
External Performance: Efficiency, Quality and Accessibility
of Justice Services
The delivery of justice services in Serbia is constrained by a combination of efficiency, quality, and
access challenges. From the users’ perspective, court and attorney fees are expensive, and the
process is long, frustrating, and subject to various vagaries and abuses. By the end, the users may
secure a judgment in their favor but still struggle to see it enforced. The service delivery challenges
are thus inter-related and mutually reinforcing.

Below is a summary of the main findings and recommendations related to the external
performance of the judicial system in Serbia, as measured against the indicators and European
benchmarks outlined in the Performance Framework agreed among stakeholders.




                                                  12
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                       Summary of Findings >> In Context


        i.    In Context: Assessing Performance in Light of Caseloads
              and Workloads
Court performance should be measured in light of the demand for court services including the
quantity and nature of cases, workloads, and changes in those factors over time.

Demand for court services in Serbia is weaker than EU averages. When measured relative to
population, Serbian courts receive around 13.8 incoming cases per 100 inhabitants, which is slightly
lower than the EU average. Meanwhile, Serbia has nearly double the ratio of judges-to-population
than the EU average, with over 39 judges per 100,000 inhabitants. As a result, the incoming
caseloads per judge in Serbia are approximately half the EU average14 and are also lower than most
EU11 Member States and regional neighbors.

Caseload figures in Serbia are also highly inflated. Many matters are counted as a ‘case’ that would
  Incoming caseloads per judge in      not be considered as such in other systems.15 Much of the
    Serbia are approximately half      caseload is composed of cases requiring little judicial work,
    the EU average and are lower       such as enforcement cases, with a number twice as high as the
  than most EU11 Member States         EU average, and a large number of old inactive cases. Caseload
       and regional neighbors.         inflation can result in misleading statements about the real
                                       demand pressures facing the judiciary. Once case numbers are
sifted and further analyzed, judicial workloads appear to be modest.




14
   According to the CEPEJ, in Serbia in 2012, the judiciary received on average 350 incoming cases per judge,
whereas the EU average was 840. A more conservative EU average, which removes certain outliers, is 453
incoming cases per judge, approximately 30 percent higher than in Serbia.
15
   For example, a criminal investigation counts as one case, then the ensuing trial counts as a separate case. If
the decision is appealed, the appeal is a separate case, and if the appeal results in a re-trial then that too
counts as a separate case. If the criminal trial raises an issue of compensation to the victim, then the
compensation aspects is a separate civil case.

                                                       13
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                 Summary of Findings >> In Context


Caseloads are distributed unevenly among courts and without any clear pattern. Some small courts
are extremely busy, whilst larger ones are less so. Higher     Some small courts in Serbia are
Courts and Appeals Courts receive a comparatively small          extremely busy, whilst larger
caseload on average. A series of painful reforms and court re-         ones are less so.
organizations have done little to address the uneven caseload
distribution.

Demand for court services is also falling significantly. Declines are most apparent in Basic and
Commercial Courts where the number of incoming cases fell by over one-third and one-half
respectively from 2010 to 2013. The decline is likely attributable to the transfer of judicial functions
to other private or public actors and the decrease in affordability of court services. As a result,
workloads are falling and the average incoming caseloads of judges across the court system declined
by one-third from 2010 to 2013.

Even so, judges, prosecutors and staff throughout the system report feeling busy and
overburdened with work. The reasons lie in the systemic
                                                                      Average caseloads declined by
problems in the way the system operates that undermine
                                                                      one-third from 2010 to 2013.
external and internal performance, and not in the numbers of
judges, staff, or cases. Therefore it is the systemic problems, and their possible solutions, which are
the focus of the Functional Review Report.




                                                  14
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


        a. Efficiency in Justice Service Delivery
          i.    Main Findings
System efficiency is a significant challenge facing the Serbian judiciary but is improving in some
areas.

Production and productivity in courts has improved over the last three years, but more should be
done to address pockets of under-performance. Clearance rates rose and are currently in line with
EU averages, but this success is due largely to declines in incoming cases, and given the amount of
resources they could have been higher.16 There is significant variation across courts, but few courts
                                      produced a less-than-100 percent clearance rate by 2013. The
       If the output of the worst
                                      average case dispositions per judge are in the acceptable
      performing courts could be
                                      range but vary markedly by court type and court location.17
    lifted to the current average,
                                      Average case dispositions per judge have declined in the last
     productivity would be in line
                                      two years in Basic, Commercial, and Misdemeanor Courts,
      with performance in EU11
                                      again to due to a reduction in incoming cases and an
               countries.
                                      increasing number of judges. It appears that judges generally
dispose of about the same number of cases that they receive – whether that figure is big or small –
without much impact on case backlogs. Many courts resolve fewer cases per judge than could be
reasonably expected, and many judges resolve fewer cases than their colleagues. If the output of the
worst performing courts could be lifted to the current average, productivity would be in line with

16
   For example, the judiciary maintained average clearance rates over 100% across most court types and case
types during the period when more than 800 judges and prosecutors were absent from work during the failed
re-appointment process. Their gradual return to work by 2013 should have significantly boosted clearance
rates that year. Combined with falling incoming cases, clearance rates in 2013 could have increased
dramatically. Instead, clearance rates remained about the same, and actually fell in all Higher, Appellate,
Commercial and Misdemeanor Courts. This suggests that there is much capacity within the system to do more
to tackle caseloads.
17
   For example, the Higher Courts currently produce fewer dispositions per judge than the SCC, and judges in
the busier Basic Courts dispose of three times the number of cases than their colleagues in the least busy Basic
Courts.

                                                      15
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                 Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


performance in EU11 countries. Judges across Serbia would then have more time to contribute to
other important functions that support the attainment of Chapter 23 standards, including training.

In terms of timeliness of case processing at first instance, the picture is also mixed but improving.
Serbia’s pending stock of unresolved cases per 100 inhabitants is high in comparison to EU averages,
although this is improving for civil and commercial cases. Congestion rates remain high at around
1.41 and are particularly high in Basic, Commercial, and Misdemeanor Courts. On average, new
cases proceed through the system relatively smoothly: as a result the average age of resolved cases
is relatively young across all case types. However, backlogs persist because old cases remain ‘stuck’
and many inactive cases remain on the books. Although the case management systems are capable
of producing Ageing Lists of Unresolved Cases, they are not routinely produced and so Court
Presidents do not generally analyze them. This is unfortunate because Ageing Lists are perhaps the
most useful tool available to track timeliness in case processing. The Functional Review developed
an Ageing List for the purpose of this report, and it highlights an alarming number of cases that
remain pending after three, five, and even ten years. These old cases are unlikely to meet the
timeliness requirements of the European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and they thus
require particular attention. The time to disposition
of resolved cases in days varies markedly by case
and court type. The time to case disposition is short
in Higher Courts (98 days) but long in Basic Courts
(736 days). In civil and commercial litigation,
Serbia’s time to case disposition is reasonable and
in line with EU averages. Whereas in enforcement
cases, timeliness is intractably long and far worse
than elsewhere in Europe. Unsurprisingly, user
perceptions of timeliness remain negative, and the
long duration of cases frustrate court users. Image of a Registry Office in the Enforcement
Furthermore, data on the timeliness of first instance Department of a Basic Court, 2014.
proceedings does not reflect the full user experience, as appeal rates are high and the ‘recycling’ of
cases through re-trials is too common, and this further prolongs the ultimate resolution of disputes
for the parties.


                                                 16
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


Effective enforcement underpins the justice system, and on this indicator Serbia lags far behind EU
Member States. Enforcement cases comprise much of the backlog and cause most of the congestion
and delays in courts. Enforcement departments within courts are often poorly staffed and exhibit
low morale. Much of the problem relates to unpaid utility bills, which make up around 80% of the
enforcement caseload.18 While recent reforms will ensure that many new monetary enforcement
cases, including utility bill cases, are now channeled to private enforcement agents instead of to
                                        courts, and ongoing monitoring of this profession will be
  The successful mass resolution
                                        required to ensure their effectiveness in dealing with these
    of enforcement cases in the
                                        cases. Meanwhile, the elimination of the existing backlog of old
  Belgrade First Basic Court could
                                        enforcement cases in courts will require specific measures.19
    be replicated in other Basic
                                        On a positive note, remedies are available. Mass resolution
              Courts.
                                        (purging) of cases has proven successful at the Belgrade First
Basic Court, and this experience could be replicated in other courts. Targeted evidence-based
approaches have also shown some promise in the Vrsac Basic Court. By contrast, enforcement cases
that do not relate to utility bills, such as the enforcement of court judgments, proceed relatively
smoothly, though there remains room for improvement.

A range of procedural inefficiencies cause frustration among court users and practitioners and
contribute to delays. Service of process is required at each step of the process, and unnecessary
                                    delays here cause a ricochet effect through the system.
   In Serbia, avoiding service of   Avoiding service of process is relatively easy; on average at
   process is relatively easy: on   least 57% of attempts at service of process fail. Stakeholders
      average at least 57% of       are unanimous that the Postal Service is ineffective and it has
  attempts at service of process    little incentive to improve whilst it charges the courts per
                fail.               attempt of service. Related cases are rarely joined (and even
                                    claims and counter-claims are not routinely joined) resulting in
duplication. However, judges are unlikely to change that behavior and join cases more often whilst
ever they are monitored on the raw quantity of their resolved cases. Time management in courts is


18
   At the end of 2013, around 2 million enforcement cases remained unresolved in the Basic Courts, of which
around 1.7 million related to unpaid utilities bills.
19
   Some have suggested that private enforcement agents should also be allocated old enforcement cases, but
the Functional Review advises against this.

                                                    17
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


often poor. Hearings are held only in the mornings, despite a lack of courtrooms. Some courts use
existing case management software to schedule hearings, while others rely on manual diaries which
are less reliable and more time-consuming than their modern equivalents. Routinely, there is a long
delay in scheduling the first hearing in a case and an average three-month time lag between
hearings. Case processing practices are outdated, including disjointed hearings and the manual
exchange of case information. Case files get misplaced and take a long time to transfer from one
court to another. Preparatory departments have shown some promise, but many courts have been
slow to establish them, often due to lack of space or reluctance on the part of judges to part with
‘their’ assistants.20 Hearings are often cancelled or adjourned
                                                                    Preparatory departments have
because of the non-appearance of prisoners, attorneys or
                                                                   shown some promise, but many
expert witnesses: this is often due to poor coordination
                                                                       courts have been slow to
between courts and critical service providers, which is
                                                                           establish them.
exacerbated by the growing arrears owed to these providers.
An excessive number of hearings do not contribute to resolution of the case, suggesting that judges
are not using their powers to actively manage their cases. For their part, attorneys perpetuate
procedural inefficiency in the courts, and they have little incentive to change behavior whilst ever
they are paid per hearing.

Procedural abuses by litigants often go unmanaged, as do frivolous claims and appeals. Trial judges
fail to exercise their powers to curtail abuses due to a range of factors, including fear that their
decisions may be overturned by appellate courts, their close relationships with attorneys, as well as
a general dynamic of torpor within courts. In some areas however, stronger procedural laws,
including tougher sanctions, as well as greater clarity from appellate jurisdictions, may assist judges
to be more proactive in case management.




20
   Preparatory departments are designed for medium and larger sized courts, where judicial assistants and
court staff work together in a pool to ensure that procedural requirements are met and that cases are ready
for hearing.

                                                    18
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                          Summary of Findings >> Efficiency



Efficiency in the delivery of prosecution services is also a concern, but a lack of data inhibits more
detailed analysis in the Functional Review. The prosecution service is also undergoing profound
change in the transition to a prosecution-led adversarial system under the new Criminal Procedure
Code (CPC). The transfer of more than 38,000 investigation cases from Basic Courts to PPOs reduced
inventory in the courts but created a new backlog for prosecutors, which they are struggling to
process. New obligations have also expanded their scope of works, and they are ill-equipped to deal
with these. Work processes require review to adapt to this new environment.

Meanwhile, the efficiency of administrative services21 is high and improving, but unfortunately
many of these functions will soon be taken from courts. The time required to complete verification
tasks has reduced by one-third from 2009 to 2013, and in at least half of all cases, verification can be
completed at one location within a half-hour. User satisfaction is often over 70% and has increased
                                             on most aspects between 2009 and 2013. Perceptions
                                             of the conduct and competence of staff has also
                                             improved. Nevertheless as part of a controversial
                                             reform to create private notary services, these tasks are
                                             scheduled to be transferred in 2015 from courts to
                                             private notaries. It is unclear what problem this aspect
                                             of the reforms is seeking to solve, given high existing
                                             levels of satisfaction with verification services. If courts
                                             were to be able to compete with notaries for basic
                                             verification tasks, they would be well-placed to provide
                                              good value-for-money services. If courts do lose these
Image of a Queue for Administrative Services functions, significant staff reductions should be
at a Basic Court, 2014.                       expected to follow.




21
     This includes verification of documents and related services provided by courts.

                                                         19
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


        ii.     Recommendations and Next Steps
1.      Strengthen performance management in courts by recognizing and rewarding higher-
performing courts and implementing performance improvement plans for under-performing
courts. Intensify dialogue between courts to exchange good practices and experiences through a
more intensive program of meetings, workshops and colloquia.22 Lifting under-performers to the
current average would considerably improve efficiency and consistency of practice, and bring
Serbia’s performance closer in line with that of EU Member States. These recommendations can be
implemented at relatively low cost, using the Performance Framework indicators (at Annex 2 of the
Functional Review Report) as an initial reference.
     Establish a department in the SCC to analyze court performance issues, using the Functional
        Review and the Performance Framework as a foundation. (SCC – short term)
     Select a targeted number of indicators that drive court performance and monitor these
        across all courts. (SCC – short term and ongoing)
     Acknowledge performance improvements and innovations by showcasing their work at
        regular symposia and through non-financial rewards of recognition (e.g. Court
        Staff/President of the Year, Best Performing Court of the Year, Most Improved Court of the
        Year; Innovator of the Year etc.). (HJC with MOJ – short term)
     Disseminate individual and institutional good practices and innovations through workshops
        and colloquia among Court Presidents and heads of departments within courts. (SCC with
        HJC – medium term)
     Carry out targeted interventions aimed at assisting those courts facing severe performance
        challenges to rise to the current averages. (SCC – medium term)




22
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Measure 5.1.2.3: Undertaking of regular periodical
efficiency analyses of the judicial network using improved methodology; Strategic Measure 5.1.2.4: Adjusting
of the judicial network to the needs, pursuant to the results received from periodical analyses; Strategic
Measure 5.1.2.5: Undertaking of correctional measures on the level of individual Courts and PPOs with the
goal of improving efficiency of the network of Courts and PPOs as a whole.

                                                    20
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                      Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


2.        Prioritize the implementation of the SCC Backlog Reduction Strategy, targeting in
particular the utility bill enforcement backlog through analysis and a coordinated package of
incentives.23 Develop Ageing Lists as a key tool for managing timeliness and backlog reduction, and
monitor the progress of each court. This builds on the work already underway by the Backlog
Reduction Working Group. Results here would help bring Serbia’s efficiency in line with that of EU
Member States. Moderate funds may be needed for staff overtime to address the backlogs. The
initial recommendations can be implemented at relatively low cost, although technical assistance
may be required for some items.
      Accelerate the backlog reduction program and adopt the measures proposed in the Best
          Practice Guide to prevent the recurrence of backlogs. (HJC, SCC – short term and ongoing)
      Monitor prosecutorial investigations to prevent the accumulation of an investigative
          backlog. (SPC and RPPO – short term and ongoing)
      Analyze why the Infostan approach to withdraw inactive utility bill cases was so effective,
          replicate lessons learned with other utility companies. (SCC liaising with MOF, MOE, Utilities
          – short term)
      Establish taskforces in those courts most affected by utility bill backlogs. Re-allocate
          sufficient staff, particularly judicial assistants, from other departments to these taskforces,
          and provide them sufficient ICT equipment and software. Court Presidents should provide
          the necessary leadership and managerial support to enable them to succeed. Develop a
          comprehensive Ageing List of enforcement cases, and create ambitious yet realistic targets.
          Closely monitor the results of taskforces and report regularly to the relevant Working Group.
          Recognize good performers through evaluation, promotion and non-financial recognition
          and awards. (SCC – short term and ongoing)
      Create incentives to overcome the stigma that enforcement work is unattractive, such as
          giving ‘bonus points’ for the resolution of enforcement cases in productivity norms or
          considering backlog reduction efforts in evaluation and promotion processes. (HJC, SCC –
          short term)



23
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.6: Design and implementation of unified
backlog-clearance program while respecting equalization of the number of cases per judge, establishing a
system of on-going horizontal transfer and relocation of judges and public prosecutors, in accordance with the
constitution and with adequate stimulation, and efficient monitoring of the of the program implementation.

                                                     21
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                 Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


     Analyze the non-enforcement backlog with a comprehensive Ageing List. Require that Courts
      report routinely on resolution of old cases. (SCC – short term)

3.      Monitor the implementation of recent reforms introducing private enforcement agents,
including workloads, costs, quality and efficiency of service delivery, and integrity.
     Analyze data on the use of enforcement agents to assess their effectiveness and impact on
        court performance. (MOJ, SCC – short term, ongoing)
     Create an internal panel of the Chamber of Bailiffs to process complaints against
        enforcement agents as a first tier. Incorporate remedial training as a potential sanction for
        agents. Disseminate information regarding avenues for complaint against enforcement
        agents. (MOJ, Chamber, JA – medium term)
     Conduct a comparative analysis of the cost of enforcement services (including deposits,
        reimbursable expenses, and fees) in other European jurisdictions, and analyze models and
        affordability. Consider reducing the enforcement deposit and better regulating reimbursable
        expenses for enforcement agents. (MOJ –
        short term)
     Introduce caps on the number of outstanding
        cases per enforcement agent and avoid
        assigning additional cases if performance
        standards are not met. (MOJ, Chamber –
        medium term)
     Amend the location from where enforcement
        agents are appointed from the creditor’s
        territory to either the creditor’s territory or
        the territory where the debtor is registered
        to ease logistical constraints on enforcement.
        (MOJ – short term)                               Image of a Registry Department in a Basic
                                                       Court, 2014.




                                                 22
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                      Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


4.      Establish preparatory departments in all medium and large sized courts. Monitor their
results and exchange experiences.24 Judges, court staff, and practicing attorneys acknowledged
these departments would be useful, particularly for ensuring that cases are ready for hearing, but
the lack of staff or commitment to the process hindered the implementation. Departments can be
established in the short term, while evaluating the results will require more time. The cost is
moderate with the potential for substantially improved efficiency.
     Establish preparatory departments in those medium and larger courts that lack them. Collect
        baseline data on time to disposition and procedural efficiency, and monitor results. (SCC,
        MOJ – short term)
     Disseminate information about results to all courts and recognize good performance. (SCC,
        MOJ – medium term)

5.      Develop and monitor performance statistics in PPOs.25 Monitoring the workload, via
electronic means wherever possible, should be done in the short term for low cost, while making
changes to correct problems will follow, with costs depending on what correction actions are taken.
     Design more detailed and disaggregated performance statistics for PPOs. (RPPO – short
        term)
     Monitor performance statistics in PPOs to prevent backlog from accumulating, and
        recognize good performers. (SPC, RPPO – medium term)




24
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.6: Design and implementation of unified
backlog-clearance program while respecting equalization of the number of cases per judge, establishing a
system of on-going horizontal transfer and relocation of judges and public prosecutors, in accordance with the
constitution and with adequate stimulation, and efficient monitoring of the of the program implementation.
25
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Measure 4.2.1.2: Introduction of a centralized data
collection and processing system in all PPOs.

                                                     23
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


6.      Collect and analyze data on procedural efficiency to inform future reforms.26 Provide
practical training to support the rollout of recent procedural amendments. Adjust productivity
norms to encourage judges to join related cases. The CCJE calls for judges to control the timetable
and duration of proceedings, from the outset and throughout the legal proceedings. These
recommendations can be accomplished in the short term at relatively low cost.
     Require staff to enter data into existing fields in case management software (AVP and SAPS).
        Provide training to staff on consistent data entry. Generate regular analytic reports and
        monitor results. (SCC, Courts, ICT providers – short term. See also ICT Management section)
     Create new fields in AVP and SAPS, focusing on data needs relating to timeliness, procedural
        efficiency, and prevention of procedural abuse. (MOJ – short term)
     Provide training to lower and higher court judges and judicial assistants on issues affecting
        procedural efficiency, including training to judges on their recently-enhanced powers to
        manage cases. (HJC, SCC, JA – medium term)
     Where variations in procedural efficiency exist between Courts, analyze and convene
        colloquia between courts to share experiences. (SCC – medium term)
     Analyze the extent of appeals, and procedural abuses; identify causes and develop possible
        sanctions.27 (SCC – medium term)

7.     Tighten scheduling practices for court hearings, including by conducting hearings
throughout the day and fully utilizing case management software functionality. Collect and
monitor data on scheduling patterns, such as reasons for adjournments, to inform future
reforms.28 Most of these changes could be made in the short term for little cost.


26
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Goal 5.2: Establishing of e-justice; Strategic Guideline 5.3.2:
Amendments to the normative framework in a manner that would contribute to the reduction of the duration
of court proceedings; Strategic Measure 5.3.3.4: Mandatory education of administrative – technical staff and
regulation of the issue of competence in the field of their education; Strategic Measure 4.2.1.3: Conducting
trainings for employees in courts and PPOs for working with the centralized data collection and processing
system.
27
   This aligns with CCJE Opinion No. 6 (2004), which indicates provision should be made for sanctioning abuse
of court procedure.
28
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.4: Infrastructural investments in courts and
prosecution facilities targeted at tackling the lack of courtrooms and prosecutorial cabinets, thereby increasing

                                                       24
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Efficiency


     To maximize the use of limited courtroom facilities, schedule hearings throughout the day,
      except in extraordinary circumstances. (SCC/Courts – short term)
     Collect and analyze data on cancelled and adjourned hearings and the reasons for them.
      (SCC/Courts – short term)
     Require that judges close each hearing by setting the next hearing date within a
      standardized timeframe, with only limited exceptions. (SCC/Courts – short term)
     Require that all courts use existing case management software to electronically schedule
      court hearings. Provide training as necessary. (SCC, JA, MOJ – medium term)

8.      Reduce the requirements for service of process and reconsider arrangements for the
delivery of service, applying lessons from some Basic and Misdemeanor Courts.29 Most of these
steps can be taken in the short term at low cost.
     Monitor the implementation of recent procedural amendments which attempt to close
        loopholes on service of process. Collect and monitor data on service of process, including
        attempts and costs, and identify sources of variations. (MOJ, SCC, Courts – short term)
     Re-negotiate the MOJ’s outdated MOU with the Postal Service and pay only for successful
        service (modelling the experience from Uzice Basic Court). Increase training and awareness
        among postal officers of their requirements and the sanctions for abuse. Create a plan to
        monitor results and to report on changes. (MOJ – short term)
     Work with Courts to build flexibility into their budgets so that they can innovate, for
        example by contracting with private couriers (like Sloboda which delivered an inexpensive
        and successful solution in the Novi Sad Misdemeanor Court), or delivery men, as occurs in
        the Vrsac Basic Court. (HJC, MOJ – medium term)
     Provide training to judges on new rules and encourage them to take a proactive approach to
        managing service of process. (SCC, JA – medium term)
     Amend procedural laws to create a presumption of continual service after the first service of
        process, with the onus on the party to notify the Court of any change of address, along with
        sanctions for non-compliance. (MOJ, HJC – medium term)


the number of trial days per judge, reducing the time between the two hearings and significantly expediting
the investigative proceedings.
29
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.2: Amendments to the normative framework
in a manner that would contribute to the reduction of the duration of court proceedings.

                                                    25
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Quality


        b. Quality of Services Delivered
As outlined in the Performance Framework, the quality of service delivery covers a range of
dimensions ranging from quality of legislation to quality in case processing, decision-making, and
appeals. The integrity of the system is also a dimension of quality in the eyes of users. Poor quality
has significant implications for efficiency of service delivery as well as for the access to justice
services.

         i.    Main Findings
The poor quality of legislation in Serbia causes a range of problems for the courts. Lack of precision
in legislative drafting creates ambiguity which is then exploited by parties. Overlapping and
conflicting laws cause inconsistency of practice, while gaps in the law leave judges with little
guidance. In all, 21 percent of judges and 19 percent of lawyers report poor quality legislation as the
main reason for the poor quality of court services. Only 13
percent of judges and prosecutors considered Serbian laws
to be fair and objective.

Deficiencies in the policymaking and legislative process
perpetuate these problems. There has been a proliferation
of new legislation in recent years, often developed without
policy analysis, and with limited analysis or buy-in from the
stakeholders responsible for their implementation. Ad hoc
working groups are convened by the MOJ to consider and
draft each new law, and their organizational methods are Title: Rupa u zakonu, submitted by an
haphazard. There are too many working groups, and the entrant to the Justice Competition,
deliberative process is time-consuming without producing World Bank MDTF-JSS, 2014.
the requisite quality of drafts. Working groups tend to debate concepts rather than conduct analysis
based on policy criteria, and they tend not to rely on data to inform decision-making. They do not
sufficiently consider the financial and operational implications of proposed legislation, as evidenced
by a lack of policy analyses or fiscal impact analyses. Consultation processes are perfunctory.
Legislation is routinely passed by the National Assembly under emergency procedures.

                                                  26
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                   Summary of Findings >> Quality


Following the enactment of new legislation, there has been limited outreach and training to
embed new behaviors. In recent years, many laws have been ‘stillborn’, unable to be effectively
                                    implemented and requiring a new working group to start over
        Many laws have been         again. This creates a constant and unproductive ‘churn’ of
       ‘stillborn’, unable to be    reform. Professionals have little time to apply the new
    effectively implemented and     legislation before they are revised. Many judges stall their
  requiring a new working group     decisions or continue to apply old legislation while waiting for
    to start over again. This has   appellate courts to provide guidance on new legislation. There
       created a constant and       is also evidence of reform fatigue, which is concerning at the
  unproductive ‘churn’ of reform.   outset of the Chapter 23 process. Legislative reform will
                                    continue through the accession process, but the quality of the
working group process should be enhanced to prevent the Chapter 23 accreditation process from
becoming a merely box-ticking exercise.

When disputes arise, the application of the law is inconsistent across the country. More than 80
percent of judges, prosecutors and lawyers express concerns about inconsistent or selective
interpretation of laws and inconsistent jurisprudence. Process Maps highlight that the ‘law in
practice’ differs from the ‘law on the books’ in certain cases and at certain locations.

Current arrangements for case processing present several challenges in terms of quality . The
system lacks a standardized approach to routine aspects of case processing. There are no checklists,
  More than 80 percent of judges,     standardized forms or templates for routine aspects of case
      prosecutors and lawyers         processing, nor is there a consistent approach to drafting
       express concerns about         routine documents, such as legal submissions, orders, or
      inconsistent or selective       judgments. Meanwhile, there are few examples of specialized
     interpretation of laws and       case processing for the types of cases that often warrant a
    inconsistent jurisprudence.       tailored approach. Certain types of cases, such as small claims,
                                      complex fraud and gender-based violence, can tend to get
‘stuck’ in the system because they lack specialized case processing practices.




                                                 27
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Summary of Findings >> Quality


In criminal cases, the quality of decision-making by judges and prosecutors varies. Some
innovations are showing promise, including the use by prosecutors of deferred prosecution30 and
plea bargaining. In deferred prosecution cases, arrangements to implement and monitor sanctions
remain weak, causing prosecutors to rely disproportionately on cash payments as sanctions rather
than more proactive rehabilitative measures, such as
                                                                      Monitoring of deferred
community work or psycho-social treatment. Monitoring is also
                                                                    prosecution and alternative
inconsistently applied across the territory, largely due to the
                                                                     sanctions is inconsistently
limited geographic reach of the Commissioner, undermining
                                                                    applied across the territory,
the principle of equality before the law. Plea bargaining
                                                                     largely due to the limited
procedures could be simplified by giving greater autonomy to
                                                                      geographic reach of the
Deputy Prosecutors. Sentencing appears inconsistent, and
                                                                  Commissioner. This undermines
many stakeholders report that it is overly lenient, and
                                                                  the principle of equality before
prosecutors could play a more constructive role in compiling
                                                                              the law.
data on sentencing practices and trends and recommending
sentences accordingly. Alternative sanctions could be strengthened by supporting the arrangements
for implementing and monitoring sanctions. Alternative sanctions should be particularly encouraged
in Misdemeanor Courts, where deferred prosecution and plea bargaining do not occur and the
prospects for rehabilitation for minor offenses are high.

More broadly, the Serbian judicial system struggles
to fully comply with ECHR requirements, as
evidenced by the large caseloads in Strasbourg. Non-
compliance tends to be found in a limited number of
case types, highlighting specific problems relating to
inconsistent application of the law and non-
enforcement of the final decisions against state-
owned enterprises. It thus appears that the bulk of
Serbia’s non-compliance relates to financial
complaints against public entities, rather than
structural problems in the judicial system. Friendly Title: Serbia 2020, submitted by an entrant to the
settlements offer some solution here. In an attempt to Justice Competition, World Bank MDTF-JSS, 2014.

30
     Deferred prosecution is commonly referred to in Serbia as ‘opportunity cases’.

                                                        28
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                Summary of Findings >> Quality


comply with the ECHR right to trial within a reasonable time, recent procedural reforms now enable
parties to pursue a separate cause of action for delayed proceedings. These reforms are well-
intentioned but run a high risk of producing unintended, or even perverse, consequences. Their
implementation should be monitored closely and adjustments may be required.

The appeals system is at the heart of Serbia’s problems in terms of quality of decision-making.
Appeal rates are very high on average, as are reversal rates31 on appeal. Rates also vary markedly
across court types, case types, and court locations. Without plausible explanation, some courts
exhibit appeal rates and reversal rates that are double those of the court adjacent to it. Appeals
from Basic Courts to Higher Courts (known as small appellation) are not well monitored in the
system and, upon analysis, are particularly alarming. The perceived unfairness of the system,
   Without plausible explanation,    combined with its lack of uniformity and consistency,
     some courts exhibit appeal      encourages court users to appeal. Attorney incentives may also
    rates and reversal rates that    play a hand in driving up appeals. At the same time, levels of
   are double those of the court     trust in the appellate system among court users are low. On a
            adjacent to it.          positive note, recent procedural amendments to reduce
                                     successive appeals (known as the ‘recycling’ of cases) seem to
be working. Nonetheless, appellate judges (notwithstanding their lighter caseloads) continue to
remand cases back to the lower jurisdiction for re-trial more often than they are required to, rather
than substituting their own judgment. Excessive remands duplicate workloads, inflate case numbers
and perpetuate inconsistent practices by failing to provide adequate guidance to lower courts. The
SCC plans to improve uniformity in the application of the law through a range of measures, including
Certification Commissions. These efforts should be prioritized and augmented with a suite of basic
quality-enhancing measures, which together could reduce appeal rates over time.




31
     Reversal rates are commonly referred to in Serbia as ‘abolishment rates’.

                                                         29
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                      Summary of Findings >> Quality


Meanwhile, corruption remains a challenge for the Serbian judiciary. Serbia lags EU Member States
and neighboring countries on all comparative indices of
perceived corruption in the judiciary. Court users admit that         In addition to paying bribes,
                                                    32
they engage in corruption to advance their cases. Bribery of           around 19 percent of users
court staff appears to be more common than bribery of judges,           report ‘pulling strings’ to
who likely rely on more subtle means. In addition to bribes,              influence the courts.
around 19 percent of users report ‘pulling strings’ to influence the courts. Such informal means are
more often used to affect the procedure rather than the outcome, suggesting that improvements in
transparency and efficiency in case processing would reduce opportunities for malfeasance. Gift-
giving is also common and goes largely unchecked. Surveys indicate that the perceived prevalence of
corruption is declining across the system. However, in Misdemeanor Courts, public trust and
confidence is falling.

Perceptions of judicial independence in Serbia remain low. A significant portion of judges (25
percent) and prosecutors (33 percent) report that the judicial system is not independent, compared
with 50 percent for the public and business sector, and 56             25 percent of judges, 33
percent of lawyers. The same view is reflected in Serbia’s poor     percent of prosecutors and 56
rankings in terms of judicial independence on a range of global     percent of lawyers report that
indices. Notably, perceptions of judicial independence have          the Serbian judicial system is
worsened since 2009, which reduces the credibility of the                  not independent.
system and users’ trust and confidence in it.




32
   Around 10 percent of court users report that a bribe was solicited when they had dealings with a court.
Figures on reported corruption are expected to be significantly under-stated.

                                                   30
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Quality


         ii.    Recommendations and Next Steps
9.       Improve the organizational methods of Working Groups that develop draft policy and
legislation relating to the judiciary. Require that working groups identify policy objectives and
options, analyze fiscal and operational impacts of policy options, and prepare detailed
implementation plans for the rollout of reforms.33
     Ensure standard terms of reference for working groups, with accompanying checklists for
         Chairs of working groups. Ensure that working groups articulate precise policy objectives and
         criteria. (MOJ – short term)
     Require that working groups analyze the causes for previous policy failures using system
         data, surveys and assessments of gaps between the ‘law on the books’ and the ‘law in
         practice’. Require that all working groups conduct fiscal analyses and operational analyses of
         proposed reforms and policy options. Base recommendations on evidence. Ensure that draft
         legislation recommended by each working group includes an estimated breakdown of the
         costs of implementation. (MOJ – short term)
     Ensure that each working group includes a specialist in legal drafting to ensure consistency
         and completeness of draft legislation. Conduct training on legislative drafting and
         interpretation. (MOJ, JA – medium term)
     Prepare implementation plans for the dissemination and rollout of new legislation and
         policy, and engage the Judicial Academy to deliver comprehensive training on new
         legislation for judges, prosecutors and court staff. (MOJ, JA – short term)
     Disseminate information about reforms through the media and on the websites of courts
         and the MOJ to inform citizens and court users. (MOJ, SCC – short term)




33
  This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.3.3: Analysis of the results of implementation of
the ‘judicial laws’ and amending them pursuant to the results of the analysis ; Strategic Guideline 1.3.4:
Analysis of the results of implementation of substantial and procedural laws (Criminal Procedure Code, Civil
Procedure Code, Law on Enforcement and Security, etc.).

                                                     31
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                          Summary of Findings >> Quality


10.     Implement basic quality-enhancing measures. Standardize formats for routine procedures
in Courts, including through the development of templates and checklists.34 The CCJE recommends
that simplified and standardized formats for documents be adopted to initiate and proceed with
court actions.35 Initial forms can be created in the short term at relatively low cost. Training can be
incorporated into existing programs.
     Develop and require courts to use standardized templates and forms for routine procedures
        and processes, applying lessons from the Vrsac Basic Court. (SCC – medium term)
     Provide training on their use to judges, prosecutors, and court staff to enhance consistency
        in case processing. (SCC, JA – medium term)
     Disseminate to court users and legal professionals. (SCC – medium term)

11.    Develop pilots in Misdemeanor, Basic and Higher Courts for specialized case processing
departments, including a specialized small claims department in Basic Courts with streamlined
procedures.36 These recommendations can be implemented in the medium term for relatively low
cost.
     Assess the feasibility of establishing small claims departments inside Basic Courts. If
       successful, start with a number of pilot Courts, and monitor results. Support departments
       with incentives, such as awards and recognition or consideration in evaluation or promotion,
       to attract high-quality judges and staff. Develop streamlined procedures and lay guides that
       could be followed by self-represented litigants. (MOJ, HJC, SCC – short term and ongoing)
     Create a working group to identify what kinds of cases could benefit from specialized case
       processing, including for example tax and customs cases in Misdemeanor Courts and
       gender-based violence and fraud in Basic and Higher Courts. Analyze lessons learned from
       the Commercial Courts. (MOJ, HJC – medium term)
     Develop pilot programs in Courts to test the efficacy of specialized proceedings. Monitor
       results. (MOJ, HJC – medium term)

34
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.7.4: Improve the judgment drafting
methodology and achieve uniformity in this area (through initial and continuous training at the Judicial
Academy).
35
   See CCJE Opinion No. 6 (2004) on fair trial within a reasonable time.
36
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.4.1: Changes in the normative framework
related to the special character of the right to natural judge in cases of specialization and the possibility of
derogation from the automatic case assignment when program for solving case backlog is applied.

                                                      32
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Summary of Findings >> Quality


12.     Implement and augment existing SCC plans to promote uniformity and clarity of court
decisions.37 This would enhance quality and perceived fairness in line with CCJE and the Magna Carta
of Judges’ recommendations for improved quality, accessibility, and clarity of decision-making.
Consolidating cases are for the short term while other items are for the medium term. All
recommendations require relatively minimal cost.
     Provide guidance and training to judges at both first-instance and appellate levels on how to
        join related cases. (SCC, JA – short term)
     Develop a more standardized approach to judgment writing and train judges on how to
        apply this approach. (SCC, JA – medium term)
     Establish a series of colloquia between Court Presidents to discuss emerging issues in law
        and practice. (SCC – short term)
     Establish forums of institutional court users at the local level of each Basic Court (police,
        prosecution, social welfare, lawyers etc.). Meet periodically to ensure effective coordination
        of cases (applying lessons from the Zrenjanin Basic Court). (SCC – short term)
     Collect sentencing data by Court and offense; compare across case types and court
        locations. Provide training to reduce variations in sentencing practices. (SCC – medium term)
     Compile sentencing tables as a reference guide for prosecutors when developing
        submissions. Update and elaborate data periodically. (RPPO – medium term)
     Develop bench books on substantive areas of law topics. (HJC, JA – long term)




37
     This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic objective 2.7: Uniformity of case law.

                                                        33
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                          Summary of Findings >> Quality


13.     Improve statistical reporting of appeals (including data relating to decisions confirmed,
amended or remanded back to the lower court). Combine analysis of the results with a package of
training and incentives for courts and judges to promote quality in decision-making.38 The COE
recommends that steps should be taken to deter the abuse of post-judgment legal remedies.
Improved enforcement will discourage appeals by reducing incentives for attorneys and/or parties
to delay final judgment.39 Recommendations can be implemented in the medium term at relatively
low cost.
     Align statistical data on appeals from Basic Court decisions to enable tracking of small and
        large appellation and analyze variations. Link the Courts’ case management systems to allow
        cases to be tracked through all appeals, related cases and closure. (SCC, MOJ – medium
        term)
     Consider the appeal record of individual judges and prosecutors in the evaluation and
        promotion process. (HJC, SPC – medium term)
     Adjust the productivity norms of appellate judges to reward those who replace a lower court
        decision with their own judgment rather than remand it back to the lower court for retrial.
        Provide training to appellate judges on the implementation of recent procedural reforms
        requiring judges to amend decisions at the second appeal. (SCC, JA – medium term)
     Prepare and deliver training on issues that drive up appeals, including issues of concern
        under the ECHR40. (SCC, JA – short term)
     Agree to friendly settlements between the state and parties in mass resolution of cases
        before the European Court of Human Rights. (MOJ – medium term)




38
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.7.1: Improvement of the normative framework
in order to regulate the harmonization if court decisions and more precisely define the role of the Supreme
Court of Cassation in this area, as well as to fully ensure harmonization with the decisions of the European
Court of Human Rights and practice of other relevant international institutions.
39
   Committee of Ministers Recommendation No. R (84) 5, Principle 7.
40
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.7.3: Monitoring case law of the European court
of human rights and other relevant international institutions, ensuring that their decisions are analyzed,
organized and publicly available; Strategic Guideline 3.2.3: Further improvement of the initial training program
at the judicial academy; Strategic Guideline 4.1.3: Amendments to the normative framework in terms of civil
liability of the judicial office holders.

                                                      34
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Quality


14.     Develop a high-profile campaign to enhance quality and combat corruption in
administrative services in Courts, including the development and monitoring of integrity plans.41
Creating integrity plans, standards, and a task force can occur in the short term, with other
recommendations in the medium term, all at relatively low
cost. Monitoring, training, and public awareness should be
an on-going process.42
     Prepare and deliver training for judges, assistants
        and court staff on the purpose and content of
        court integrity plans. Develop integrity plans for all
        courts and PPOs. Disseminate existing rules on gift
        giving and provide relevant training. (ACA with HJC,
        Courts, PPOs – short term)
      Create a task force to consider performance and Title: Mito, submitted by an entrant to the
       integrity improvements in Misdemeanor Courts for Justice Competition, World Bank MDTF-
       which public trust and confidence has been JSS, 2014.
       reduced significantly since 2009 and which impact large numbers of litigants. (SCC – short
       term)
      Continue to conduct periodic surveys focusing on court user experiences of corruption.
       Strengthen the survey methodology and expand the survey to provide more detailed and
       robust findings to inform future anti-corruption reforms within the judiciary. (Courts, ACA –
       medium term)
      Target interventions to deal with the most commonly reported forms of corruption, such as
       petty bribery of court staff. (HJC, SCC, MOJ – medium term)
      Develop public relations information on the websites and in brochures at the courts
       regarding the law and policy on gift giving. (HJC, SPC – short term)




41
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.1.1: Monitoring of the implementation of
integrity plans in judiciary which are fully adapted to the judicial system and their improvement.
42
   See also Governance and Management recommendations.

                                                 35
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Quality


15.      Enhance the capacity of the system to implement and oversee alternatives to prosecution
in all locations to ensure equal treatment of defendants across Serbia.43 Recommendations can be
accomplished by the medium term. Adding staff and enhancing SAPO will require moderate costs,
while the other efforts are relatively inexpensive.
     Consider how recently-enacted Misdemeanor Orders could be used to impose alternative
         sanctions other than fines. Provide training for Misdemeanor Court judges on the use of
         alternative sanctions. (Misdemeanor Courts – short term)
     Expand the number of Offices of the Commissioner to all 26 Higher Court regions to oversee
         the implementation of deferred prosecutions. Add support staff in Commissioner’s offices to
         enable monitoring of fulfillment of the terms of deferred prosecution cases, particularly in
         rehabilitative sanctions, such as treatment and community service. (Office of the
         Commissioner; RPPO – short to medium term)
     Streamline the plea bargaining process by providing more autonomy to Deputy Prosecutors
         to offer plea bargains for cases meeting criteria set by the RPPO. (RPPO – medium term)
     Design and deliver a training program for Deputy Prosecutors on the processing of plea
         bargaining and deferred prosecution cases. (RPPO, JA – medium term)
     Expand the use of alternative sanctions, particularly in misdemeanor cases. (Misdemeanor
         Courts, Office of the Commissioner – medium term)
     Collect data from PPOs on deferred prosecution and plea bargains, and any concerns or
         bottlenecks. Issue additional instructions on deferred prosecution and encourage more
         proactive rehabilitative efforts. (RPPO – medium term)
     Add data collection concerning deferred prosecution and plea bargains to the prosecutors’
         automated system (SAPO): include number of deferrals and pleas offered, the criminal
         offense, location, and reasons for any rejections by courts of offered plea bargains. (RPPO –
         medium term)




43
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.1: Wider implementation of the simplified
procedural forms and institutes such as plea bargaining, implementation of the principle of opportunity in
criminal prosecution and directing parties towards alternative dispute resolution methods (such as mediation)
whenever allowed by legislative framework.

                                                     36
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Access


        c. Access to Justice Services
         i.    Main Findings
Lack of affordability is the most serious barrier to access to justice services in Serbia. Court and
                                   attorney costs represent a significant proportion of average
                                   income in Serbia. Pursuing even a simple case is unaffordable for
                                   many. Citizens do their best to avoid the courts: nearly 63% of
                                   the general public reported that, if they had a dispute which they
                                   thought should be settled in the court, they would decide against
                                   pursuing it; and fear of costs was the most common deterrent.
                                   Over half of recent court users surveyed considered the court-
                                   related costs in their particular case to have been excessive. The
                                   schedules for court and attorney fees are also quite complex, so
                                   court users struggle to estimate likely costs.44

                                   Lack of affordability of justice services also causes a drag on the
                                   business climate. Over one-third of businesses with recent
                                   experience in court cases reported that the court system is a
Title: Svetlost pravde obasjaće i great obstacle for their basic business operations, and an
mene, submitted by an entrant to   additional 30 percent reported that courts are a moderate
the Justice Competition, World     obstacle. Businesses also report that the courts are becoming
Bank MDTF-JSS, 2014                increasingly inaccessible to them due to high court and attorney
                                   fees. Small businesses face particularly challenges in navigating
the court system, including high costs, cumbersome processes, lengthy delays, inadequate
enforcement, and constantly changing legislation.




44
  There is also a cap on court fees, which distorts incentives by encouraging court users to pursue
unmeritorious claims in high-value cases.

                                                 37
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Access


On further examination however, it is not absolute costs to users but perceived value for money
which undermines access to justice. Although court users
                                                                  Over one-third of businesses
complain about costs (and non-users report that costs deter
                                                                  with recent court experience
them), the Multi-Stakeholder Justice Survey found that recent
                                                                reported that the court system
court users who were satisfied with the quality of services
                                                                  is a great obstacle for their
delivered were far less likely to consider the costs to be
                                                                 basic business operations. An
excessive.45 These data therefore suggest that improvements
                                                                additional 30 percent reported
in quality and efficiency in service delivery could improve
                                                                  that courts are a moderate
access to justice, by increasing the perceived value for money
                                                                            obstacle.
for potential court users, while also improving user
satisfaction.

Attorneys play an important role in helping court users to navigate the system, but their fee
structure is out of step with European practice and creates perverse incentives which undermine
access to justice and efficiency and quality and service delivery.46 Self-represented litigants struggle
to proceed alone without lay formats, checklists or practical guides, and unsurprisingly therefore,
they are less likely to succeed. Attorneys are paid per hearing or motion, which encourages
protracted litigation. Fees are awarded based on a prescribed
Attorney Fee Schedule, which prohibits from charging less              The Attorney Fee Schedule is
than 50 percent of the rates prescribed. This arrangement is          highly inflated and out of step
out of step with European practice.47 Serbia’s prescribed fees           with European practice.
are also highly inflated and unrealistic, and in practice many
attorneys charge less than the mandatory minimum because rates are beyond user willingness to
pay. State-appointed attorneys (known as ex-officio attorneys) may be appointed for indigent clients
but there are concerns regarding the mechanism for their selection and a lack of quality control.


45
   75 percent of court users who reported low quality of services also reported that the costs were excessive;
while the 29 percent of court users who reported that quality was high did not consider the costs to be
excessive.
46
    71 percent of citizens with court experience found attorney-related costs to be one of the most
insurmountable barriers to access to the judicial system.
47
   The European Court of Justice has held that mandatory minimum fees violate the EC Treaty. Further, 42 of
the 47 countries monitored by the CEPEJ allow free negotiation between lawyers and clients.

                                                     38
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Access


A court fee waiver is available for indigent court users but its implementation is haphazard,
resulting in inconsistent access to justice for the indigent. There is very limited understanding
among the public of the court fee waiver program. There are no guidelines or standardized forms for
judges who grant a waiver and their decisions go unmonitored. Stakeholders report that some Court
Presidents informally discourage their judges from waiving fees, as fees are a source of revenue for
courts. Waivers may improve access to justice in some areas but without data its impact cannot be
monitored.

Legal aid programs are provided by an incomplete patchwork of services across the country.
Municipal Legal Aid Centers cover around one-third of the country and around one-half of Serbia’s
total population. Yet, most citizens are unaware of any free legal services that might be provided in
their municipality.

Reforms are currently underway to expand legal aid in line with EU practice by providing both
‘primary legal aid’ (legal information and preliminary advice) and ‘secondary’ (legal
representation) to the poor and certain vulnerable groups. While the aims of the reform are
admirable, there remains a high risk that these laws, like other reforms in recent years, will become
‘stillborn’ if fiscal and operational implications are not carefully planned or if implementation
                                       arrangements are weak. Despite several years of deliberation
     There remains a high risk that
                                       in working groups, there remain some concerns with the latest
       the Free Legal Aid law, like
                                       draft of the law. The current draft creates a bias in favor of
     other reforms in recent years,
                                       secondary legal aid, to be provided predominantly by
     will become ‘stillborn’ if fiscal
     and operational implications      attorneys, while doing little to encourage primary legal aid,
                                       which would be provided by CSOs, municipal legal aid centers,
     are not carefully planned or if
    implementation arrangements        and law faculties. Yet, the efficient delivery of primary legal
                                       services is likely to have the greatest benefit in terms of
               are weak.
                                       increasing access to justice for the largest numbers of Serbian
citizens and could be delivered at much lower unit costs. It will be important to ensure that primary
legal aid is adequately funded and delivered consistently throughout the country. Meanwhile,
proposals for secondary legal aid could be considered more cautiously. A Fee Schedule will also need
to be developed for the compensation of service providers for both primary and secondary aid.
Based on previous analysis, the fees for these services should be far lower than the current Attorney


                                                 39
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Summary of Findings >> Access


Fee Schedule.48 Quality assurance mechanisms will also be required and this is another area of high
implementation risk.

Recent legislative amendments seek to promote mediation but there are significant
implementation challenges. Due in large part to previously failed reforms, there is limited
awareness of mediation among judges, attorneys, court staff, and court users. Among those who are
aware of mediation services, few report it to be a useful means of dispute resolution. A significant
outreach initiative to potential court users will be required, along with intensive training for judges,
prosecutors, lawyers, and court staff. Further incentives should be built in to the institutional
framework to encourage the use of mediation and integrate it into the court system.

Awareness of law and practice is limited, even among professionals. Judges, prosecutors, and
lawyers struggle to conduct research and keep abreast of new
                                                                   In Serbia, continuous changes in
legislation, cases, procedures, and practices. Before 2014, the
                                                                    legislation and scarce outreach
only legal databases with consolidated legislation were
maintained by private companies on paid subscription basis.          of reforms combine to prevent
Few courts publish their court decisions, so access to these         the public from understanding
even among judges is very limited. On a positive note, the           their rights and obligations, or
Official Gazette recently launched a free online database, and        how to uphold them in court.
this should improve access to legislation. Efforts to raise awareness and build the capacity among
professionals to conduct legal research could reap significant rewards in terms of consistency of
practice across the jurisdiction.

Among the public, awareness of law and practice is even more limited. Continuous changes in
legislation and scarce outreach of reforms combine to prevent the public from understanding their
rights and obligations, or how to uphold them in court. Businesses report that access to laws – and
frequent changes in legislation and regulations – causes uncertainty that affects their business
operations. A significant injection of outreach and awareness-raising of legal reforms among the
public, particularly among potential court users, is required. Existing court users also struggle to
access information related to their own case. Examples exist in Croatia and elsewhere of court

48
  Further analysis will be required to ensure that service delivery arrangements provide sufficient incentive for
high-quality service delivery without inflating costs or creating distortions in the market.

                                                       40
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                       Summary of Findings >> Access


portals which could be applied in Serbia to enable court users to access information related to their
case in a manner consistent with privacy laws.

Women experience the judicial system differently from men in a few ways. Women report more
than men that justice services are inaccessible. More often than men, women find attorney fees to
be cost-prohibitive. Women are also more likely to experience barriers to access to justice and
inefficiencies in justice service delivery because they are more likely to be parties to certain types of
cases, such as custody disputes and gender-based violence, which exhibit specific problems relating
to procedural abuse and delay.

 Equality of access for vulnerable groups poses specific challenges. The majority of citizens surveyed
 reported that the judiciary is equally accessible regardless of age, socio-economic status, nationality,
 disability, and language. However, those citizens who are over 60 years of age, live in rural areas or
 have the least amount of education find the judicial system particularly inaccessible, suggesting that
                                            targeted interventions are warranted. Individuals with
                                            intellectual and mental health disabilities experience serious
                                            disadvantage through the process by which they are deprived
                                            of their legal capacity. Members of the Roma community,
                                            refugees and internally displaced persons also report low
                                            awareness of their rights, as well as concerns regarding fair
                                            treatment before the courts. For these groups, there is a case
                                            for strengthening the dissemination of information to relevant
                                            CSOs and community leaders about the functioning of the
Image of multi-lingual signs at Vrsac Basic judiciary and basic legal rights. The experience of the LGBT
Court, 2014.
                                            community is slightly different: though they appear more than
 the abovementioned groups to be aware of their legal rights, they remain deterred from filing cases
 due to fear of reprisal and perceived discrimination.




                                                   41
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Access


         ii.    Recommendations and Next Steps
16.     Simplify the court fee structure to enable users to estimate likely costs. Remove the cap on
court fees. Standardize the court fee waiver process, and collect and analyze data on court fee
waivers.49 Implementation of this recommendation will align with EU standards and good
international practice.50 The initial steps can be made in the short term for little to moderate costs.
     Simplify the court fee structure to enhance understanding of likely court costs. Remove the
        cap of 80,000 RSD on court fees and remove court fees for criminal cases initiated by a
        private party. (MOJ – medium term)
     Provide lay formats of information online and in paper brochures about the foreseeable
        costs and duration of proceedings to enable potential court users to better estimate the
        costs of their case. (MOJ – medium term)
     Adopt and disseminate standards for granting fee waivers, and create a standardized fee
        waiver application form and decision form for use by all courts. (MOJ, SCC – short term)
     Require staff to enter data on fee waiver requests and decisions in existing fields in AVP.
        Over time, monitor data fee waivers to encourage compliance with standards. (MOJ, courts
        – short term)




49
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline: 2.5.2 Defining the criteria for determining the
poverty threshold (in order to abolish or reduce court fees and reduce pecuniary fines in criminal and
misdemeanor cases).
50
   See Measures for the Effective Implementation of The Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct , adopted by
the Judicial Integrity Group, undated.

                                                     42
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Access


17.      Remove the Attorney Fee Schedule to enable competition in the market for legal services.
Develop a more cost-effective Attorney Fee Schedule to apply only for legal services to the state
(e.g., legal aid services and ex-officio attorney appointments). Consider moving away from a pay-
per-hearing model.51 The CCJE advises that remuneration of attorneys should not be fixed in a way
that encourages needless procedural steps.52 The European Court of Justice has held that mandatory
minimum fees violate the EC Treaty. In 42 countries monitored by the CEPEJ, lawyers’ remuneration
is freely negotiated.53 Some steps will entail low to moderate costs but they would likely be more
than offset by savings in moving from per-hearing payment for court-appointed attorney.
      Remove the Attorney Fee Schedule and allow attorneys to negotiate their fees freely with
         clients. Develop a lower Attorney Fee Schedule for legal services provided to the state (see
         below), which could also apply as the schedule for awarding costs. (MOJ – medium term)
      Periodically update Bar Association lists to inform the process of selecting ex-officio
         attorneys, and provide lists to all relevant stakeholders. Clarify the appointment process and
         re-instate/establish Bar Association hotlines for attorney referrals. Provide parties with
         information on how to make a complaint about an ex-officio attorney. (MOJ, Bar
         Associations – short term)
      Require court staff to enter data on ex-officio attorney appointments into existing AVP
         fields. Monitor the use of ex-officio attorney appointments by case type, outcome, appeal
         rate and time to disposition. Compare with data where attorneys were not appointed ex-
         officio. Over time, use data to inform future reforms of ex-officio appointments. (MOJ, Bar
         Association – short to medium term)
      Provide parties with information on how to make a complaint about an ex-officio attorney.
         Strengthen quality control mechanisms for ex-officio attorneys. (Courts, Bar Associations –
         long term)
      Consider whether the mandatory appointment of ex-officio attorneys in certain cases
         (known as mandatory defense) should be broadened. (MOJ – long term)



51
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.5.1; Defining the structure of the standardized
system of legal aid trough setting up of a normative framework and establishment of institutional support.
52
   This aligns with CCJE Opinion No. 6 (2004) on fair trial within a reasonable time.
53
   See CEPEJ Evaluation Report, 2014 (based on 2012 data). Only Cyprus, Germany, Slovenia and UK-Northern
Ireland prevent free negotiation of rates.

                                                     43
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Access


18.      Prioritize the passage of an adequately funded, cost-effective Free Legal Aid law that
expands the pool of service providers and limits State costs.54 International standards establish the
right to counsel to protect fundamental rights, and the ECHR calls for state-supported defense for
indigent parties when the interest of justice demands it. The law should be passed as a priority, and
rollout can occur in the medium term. Potential significant costs can be contained by following these
recommendations:
      Prioritize passage of the draft Free Legal Aid Law. Ensure that the operational and fiscal
         implications of the draft law are adequately addressed. Cost and provide funding for primary
         legal aid services and ensure its coverage across the territory. Secure funding to implement
         any expanded mandates provided in the law. (MOJ, MOF – short term)
      Develop an Attorney Fee Schedule for the reimbursement of providers of primary and
         secondary legal aid. Consider a payment mechanism whereby clients receive vouchers for
         legal aid services and can choose their own provider. (MOJ – short term)
      Task a Working Group within the MOJ to plan and oversee the rollout of the new law and
         draft regulations. Provide training to service providers. Establish the proposed quality
         control mechanism and relevant protocols. (MOJ – medium term)
      Provide easy-to-read information about court processes in pamphlets and on the web,
         including guidance on assessing court and attorney fees, and how to make a complaint
         against attorneys. (MOJ – medium term)
      Disseminate information to the public about the availability of legal aid services. (MOJ –
         medium term)
      Collect and analyze data on the use of legal aid by the public, including the most common
         case types, the workloads of service providers and the levels of satisfaction of users. (MOJ –
         medium term)




54
  This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.5.1: Defining the structure of the standardized
system of legal aid trough setting up of a normative framework and establishment of institutional support.

                                                    44
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Access


19.     Improve services for self-represented litigants, including simple forms and checklists for
court users, and lay brochures and guides of basic laws and procedures.55 Improved information
can enable litigants to proceed smoothly through the system without an attorney, thus improving
access to justice, as well as efficiency in the delivery of services.
     Create fields in AVP to collect data the number of self-represented litigants, their case types,
        outcomes and times to disposition. Require that staff enter data. Over time, use the data to
        design more targeted interventions to support self-represented litigants. (MOJ – short term)
     Building on lessons from Vrsac Basic Court, develop checklists of routine processes for court
        users and disseminate widely. (Courts – short term)
     Develop lay information packs for case types that are (or could be) most commonly pursued
        without an attorney, including guides, flow charts and infographics (MOJ – medium term)
     Develop/improve registries of allied professionals, such as enforcement agents, mediators
        and private notaries, to include expertise, geographic area, clear fee descriptions, complaint
        procedures, and disciplinary actions initiated or fines levied against an individual. Include in
        the bailiff registry a calculator for assessing likely bailiff fees (similar to the court fee
        calculator). (MOJ, Chamber of Bailiffs – short term)

20.      Operationalize the new Mediation Law, create incentives for court users and practitioners
to opt for mediation, and monitor the results. Conduct intensive training among professionals on
mediation and disseminate information to potential court users.56 The CCJE recognizes the critical
role of judges and lawyers for consensual settlements.57 EU Member States are required to ensure
training and quality of mediators and mediation confidentiality. While some steps can be taken
soon, this is a large undertaking requiring considerable time, money, and political will to accomplish.


55
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.5.1: Defining the structure of the standardized
system of legal aid trough setting up of a normative framework and establishment of institutional support.
56
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.5.3: establishment of an efficient and
sustainable system of dispute resolution through mediation, by improving the normative framework and
conducting the procedure of standardization and accreditation of initial and specialized training program for
mediators, as well as by promoting the alternative methods of dispute resolution. Establishment of the
register of licensed mediators in accordance with predefined criteria.
57
   CCJE Opinions No. 6 (2004) and 16 (2013). See also, De Pala, Giuseppe and Mary B. Trevor, eds., EU
Mediation Law and Practice, Oxford University Press, 2012.

                                                     45
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Access


In order to encourage mediation, the remuneration structure for attorneys will need to be changed
from one based on fees paid for hearings to one based on legal services and case resolution.
     Develop quality standards for mediators and a certified mediator registry. (MOJ – short
        term)
     Raise public awareness of mediation through websites, brochures, and public service
        announcements. Introduce a Mediation Self-Help Test, applying lessons from the
        Netherlands, so that parties can determine whether mediation would benefit them. (MOJ –
        short term)
     Establish a formal Court-annexed mediation program in all Basic and Higher Courts and
        standards for determining which cases are appropriate for mediation.58 Strengthen
        mediation confidentiality requirements, requiring that judges serving as mediators cannot
        serve as trial judge in the same case and providing trial judges only with confirmation that
        mediation was unsuccessful rather than the reasons no settlement was reached. (MOJ,HJC –
        medium term)
     Provide incentives to potential users of mediation, including:
        o Lawyers: provide subsidized, tiered training to familiarize attorneys with mediation and
            those lawyers who decide to become mediators. Require mediators who received
            subsidized training to provide a specified number of free mediations. Introduce a system
            of co-mediation and mentoring to enhance mediator skills. (MOJ, Bar Associations –
            medium term)
        o Judges: develop training and printed materials for Court Presidents and judges about the
            advantages and mechanics of mediation. Count dispositions achieved through mediation
            as part of the individual judges’ workload. (HJC, JA – medium term)
        o Public: introduce legal aid for mediation59 and provide a temporary financial stimulus via
            free mediation hours. Set fees for mediation at less than court litigation fees, reflecting
            likely lower court costs than through standard litigation. Reduce the mediation fee in
            small claims cases to bring it more in line with court fees for these cases. (MOJ –
            medium term)



58
  For example, civil matters, divorce and/or custody cases, and victim-offender mediation in juvenile cases.
59
  Fourteen EU Member States offer legal aid for cases in mediation. See CEPEJ Final Evaluation Report 2014
(based on 2012 data), Table 8.2.

                                                    46
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Summary of Findings >> Access


      Create an effective mediation case referral and management system, including: a) criteria
       for selecting cases; b) procedures for selecting a mediator; c) statistical monitoring and
       reporting; and d) coordinating activities between the court, litigants and mediators. (HJC –
       medium term)

21.      Make important cases, consolidated legislation, and information about open and disposed
cases freely accessible online.60 Implementing this recommendation will advance several CCJE
goals.61 Most of these efforts can be accomplished in the medium term for low to moderate costs.
     Provide public information about court processes via court websites and brochures and
         using radio and television public access channels. Start with information about misdemeanor
         case process for which citizens indicate that the least information is available and the
         highest demand for information exists. (MOJ, HJC – short term)
     Publish consolidated legislation online free of charge. For the most commonly-used
         legislation, provide annotated commentaries. (National Assembly, Official Gazette – medium
         term)
     Ensure that parties in pending cases can access the basic registry and scheduling information
         about their case on the web portal, applying lessons learned from Croatia. (HJC, MOJ –
         medium term)
     As discussed further in the ICT resource section, develop common standards on which
         appellate decisions should be uploaded to searchable public websites. (MOJ, SCC – medium
         term)




60
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline2.9.2: improving the transparency of work of the
judiciary by establishing public relations offices, info-desks and comprehensive websites.
61
   CCJE, Opinion 14 (2011), ‘Justice and Information Technologies (ICT)’; Opinion 6 (2004) on Fair Trial Within a
Reasonable Time. See also the Magna Carta of Judges (Fundamental Principles) on Access to Justice.

                                                       47
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Access


22.     Develop lay formats of legal information specifically aimed at reaching vulnerable
groups.62 CEPEJ reports 17 EU Member States provide special information to ethnic minorities in line
with CCJE recommendations63 supporting steps to strengthen the public perception of impartiality of
judges64 Further, providing information to designated groups can be made in the short to medium
term for low cost.
     Develop lay formats of legal information specifically tailored for vulnerable groups, including
        less educated court users, Roma and internally displaced persons. (HJC – short term)
     Develop court materials including websites in languages other than Serbian consistent with
        European standards for providing information in other languages. (MOJ – medium term)
     Organize training programs in non-discrimination and equal treatment for judges and court
        staff. (HJC, JA – medium term)
     Consider the feasibility of establishing a victim of crime service, applying lessons from EU
        Member States. (MOJ – medium term)
     Conduct a public campaign to raise awareness on the role of, and right to, a court appointed
        interpreter. (MOJ – long term)




62
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.5.6: Improvement of the normative framework
on the basis of results of assessment related to the access to justice of vulnerable and marginalized groups.
63
   Opinion 7 (2005) on Justice and Society.
64
   CEPEJ Final Evaluation Report, 2014 (based on 2012 data), page 86.

                                                     48
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                              Summary of Findings >> Governance


Internal Performance: Governance and Management of
Resources for Service Delivery
Below is a summary of the main findings and recommendations related to the inner workings of
the judicial system in Serbia, as measured against the indicators and European benchmarks outlined
in the Performance Framework agreed among stakeholders.


        a. Governance and Management
         i.    Main Findings
Effective management of the judicial system is hindered by difficulties in measuring system
performance. Data are scattered across fragmented information systems with gaps, overlaps, and
inconsistencies. Data collection tends to be manual, which absorbs a lot of time and staff resources
                                      and is prone to errors. Reports are not often tailored to
         There is not a single
                                      management needs, and so do not adequately inform decision-
      management entity in the
                                      making. Analytical capacity across the sector is inadequate, and
    Serbian justice system able to
                                      so the foundation for management decisions remains weak.
    substantiate how the system
                                      There is not a single management entity in the system able to
  actually performs or use data to
                                      substantiate how the system actually performs or use data to
   identify areas for performance
                                      identify areas for performance improvement. The system lacks
            improvement.
                                      a unified vision of what good performance should look like, or a
performance framework around which stakeholders unite to set goals and targets. As a result, it is
very difficult for the system to manage for results.

Effectiveness in strategic management is limited. The adoption of the NJRS 2013-2018 and its
Action Plan represents a significant milestone for the Serbian judiciary. Their content is
comprehensive, and progress is being made against several milestones. However, the Action Plan
may be overly ambitious and it will be difficult to implement effectively within the five-year
timeframe. The NJRS also focuses heavily on enacting legislation more than ensuring the effective
implementation of existing and new legislation to change behavior on the ground. Yet the latter is

                                                 49
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                Summary of Findings >> Governance


the more important task and it requires an organizational and managerial approach more than a
legal one. The NJRS and Action Plan also lack a clear focus on how reforms will affect court users,
who should be the ultimate beneficiaries of the reforms. A Strategy Implementation Commission
exists, but lacks a work plan and a secretariat and is not driving reform implementation. In the
resulting vacuum, it is not clear among the many fragmented stakeholders who is leading the
system’s reform effort or driving for performance improvement. At this rate, at best by 2018 Serbia
may have enacted relevant legislation but behaviors will not have changed and performance will not
have improved on the ground.

A range of key governance and management functions are currently being transferred between
various bodies. In the past, these functions were almost entirely entrusted to the MOJ. In the
somewhat poorly sequenced and inconsistently implemented                    It will be essential to
transition towards more responsibility for the HJC and SPC,                adequately prepare the
some fragmentation, overlaps and redundancies have occurred           Councils for their new functions
and impeded the effective management of system                               by the end of 2015.
performance. Moving towards the full transition of
responsibilities, it will be essential to adequately prepare the Councils for their new functions by the
end of 2015.

Limited management capacity in the Councils hinders their ability to meet the challenges ahead.
Each Council has established an organizational plan and taken steps to implement it. Each is able to
administer only their most basic requirements. The Administrative Office of the HJC is already
sizeable, but many positions are held by junior clerical staff and lawyers who see their roles in
narrow terms. The Councils lack managerial capacities to drive performance improvements across
the sector. For example, neither institution currently has a system to evaluate or re-engineer work
processes, even though such work will be critical to improving system productivity.

The internal organization within courts needs to be improved if the system is to reach and sustain
higher levels of performance. To date, the Councils have undertaken little work to assess whether
the internal organization of each court or PPO is optimal. No analysis has been conducted on how
organizational variations affect productivity or other aspects of performance. The Councils do not
carry out process re-engineering to produce high-quality outputs more rapidly, with less effort, and
at lower costs. The Court Book of Rules provides extensive guidance, but it is outmoded. Current

                                                  50
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                             Summary of Findings >> Governance


efforts to update the Book of Rules are focused narrowly on the minimum requirements to comply
                                   with the new procedural codes, suggesting that reformers are
                                   yet to appreciate the significant benefits to be reaped by
                                   simplifying and modernizing processes. Individual Court
                                   Presidents use their own systems based on personal initiative or
                                   with the support of donors. A simple case-weighting system
                                   would assist to equalize caseloads and manage workloads, but
                                   much can be done in the meantime through effective
                                   monitoring of data from existing systems.
Example of business process
engineering in Subotica Basic Court.
2013.
Inside each court, the managerial abilities of Court Presidents are pivotal to success. Stakeholders
                                     report that the performance of an individual court depends
     Greater use of managerial       largely on its Court President’s enthusiasm and willingness to
   reports from the various case     address management issues. However, most Court Presidents
     management systems, in          have received no training on management and few incentives
     particular the analysis of      exist to encourage a modern and proactive approach to
     Ageing Lists, would assist      management. Courts lack specialized staff to assist in
              greatly.               management tasks and often lack basic management tools.
                                     Greater use of managerial reports from the various case
management systems, in particular the analysis of Ageing Lists, would assist greatly. The higher
performing Court Presidents each seem to have cultivated in an ad hoc manner a small managerial
team of skilled mid-level professionals who support him/her to run the court. This model seems to
work well and could be replicated. Court Presidents also rarely meet with each other – they could
benefit greatly from colloquia aimed at sharing information, generating ideas and replicating
innovations.




                                                51
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                               Summary of Findings >> Governance



A core task for governance and management bodies is to                To enable this transformation,
ensure the appropriate mix of system resources to enable               the resource mix must favor
performance. In Serbia, neither the MOJ nor the Councils have        spending on ICT, infrastructure,
developed the capacity to consider and program resources              training and innovation, while
jointly. This has led to a resource mix that is currently            reducing spending on the large
inadequate to bring the system in compliance with EU                 wage bill, particularly on judges
accession requirements. Continued fragmentation exacerbates           and low-skilled ancillary staff.
this challenge resulting in suboptimal coordination and
management of resources, as well as resource planning. When there is a common view, it reveals a
strong bias toward adding judges and assistants, while the provision for much-needed provision for
other resources is not sufficiently prioritized. To enable transformation, the resource mix must favor
spending on ICT, infrastructure, training and innovation, while reducing spending on the large wage
bill, particularly on judges and low-skilled ancillary staff. This will require a series of calibrated
decisions by the governance and management bodies.

The mechanisms to govern integrity and conflicts of interest are not fully able to address a
perceived lack of integrity in the judicial system. Serbia’s random case assignment technology
works well to reduce predictability in the assignment of individual cases to specific judges. However,
not all courts use the functionality, and those Court Presidents who do use it overrule the system
relatively frequently. There is no corresponding technology for allocating files randomly within PPOs.
Integrity Plans have been prepared only for some parts of the judiciary. Formal rules on gift-giving to
judges, prosecutors, and staff are clear. Yet gift-giving remains prevalent. Complaints are numerous,
but grievance redress is scarce. Lessons learned from complaints do not systematically feed these
into reform processes.




                                                  52
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                      Summary of Findings >> Governance


         ii.     Recommendations and Next Steps
23.     Clearly define the governance structure, organization and goals of the Councils and
enhance their management capacities to carry out their current responsibilities and prepare for
the transition of additional functions.65 Because of the short time remaining before the scheduled
transfer of these functions on 1 January 2016, many of the recommendations will require prompt
implementation. Costs for these items are relatively low, with ongoing costs if a General Manager is
hired.
     Complete the Councils’ definitions of their working arrangements and internal rules; create
        subcommittees or other means of allocating members’ responsibilities. (HJC, SPC – short
        term)
     Amend the Constitution and relevant legislation in line with Venice Commission and CCJE
        recommendations to enshrine Council and court independence, including regarding
        appointments and promotions within the judicial system.66 In doing so, consider also
        amending rules on retiring the Council en masse every five years, replacing them with
        rotational elections that assist the retention of corporate memory and momentum. (MOJ,
        HJC, SPC, Assembly – medium term)
     Consider adding a General Manager to each Council to provide managerial oversight, based
        on a job description that requires prior management experience. (HJC, SPC – medium term)




65
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline1.2.2: Analysis and division of competences
between the HJC and SPC on one side and the MOJ on the other in regards to competences; Strategic
Guideline 1.3.1: Strengthening of professional capacity of the HJC and SPC for the analysis of the results of the
reform (hiring of experts of suitable profiles in administrative offices, development of data collection system,
training of the members of the HJC and SPC in the field of analytics, statistics and strategic planning).
66
   See for example CCJE Opinion 10 (2007), which states that ‘ [p]rospective members of the Council for the
Judiciary, whether judges or non judges, should not be active politicians, members of parliament, the executive
or the administration. This means that neither the Head of the State, if he/she is the head of the government,
nor any minister can be a member of the Council for the Judiciary. Each state should enact specific legal rules in
this area.’

                                                       53
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Governance


24.      Create an ongoing strategic and operational planning function in the judiciary to collect
and analyze data and plan process improvements.67 The CCJE specifies that the goal of data
collection should be to evaluate justice in its wider context,68 and the design of data collection
procedures, evaluation of results, their dissemination as feedback, monitoring, and follow-up
procedures should reside in an independent institution within the judiciary.69 Most of these
recommendations should be completed in the short term to prepare for transfer of responsibilities
from the MOJ. The data gathering and reporting, strategic and operational planning functions will
develop over the medium term. The creation of capacity to fulfill these functions will require
ongoing and potentially expensive staff costs.
     Define the Strategy Implementation Commission’s work plan. (Commission – short term)
     Adapt the Functional Review’s Performance Framework into a streamlined dashboard-style
         framework to monitor system performance, with a small number (maximum of 10) of key
         performance indicators most likely to drive performance enhancements. (Commission, MOJ
         – medium term)
     Consider revising the NJRS Action Plan to increase the focus on the effective rollout and
         implementation of a smaller number of reforms most likely to improve system performance
         from the perspective of court users. Identify measurable targets. Monitor and document
         results, especially in the efficiency area. (MOJ, HJC, SPC, Commission – short term)
     Require all institutions to provide brief and frequent updates on progress against targets.
         Communicate to stakeholders the baseline results, initiatives and changes in outcomes.
         (SCC, HJC, SPC – short term)




67
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Goal 1.3: Strengthening of analytical capacities for strategic
planning in the HJC and SPC.
68
   I.e., including the interactions of the judiciary with judges and lawyers, justice and police etc.
69
   See CCJE Opinion No. 6 (2004).

                                                      54
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Governance


25.      Bolster the sector’s capacity to systematically analyze workloads and determine the
efficient resource mix to achieve policy objectives.70 Adopt a simple case weighting
methodology.71 Adding judges and staff to address performance issues is ineffective without a more
rigorous evaluation of system needs. These activities should begin in the short term and would be
ongoing.
      Analyze existing caseloads based on managerial reports in the case management systems.
         Transfer files from busier courts to neighboring less busy courts, when appropriate and
         preferably during the early phases of case processing. (SCC – medium term)
      Collect and analyze data about when and why random case assignments are overruled.
         Supplement data from random case assignments with analytic reports from case
         management systems to equalize the distribution of caseloads by case type and age. (HJC,
         SCC – short term)
      Finalize a simplified case weighting methodology, applying lessons from the USAID SPP pilot.
         (HJC, SCC – medium term)
      Refine the weighting of cases over time to continually improve the allocation of resources to
         meet needs (HJC – long term)
      Create a planning, analytic, and statistics unit within each Council, with skilled staff who are
         capable of collecting and analyzing data about court performance. Task this unit to



70
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Goal 1.3 Strengthening of analytical capacities for strategic
planning in the HJC and SPC; Strategic Measure 1.3.1.2: Strengthening of the capacities of the HJC and SPC in
the field of strategic planning and analytics.
71
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.2.1: Strengthening of professional and
administrative capacity of the High Judicial Council and SPC for Planning of the budget for Judiciary
(Establishing of the number of judges, public prosecutors and assisting staff required by the Judicial system,
analysis of the workload and legal changes); Strategic Guideline 5.1.1: Establishment of an efficient system of
allocation of judges based on the principle of equalization of the number of cases per judge, as well as on
additional criteria taken into consideration in the process of establishing the new court network; respect of the
principle that a judge can be transferred only in the court of the same rank which is overtaking competences
from the abolished court; introduction of the system of permanent transfer and reallocation of judges (on
voluntary basis in accordance with the constitution and with adequate stimulation) with particular regard to
the reintegration of judges who returned office after decision of the Constitutional Court of Serbia in 2012;
termination of an office of public prosecutor only if the public prosecutor’s office was abolished.

                                                       55
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Governance


       undertake planning and policy analysis functions focusing on the key performance areas.
       (HJC, SPC – short term)
      Work with budget and management staff to consider and evaluate relative costs/benefits of
       proposals, analyze trends, develop ‘what-if’ scenarios and assess optimum resource mix.
       Provide advice to management on reform proposals. (HJC, SPC – medium term)

26.     Supplement statistics from the automated systems with periodic user surveys.72 This is a
best practice noted by the EC, CEPEJ and the International Framework for Court Excellence and an
important source of information for the judicial system. This measure is not inherently costly
although some technical assistance may be needed to develop remedies and programs.
     Develop a court user survey, building on lessons from the Multi-Stakeholder Justice Survey.
        Finance the surveys through the HJC and SPC budgets. (HJC, SPC – medium term)
     Conduct periodic open and/or focus group discussions with users at the local level. Develop
        exit questionnaires for court users. Consider results in the formulation of policies. (HJC –
        medium term)

27.      Re-engineer and streamline administrative processes in the courts and PPOs.73 Re-
engineering can result in more efficient and effective remedies for users, and reduced burden on
judges and staff without sacrificing quality. Some tasks should be short term, but the overall effort
will be ongoing. Once the analytical unit is established, ongoing costs will be minimal.
      Expand significantly the initiative to revise the Court Book of Rules. Identify opportunities to
         re-engineer and streamline processes, not only to align with recent legislative reforms but
         more broadly to improve efficiency and quality of processes. (MOJ – medium term)
      Establish a working group (comprising business process experts, judges and staff) to consider
         areas where re-engineering of processes would provide the greatest benefit. (HJC, Courts –
         short term)


72
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Measure 2.1.3.2: Regular surveys are conducted in order to
identify unethical conduct of judges/public prosecutors in cooperation with other institutions.
73
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.3: Relieving the burden on judges in terms of
administrative and technical task, which take a significant portion of their time, by reassigning them to the
administrative and technical staff and judicial assistants by ensuring uniformity of administrative and technical
procedures through the adoption of the relevant rules of procedure enhancing judiciary integrity.

                                                       56
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                     Summary of Findings >> Governance


     Facilitate colloquia for Court Presidents to discuss attempts to innovate processes, to share
        challenges and lessons and replications. (HJC, SPC in collaboration with MOJ, Court
        Presidents for local meetings – short term)
28.     Reduce opportunities for conflicts of interest to arise. Fully implement the plan of the
Complaints Handling Working Group and strengthen dissemination.74 Offering avenues for court
users to complain can be made quickly, with analysis in the medium term. There will be moderate
costs for creating the web presence.
     Require that all Court Presidents use the existing random case assignment software in
        allocating cases. Require Court Presidents to report on instances when the random
        assignment is overruled, including the rationale for reach decision. Monitor reports. (SCC –
        short term)
     Create fields in AVP to collect data on the exclusions and exemptions of relevant persons
        (i.e. judges, prosecutors, lay judges, expert witnesses etc.) from cases. Require that court
        staff enter data on exclusions and exemptions and that Court Presidents monitor trends.
        (HJC/SCC – medium term)
     Conduct a large-scale public information campaign to enhance public education on the
        scope and methods of both complaint and disciplinary procedures. (HJC – short term)
     Link the outcome of complaints processes to evaluation, discipline and promotion systems
        for judges and prosecutors. (HJC, SPC – medium term)
     Provide training for Court Presidents on their key role in complaints handling. Enforce
        disciplinary proceedings against Court Presidents who do not address complaints lodged or
        implement findings made. (HJC – medium term)




74
  This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 4.2.2: Establishment of a uniform system for the
collection, processing and analysis of complaints and petitions relating to the work of judicial office holders.

                                                      57
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Governance




29.      Disseminate information about system performance to target audiences. Improving public
awareness would enhance public trust and confidence, combat persistent negative reports about
the judiciary and demonstrate improvements in service delivery in line with Chapter 23.75 Costs are
relatively low.
     Improve analytic content of SCC Annual Reports and include summaries in lay formats.
         Accompany Annual Reports with downloadable spreadsheets of system data for the benefit
         of analysts and researchers. Maintain email distribution lists for more frequent updates of
         progress. (SCC, HJC – medium term)
     Provide more detailed and disaggregated data in the annual reports of the prosecution
         service. (RPPO – medium term)
     Develop a communication strategy to explain the role and work of the judiciary and the
         implementation of the NJRS, to address the perception gap between the general public and
         court users. (MOJ – short term)
     Provide summary updates of recent reforms and their implications for court users and
         inform target audiences of proposed reforms using lay formats. (MOJ, Councils, SCC –
         medium term)




75
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.9.1: Promoting the results of the courts and
PPOs, regular reporting on the work of the judiciary, readiness to respond to media requests, as well as
promotion of the activities of the MOJ through the strategy for communication with the media/public;
Strategic Guideline 2.9.2; Improving the transparency of work of the judiciary by establishing public relations
offices, info-desks and comprehensive websites.

                                                      58
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> Finance


        b. Financial Management
          i.    Main Findings
The judicial system in Serbia is not under-resourced, measured on either a per capita basis or as a
share of GDP. In 2012, court expenditure was 0.66 percent of GDP, which is higher than any EU
Member State monitored by the CEPEJ. Prosecution expenditure was 0.11 percent, which is slightly
lower than the EU average.

Any increase in the judicial budget is highly unlikely in the medium to long term. Serbia faces a
tight fiscal environment, characterized by a double-dip recession, high and growing public debt. The
                                      Serbian Government recognizes the need to find savings,
      In 2012, court expenditure
                                      including by reducing the wage bill and rightsizing the public
     represented 0.66 percent of
                                      sector. It would be difficult for the sector to argue for more
    GDP, which is higher than any
                                      resources, particularly given the low levels of efficiency and
   EU Member State monitored by
                                      effectiveness in the use of existing resources. Budget cuts may
               the CEPEJ.
                                      be expected, and the sector may need to ‘do more with less’,
including by funding innovations via savings identified within the resource envelope.

The courts are partly funded by court fees, and this poses some opportunities and some significant
risks.76 In 2013, the courts collected 10.22 billion RSD in fees.77 However, collection rates are low,
and courts manage to collection only around one-third of the fees due. The courts are not well
equipped to play the role of a collection agency, as the lack the legal tools to pursue delinquent
debtors78 and lack the technical capacity to dedicate to fee collection. More concerning, court fee

76
    It is estimated that nearly 43 percent of the total budget of the courts came from court fees. Draft
Comparative Court Budgeting Analysis, June, 2013, ‘Case Study – Court Budgeting Practices in Serbia’, World
Bank, page 12.
77
   The Treasury allocates 40 percent of all collected court fees to the HJC and 20 percent to the MOJ. The rest
is deposited into general consolidated revenue and used for unrelated purposes.
78
   Due to legal requirements, the courts are not able to refuse hearing a case even if the court fees are not
paid, and they cannot charge late fees or interest payments. Therefore, it is common for court users not to
delay or evade payment.

                                                      59
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Finance


revenue is declining, and will soon decline rapidly.79 With the imminent transfer of verification
services from courts to private notaries, court fees can be expected to decline by as much as 30
percent by next year.80

Budget planning and resource allocation are not linked to service delivery needs. Rather, it is based
on historical allocations of inputs, which are adjusted rarely in
                                                                     Courts manage to collection
reaction to extraordinary events, such as the reorganization of
                                                                    only around one-third of court
the court network or emergencies that may disrupt judicial
                                                                              fees due.
work. Resource allocation is not based on any caseload
forecast, performance targets, or objective norms, and the resource allocation mechanism does not
provide the courts and the prosecution service with the incentives or opportunities to improve cost-
effectiveness.

The resource mix favors personnel over all else. The large wage bill crowds out other expenditures,
including in much-needed areas such as training, ICT and
                                                                    From 2010 to 2013, less than
infrastructure. From 2010 to 2013, less than 2.5 percent of the
                                                                       2.5 percent of the court
court system’s budget was spent on capital investments, which
                                                                   system’s budget was spent on
is about half the EU average. Given the pressing need for
                                                                     capital investments, which is
widespread ICT and infrastructure upgrades, a more significant
                                                                      about half the EU average.
investment is warranted. However, disbursements on capital
projects are slow due to limited procurement capacity, and funds earmarked for capital projects are
routinely reallocated in supplementary budget processes.

The courts are generating massive and growing arrears.81 The main reason for accumulating arrears
is poor planning in the budget preparation process and the legislative reform process. Frequently,
new legislation imposes increased requirements on courts and other agencies to deliver services or
fund costs of legal procedures. However, financial and regulatory impact assessments are not
conducted and budgets are not adjusted. Arrears are increasingly impacting service delivery by


79
   Court fees fell by 12 percent from 2010 to 2013.
80
   Based on unofficial estimates shared by court financial officers.
81
   By the end of 2013, the cumulative arrears reached 3.8 billion RSD exceeding the public prosecution’s total
budget.

                                                     60
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                    Summary of Findings >> Finance


courts, including by causing delays in hearings. Arrears also generate a significant amount of work,
as court presidents and financial departments operate in a continuous crisis management mode,
including the management of litigation against service providers.

The lack of automation in the processing of requests for funding reallocation results in excessive
budget rigidity, preventing courts and PPOs from adjust funding to business needs. This rigidity is
not a requirement from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) but of the HJC, SPC and MOJ respectively,
                                      which lack both human and technical capacity to process
   Budget rigidity could be eased
                                      reallocation requests and so refuse them. The problem could
  with more modern systems and
                                      be eased with more modern systems and better coordination
    better coordination between
                                      between stakeholders, consistently with the Budget Law.
   stakeholders, consistently with
                                      Without addressing this problem, it is difficult to see how the
          the Budget Law.
                                      sector could unlock the funds necessary to achieve the
transformation required to align with EU benchmarks.

The divided management authority and lack of clear division of responsibility and accountability
over judicial budget poses coordination challenges for financial management. The budget authority
is split between the Councils (the HJC and the SPC) and the MOJ. While the Councils are responsible
for the wage bill for judges and prosecutors the MOJ is responsible for wages for all other staff in
courts and PPOs. The division of budget responsibility and accountability in other areas, such as
funding for maintenance and capital investments, is not clearly defined which slows progress and
disbursements on much-needed capital projects. The authority over other non-financial matters,
which may have a major financial impact, is also separated from the budget authority, including
decisions that affect the large wage bill.

Financial systems are fragmented and outdated. Multiple financial management systems operate
simultaneously, and staff are required to enter and transfer data between systems manually. The
judicial system lacks a clear cost structure, and there is very little information on unit costs or data
that would relate costs to outputs, making analysis of costs per case challenging. There is no
alignment between case management and accounting systems, so financial management is unable
to inform decision-making or support performance improvements.




                                                  61
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Finance


         ii.    Recommendations and Next Steps
30.     Improve the quality of financial data that decision-makers require for performance
analysis and planning.82 Implementation of this recommendation would give Court Presidents,
judges and managers the information that would allow their greater and more meaningful
engagement in court administration, as per good European practice.83
     Ensure interoperability of different financial management systems and establish a
        centralized data storage management system where financial data needs to be entered only
        once and is then exported to authorized users. (HJC, SPC, SCC, RPPO, MOJ – medium term)
     Ensure that information management systems align financial and non-financial data around
        the core business processes (e.g., once a new case is registered in case management
        software, it should be reflected in accounting systems). (HJC, MOJ – medium term)
     Do no further harm to information fragmentation by requiring that any future automation
        initiative does not exacerbate the existing fragmentation between various systems. (MOJ -
        short term)
     Utilize the analytical potential of financial data that are already collected, e.g. by developing
        a standard methodology for calculating cost-per-case and encouraging courts to improve
        cost-effectiveness. (HJC, SPC, SCC, RPPO, MOJ – short term)




82
   This recommendation aligns with the Strategic Guideline 1.2.1: Strengthening of professional and
administrative capacity of the High Judicial Council and SPC for Planning of the budget for Judiciary
(Establishing of the number of judges, public prosecutors and assisting staff required by the Judicial system,
analysis of the workload and legal changes.
83
   This is provided for in: European Charter on Statute of Judges, Article 1.6; Magna Carta of Judges
(Fundamental Principles) – Access to justice and transparency, Article 22; Recommendation Number
CM/Rec(2010)12, Council of Ministers on judges: independence, efficiency and responsibilities, Articles 40-41.

                                                     62
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                       Summary of Findings >> Finance


31.     Strengthen court fee collection. Consider establishing a body within the sector that is
responsible for the collection of all court fees.84 Implementation of this recommendation would
contribute to better collection of court fees and would enable courts with more resources to
respond to newly emerging needs.
     Assess the full budgetary impacts of the transfer of verification services from courts to
        private notaries. (HJC to lead, MOJ - short term)
     Consider amendments to Law on Court Taxes and related legislation to enable courts to
        charge interest and late fees and to refuse hearings to delinquent debtors in certain
        circumstances. Assess the fiscal impacts. (HJC, SCC – short term)
     Assess the feasibility of centralizing responsibility for all court fee collection in a specialized
        organization. (HJC to lead, with MOJ and MOF – medium term)

32.     Strengthen the accounting of financial commitments and expenditures of the courts and
     85
PPOs. Enhanced procedures should ensure that delays in registering new commitments are
minimized; and that commitment data is accurate, complete and easily reconcilable with the
budgets and shared with decision-makers.
     Within the public sector accounting framework, strengthen procedures for the accounting
        and reporting of financial commitments by the courts and PPOs. (MOJ with HJC, SPC – short
        term)
     Generate regular reports that present commitment data against budgets. (MOJ with HJC,
        SPC – short term)
     Establish a workgroup which will collect and analyze detailed information on arrears within
        the system. (MOJ with representatives from budget and accounting departments from HJC
        and SPC – short term)
     Based on the analysis of arrears work with MOF on settling existing arrears. (MOJ with HJC,
        SPC, MOF – medium term)


84
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 2.5.2: Defining the criteria for determining the
poverty threshold (in order to abolish or rreduce court fees and reduce pecuniary fines in criminal and
mesdemeanour cases).
85
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.2.2: Analysis and division of competences
between the HJC and SPC on one side and the MOJ on the other in regards to competences related with the
budget.

                                                    63
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Finance


      Identify options for ensuring that courts and PPOs are informed when their arrears are
       about to be collected from the accounts of central government agencies. (HJC, SPC, MOJ and
       MOF – short term)

33.      Allow the courts and PPOs greater flexibility to reallocate funds within their individual
budgets to optimize the use of resources and reduce arrears.86 If implemented, this
recommendation would increase the effectiveness of appropriated resources and reduce the
number of instances when the courts have to return unspent funds because the funds’ economic
classification breakdown did not match their needs.87
     Develop transparent rules and procedures enabling the courts and PPOs to reallocate funds
         with the approval of the Councils or MOJ respectively, consistently with the Budget Law.
         (HJC, SPC with MOJ – short term)
     Prioritize the timely processing of budget reallocation requests, and establish timeliness
         standards for these processes. (HJC, SPC – short term)
     Automate the submission of ad hoc reallocation requests by courts and PPOs to their
         respective Councils to minimize the administrative burden on Councils and enable the
         Councils to process requests. (HJC, SPC, Courts – medium term)




86
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.2.1: Strengthening of professional and
administrative capacity of the High Judicial Council and SPC for Planning of the budget for Judiciary
(Establishing of the number of judges, public prosecutors and assisting staff required by the Judicial system,
analysis of the workload and legal changes.
87
   This aligns with European Charter on Statute of Judges, Article 1.6.

                                                     64
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                        Summary of Findings >> Finance


34.      Clarify the division of financial responsibilities in key areas of the budget.88 Articulate
definitions of capital and current expenditures, and clarify which institution is responsible for
each.89 Clarify the division of financial responsibilities for the costs of legal procedure between the
courts and PPOs. Improve coordination with service providers (i.e. prison facilities, attorneys,
expert witnesses, and enforcement agents). Clarity and coordination would improve the
effectiveness of resource allocation by the HJC, SPC and MOJ. It would also improve operational
efficiency and minimize unnecessary disruptions, reduce arrears and prevent duplication and
equivocation among courts and PPOs.90
      Within the existing regulatory framework, develop transparent criteria for defining and
         distinguishing between capital and current expenditures. The justice sector does not need to
         wait for a government-wide solution on the distinction between current and capital
         expenditures, but should one later be articulated, the justice sector could adapt it and be no
         worse-off. (MOJ, MOF – short term)
      Incorporate these definitions into regulations to guide the cycle of budget planning and
         execution within the judiciary in order to prevent duplications in requests and delays in
         budget execution. (HJC, SPC, MOJ with approval from MOF – short term)
      Establish a working group to clarify the division of financial responsibilities for the costs of
         procedure between the courts and PPOs for mandatory expenditures relating to criminal
         investigation by either adjusting the regulatory framework or by issuing a binding
         interpretation. (HJC, SCC, SPC, RRPO and MOJ and participation MOF/Treasury and, possibly,
         of the Judicial Committee of the Parliament – short term)




88
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.2.2: Analysis and division of competences
between the HJC and SPC on one side and the MOJ on the other in regards to competences related with the
budget.
89
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.2.1: Strengthening of professional and
administrative capacity of the High Judicial Council and SPC for Planning of the budget for Judiciary
(Establishing of the number of judges, public prosecutors and assisting staff required by the Judicial system,
analysis of the workload and legal changes.
90
   This aligns with European Charter on Statute of Judges, Article 1.6.

                                                     65
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                       Summary of Findings >> HR


        c. Human Resource Management
         i.    Main Findings
A strategic approach to human resources (HR) management is not evident in the Serbian judiciary.
To enable the judiciary to transform in line with EU practice, the Serbian judiciary requires a
renewed focus on performance, productivity and investment in human potential.

Serbia has one of the highest ratios of judges-to-population in all of Europe, along with a very high
ratio of staff-to-judges. A lack of planning and constraints in resource deployment explain in part
the suboptimal system performance. Key problems with human resources management are as
follows:
     a. Judges, prosecutors and staff are added to prior staffing levels in an ad hoc manner, rather
         than based on objective demand or caseloads;91
     b. Staffing complements are set without reference to an overall resource rationalization plan;
     c. There is in effect no national judiciary or prosecution service. Appointments and hiring are
         localized, resulting in groups of human resources in each court or PPO. Once appointed,
         judges, prosecutors, and civil service staff cannot be moved without their consent from low
         to high demand courts, or to other entities that have         Serbia has one of the highest
         absorbed functions formerly performed in the courts.         ratios of judges-to-population
         Few mechanisms exist to incentivize that consent.             in all of Europe, along with a
     d. In addition to the large existing staff, large numbers of        very high ratio of staff-to-
         temporary staff and volunteers create a ‘shadow                           judges.
         workforce’. Selection is reportedly based on
         patronage, and their performance goes largely unmonitored. Their net contribution is likely
         to be marginal, and their presence often distracts more experienced staff from core
         functions, and turnover is high, resulting in a loss of corporate memory. In all, the shadow
         workforce destabilizes court operations, impedes integrated resource planning, and inhibits


91
   Judicial appointments should generally be considered very cautiously, recognizing that judges and
prosecutors are permanent investments. Once appointed, they are difficult to remove or transfer and
generate high unit costs to the system in terms of salaries, allowances, accompanying staff etc.

                                                 66
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> HR


       longer term efficiency.
    e. There is insufficient funding to support other expenditures (such as infrastructure or ICT),
       which would better support people to perform at a higher standard. Unnecessary rigidities
       in resource allocation within the sector prevent managers from making positive trade-offs
       between personnel and other expenditures (such as applying savings from personnel
       vacancies to cover training or operating costs).

Setting the appropriate number and properly allocating judges, prosecutors, and staff between
courts and PPOs in line with caseload will improve the efficiency of the judiciary and provide more
equitable public access. The demand/supply balance already suggests overstaffing, and no judicial
appointments should be made nor should vacancies be filled until the number of judges falls by
    The demand/supply balance            attrition. Furthermore, a freeze should be put in place in most
   already suggests overstaffing,        areas of staffing and a staff reduction plan be developed,
   and no judicial appointments          focusing on low-skilled ancillary staff and registry staff that
     should be made nor should           previously performed verification services. The ‘shadow
     vacancies be filled until the       workforce’ of temporary staff and volunteers should be
      number of judges falls by          reduced. The human resources already in the system need to
be used more   effectively,
              attrition.    and   investments   should be made in their training. Meanwhile, the Serbian
judiciary requires new mechanisms for determining the appropriate level of court staffing, taking
into consideration workloads, performance, and the goals of transformation. Consolidating the
responsibility for the number and deployment of judges, prosecutors, and non-judge/prosecutor
staff should greatly enhance resource planning. The Councils should immediately build their
capacities to carry out this critical task.

The allocation of funding between positions, personnel needs, and other inputs (e.g., technology)
needs a significant shift within the overall budget envelope. The system needs fewer low-level
ancillary staff and should abolish lay judges who drain resources and do not contribute to service
delivery. In its place, the system should invest in and foster specialized and analytic roles, such as
judicial and prosecutorial assistants, advisors, court managers, court secretaries, planners, IT
administrators, and statisticians. Investments in ICT, infrastructure and process re-engineering are
needed to enable better skilled people to work to higher standards.




                                                  67
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                               Summary of Findings >> HR



In particular, judicial and prosecutorial assistants make an important contribution to sector
performance, and they deserve special attention in HR reforms. Currently, they do not receive any
formal training, and there are few mechanisms in place for
                                                                      The judicial system should
their objective evaluation or promotion. Yet they provide
                                                                    create an attractive and viable
critical support to judges and the court administration in
                                                                   career path for high-performing
processing cases. Many assistants aspire to work in their role
                                                                     assistants to advance to key
only temporarily as a ‘stepping stone’ to becoming judges or
                                                                       managerial (non-judge)
prosecutors. This aspiration is unrealistic (and perhaps always
                                                                   positions in the courts1 in a new
was) in a system that already has an excess supply of judges,
                                                                     system that values mid-level
falling caseloads and shrinking mandates. Yet their skills and
                                                                            management.
corporate memory are valuable to the sector. The judicial
system should create an attractive and viable career path for high-performing assistants to advance
to key managerial (non-judge) positions in the courts92 in a new system that values mid-level
management. It should also provide training and re-skilling to enable these judicial assistants to align
their aspirations with that of a modern judiciary.

Progress is underway in developing a system for the evaluation and discipline of judges. Rules for
the evaluation of judges and prosecutors were adopted in 2014 after much delay. Although these
rules are arguably too lenient and vague, they provide a frame for measuring performance and could
be strengthened over time. Further work is also needed to link evaluation to promotion and career
progression. Incentives should be built into both systems to encourage judges and prosecutors to
develop their skills through continuing training and to demonstrate a track record of performance.
An education program with judges and prosecutors may be useful to encourage this kind of cultural
change.




92
  This could include as senior advisers, analysts, court administration professionals, court managers, chiefs of
cabinets etc.

                                                      68
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                          Summary of Findings >> HR



     The Academy should focus           There is an acute need for training and capacity building
    more on continuing training         across the Serbian judiciary. The Judicial Academy has in the
   and lead a large-scale capacity      past been overly focused on the initial training of new judges,
    building initiative for judges,     despite the system already having too many judges, falling
     prosecutors, assistants and        caseloads and shrinking mandates. Looking forward, the
          court staff alike.            Academy should focus more on continuing training and lead a
                                        large-scale capacity building initiative for judges, prosecutors,
assistants and court staff alike. Training could cover all aspects relevant to the transformation to a
modern European judiciary, based on a comprehensive training needs assessment.

                                       Overall, the judiciary needs clearer assignment of
     Continuing training should        responsibility for human resources policy making, more
  cover all aspects relevant to the    sophisticated management, and better-defined systems for
    transformation to a modern         human resources. It is incumbent on the HJC and SPC to take
  European judiciary, based on a       the lead on most of these matters.
   comprehensive training needs
             assessment.




                                                   69
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                Summary of Findings >> HR


         ii.    Recommendations and Next Steps
35.     Impose a hiring freeze for judges and do not fill judicial vacancies until a rigorous and
transparent methodology is developed to determine the needed number of judges. If adjustments
are required, transfer judges with their consent or promote judges within the system to prevent
any increase in the total number of judges. Work within the budget process to re-allocate funds
earmarked for the salaries of judicial vacancies to more productive areas, such as mid-level
specialist staff, ICT and infrastructure.93 The HJC should implement this freeze immediately and
maintain it for the medium term until the HJC develops a rigorous methodology to determine the
number of needed judges and articulates that methodology. The number of judges needed is likely
to be well below the current number of sitting judges, so a process of attrition will be required.
     Impose a freeze on filling judicial vacancies. If vacancies arise in higher ranks, fill them
        through promotion of judges from lower ranks. Do not fill the vacancies at lower ranks,
        given falling demand. (HJC, SCC – short term and ongoing)
     Gradually reduce the wage bill over time by attrition – i.e. not replacing retiring or departing
        judges. (HJC – short term and ongoing)
     If needs arise, transfer existing judicial assistants from less-busy courts to busier courts of
        the same court level within the same appellate region. (HJC, SCC – medium term)94
     Work within the budget process to re-allocate funding for unfilled judicial positions to other
        priority expenditures, such as investments in managerial capacity, training, ICT upgrades and
        infrastructure improvements. (HJC, SCC, MOJ with approval of MOF – medium term)



93
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.1.1: Establishment of an efficient system of
allocation of judges based on the principle of equalization of the number of cases per judge, as well as on
additional criteria taken into consideration in the process of establishing the new court network; respect of the
principle that a judge can be transferred only in the court of the same rank which is overtaking competences
from the abolished court; introduction of the system of permanent transfer and reallocation of judges (on
voluntary basis in accordance with the constitution and with adequate stimulation) with particular regard to
the reintegration of judges who returned to office after the decision of the Constitutional Court of Serbia in
2012; termination of an office of public prosecutor only if the public prosecutor’s office was abolished.
94
   See also Recommendation 1 to improve performance management in courts, including through the transfer
of files.

                                                       70
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Summary of Findings >> HR


      Request the consent of existing judges to be appointed as substitute judges in courts of the
       same court level within the same appellate region. Transfer judges temporarily with their
       consent, where needs arise. (HJC – medium term)
      Create incentives for judges to consent to transfers and be appointed as substitutes,
       including financial incentives and consideration in future promotion processes. (HJC, SCC –
       medium term)
      Establish a rigorous and transparent methodology at the central level to determine the
       number of judges needed, taking into account, inter alia, population, geography, demand for
       court services, demand by case type, domestic legal requirements, recent reforms to court
       mandates, and the experience of comparator EU Member States. (HJC, SCC – medium term)

36.    Determine staffing objectively and in line with European experience, and adjust staffing
when circumstances change.95 Reduce temporary employees and ‘shadow’ staff. Costs would be
moderate in the short term, but reforms would produce significant savings.
     Analyze non-judge staffing needs in the courts based on caseload and economies of scale.
       Examine outliers to identify immediate staff reductions through layoffs or longer term
       through attrition. (HJC, SPC, MOJ – short term)
     Develop a staff reduction program in the courts and PPOs, focusing on rationalizing staff in
       accordance with the changing mandates of courts (i.e. targeting redundancies of land
       registry staff, verification staff etc.) and reducing or outsourcing ancillary staff whose roles
       do not contribute to case processing (cleaners, drivers, typists, registry staff, maintenance
       staff, carpenters etc.). (HJC, SPC, MOJ – short term)
     Offer incentives to staff to move from the courts to the Executive Branch or PPOs as a
       preferred alternative to layoffs. (HJC, SPC, MOJ – short term)
     Strictly limit reasons for hiring temporary or contract employees. Standardize reporting on
       numbers, roles, and costs of the shadow workforce. (MOJ – short term)
     Freeze all volunteer appointments and phase out the volunteer program in courts and PPOs.
       (SCC – short term)


95
  This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.3.2: Analysis of the Results of work of Courts
and PPOs and undertaking of the measures pursuant to the results of the analysis for better deployment of
human resources in judiciary (determining the required number of deputies, judges and equitable caseload
and allocation of cases.

                                                    71
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                          Summary of Findings >> HR


      Create formulas for determining funds and number of case processing staff per judge and
       administrative staff based on units of work (e.g., standard number of ICT people per device
       supported). Establish transparent justifications for deviations from the staffing levels set in
       the standards. Address staffing levels of administration and public employees in the medium
       term. (MOJ – short to medium term, with HJC advising prior to 2016.)
      Create a more sophisticated staffing needs/norms model considering the impact of
       statutory, administrative, or technological changes on staff needs and include other civil
       servants and public employees. (HJC – long term)

37.     Establish systems to select, evaluate, and promote the most qualified judges to enhance
quality, increase efficiency and public trust in the judiciary.96 Use the evaluation and promotion
system to recognize good performance and incentivize innovation. Develop and apply remedial
actions, including mandatory re-training, for low-performing judges. Implementation of recently-
adopted evaluation rules should be the focus in the short term.
     Clarify performance evaluation procedures, including how evaluation ratings will be used to
        make decisions about probation, promotion and discipline. This will entail changes to both
        statutes and evaluation rules. (HJC, National Assembly – medium term)
     Establish criteria and rules for filling vacant Court President positions so that temporary
        appointments, if necessary, are for only a short duration. (HJC – medium term)
     Implement the recently-adopted rules on the criteria, standards and procedure for
        promotion and performance appraisal of judges. (HJC – short term)
     Consider tightening the rules in the following manner (HJC – medium term):
             o Establish more rigorous standards for the achievement of a satisfactory rating;
             o Reduce the periods of evaluation for probationary judges to ease the administrative
                burden on evaluation panels;
             o Include evaluation criteria that create incentives to improve system performance,
                including participation in training, mentoring of less-experienced judges and
                participation in task forces and working groups;



96
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.5.1: Encouragement, strengthening and
maintaining the quality of human resources in judiciary, especially through improvement of the system of
professional evaluation and management of human resources.

                                                  72
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                       Summary of Findings >> HR


            o  Give preference in promotions to judges who have served in multiple courts or
               voluntarily worked on backlog reduction in their own or other courts.
      Provide evaluation panels with sufficient support staff to compile information against
       evaluation criteria, to facilitate panels in the conduct of performance reviews. (HJC – short
       term)
      Conduct an education campaign for judges about the skill enhancement and promotional
       purposes of evaluations. (HJC – medium term)

38.      Conduct a comprehensive training needs analysis for existing judges, prosecutors and
court staff. Re-balance the focus of the Judicial Academy towards continuing training, and design
and implement a significant continuing training program for all judges, prosecutors and staff.97
Enhanced continuous training for judges and assistants should commence in the short term. The
significant injection of training will require a moderate investment.
     Reduce the initial training intakes until a transparent and rigorous methodology has been
         developed to determine the number of needed judges and legal issues raised in the recent
         Constitutional Court decision have been resolved. (HJC, SPC, JA – short term)
     Rebalance the Judicial Academy budget by reducing funding for initial training activities and
         increasing funding for continuing training activities. Shift the focus of staff towards the
         preparing continuing training activities. (JA, MOJ – short term)
     Conduct a comprehensive training needs assessment for existing judges, prosecutors, and
         staff. (JA, HJC, SPC, MOJ – short to medium term)
     Focus the Academy as a training center developing rigorous, consistent, and effective
         training materials and methods, using lessons from the European Judicial Training Network
         (EJTN) as a guide. (JA, HJC, SPC, MOJ – short term)
     Adopt a skills-based training program for court staff to enhance performance in their current
         roles. (JA, HJC – medium term)
     Create a training plan and provide government-sponsored training to other employees (e.g.,
         Court Managers, registry staff). (JA – medium term)
     Raise the standards of the initial training curriculum and evaluation. (JA, HJC, SPC – medium
         term)

97
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 3.1.2: Further improvement of continuous
training at the Judicial Academy.

                                                 73
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                                 Summary of Findings >> HR


39.     Develop effective, efficient, and transparent disciplinary measures to ensure quality of
justice and effective access to justice.98 Each of these recommendations is relatively inexpensive;
reducing the number of complaints could result in the Disciplinary Prosecutor and Commission
becoming more cost-effective.
     Ensure adequate staffing of disciplinary departments in the HJC and SPC, and consider
        increasing their salaries commensurate with their responsibilities. Reduce delays in the
        application of disciplinary procedures. Provide training on disciplinary procedures to judges,
        prosecutors and court staff. (JA, HJC, SPC – medium term)
     Issue opinions with practical examples of permissible/impermissible conduct, including
        online FAQs about ethics. (HJC – short term)
     Analyze the outcomes of complaints processes at a systemic level, and use data to inform
        future reforms. (HJC – long term)

40.      Consolidate HR policy development in the HJC and promote a professional, properly-
managed staff within Courts.99 This should conform with the CCJE adjudication standards and
promote efficiency100 in accordance with the Bangalore principles.101 While some steps could begin
immediately, most tasks are medium term. Centralized staffing and performance pay are long term
efforts. These tasks are generally low cost, but some require the addition of a moderate number of
staff to the HJC.
     Invest in mid-level analytical staff in the courts with an additional benefit of creating an
         attractive career path in court administration for judicial assistants and court staff. Consider
         a regional approach for analytical tasks for smaller courts. (HJC – medium term)

98
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 4.1.2: Normative Strengthening of Disciplinary
accountability of judges, public prosecutors and deputy prosecutors, particularly emphasizing the obligation to
adhere to the code of ethics.
99
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.3: Reliving the burden on judges in terms of
administrative tasks which take a significant portion of their time, by reassigning them to the administrative
and technical staff and judicial assistants by ensuring uniformity of administrative and technical procedures
through the adoption of the relevant rules of procedure.
100
    See CCJE Opinion No. 2.
101
     ‘The responsibility for court administration, including the appointment, supervision and disciplinary control
of court personnel should vest in the judiciary or in a body subject to its direction and control .’ Implementation
of Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct, 2010.

                                                        74
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                      Summary of Findings >> HR


    Create a detailed position description, specific evaluation process and career path for
     judicial assistants (from junior to senior assistant and on to advisor). Develop specific
     evaluation criteria and a rigorous evaluation process for judicial assistants that recognize
     their contributions to system performance. (SCC in consultation with HJC – short term)
    Build capacity within the Councils to take responsibility for the use and number of civil
     servants and employees. Adjust the systematization by reducing the number of court
     classifications to allow flexible deployment. (HJC, MOJ – short term)
    Codify that the HJC and SPC (with dedicated HR units) will be responsible for non-fiscal
     aspects of court employee policy development. (National Assembly, HJC, SPC, MOJ – short
     term)
    Establish uniform civil servant and labor processes for non-judge employees (uniform
     judicial-sector job descriptions, position-specific recruitment and selection methods,
     performance evaluations with standardized rankings); identify training needs and candidates
     for succession. (HJC– medium term)
    Identify the source of reluctance in certain courts to utilize Court Managers; raise awareness
     of the how Court Managers are successfully utilized in some courts. Establish standard
     duties and qualifications for Court Managers. (HJC – medium term)
    Introduce periodic reviews of performance evaluations by a centralized authority to ensure
     procedures are followed. (HJC– long term)




                                               75
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                         Summary of Findings >> ICT


        d. ICT Management
         i.    Main Findings
The Serbian judicial system does not yet approach ICT as a tool for transformation. Responsibility
for ICT is fragmented. An overall governance group representing primary justice institutions is
needed to set ICT policies, prioritize reforms, and conduct long term planning across the judicial
system. Without such coordination, ICT investments decisions will be taken on an ad hoc basis and
continue to be donor-driven and supplier driven.

ICT is under-funded and some basic needs are not being adequately addressed. Hardware is often
old; internet connections are uneven across the territory;            Hardware is often old; internet
server capabilities are weak; and many courts lack adequate            connections are uneven across
scanning facilities. ICT literacy is generally low across the         the territory; server capabilities
judiciary, and basic computer training has not been provided          are weak; and many courts lack
for judges, prosecutors and court staff. Several courts have no         adequate scanning facilities.
ICT support staff, while others do not have enough staff, or
have temporary or poorly trained ICT staff. ICT staff turnover is high, and developing in-house ICT
capacity will be critical to effective operations and sustainability.

The judiciary relies on a variety of unlinked ICT systems for case processing, case management,
and document management. The system used in Basic and Higher Courts (AVP) could readily
produce greater functionality than it does currently. However, there has been no training on AVP
since its rollout in 2010. Ongoing development has been limited, due to poor budgeting and lack of
interest in evidence-based decision-making. New case management systems are being rolled out in
different courts, and the process has been deeply fragmented. In many cases, courts continue to rely
on hard copies that duplicate existing case management systems, and the systems have yet to instill
changed behaviors.

Automated information exchange is extremely limited across the sector . The exchange of
documents between lower and higher courts, between courts and PPOs, and between courts and
external institutions (such as police and prisons) is almost entirely manual, resulting in significant

                                                  76
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                               Summary of Findings >> ICT


      The AVP system could readily     inefficiencies, errors, and delays in case processing and delays in
      produce greater functionality    receiving funds owed to the court or other parties. Furthermore,
      than it does. However, there     ICT remains largely unexplored for sharing information on court
      has been no training on AVP      practice, accessing services, or facilitating the exchange of
         since its rollout in 2010.    documents between legal professionals and the judicial system.

The judicial system is caught in a ‘vendor lock-in’, where excessive dependence on vendors has
heightened costs and risks and undermined in-house capacity. Vendors are currently responsible
for critical tasks throughout the judiciary, from development through to maintenance, and vendors
own and control the data. Contracts favor the vendors, in large part because they were not subject
to careful negotiation.

Courts, PPOs and the Councils need meaningful, accurate, and timely statistics generated by the
case management system to become more effective in managing overall system performance. In
recent years, significant improvements have been made, particularly to case management systems,
and the Serbian judiciary is now a relatively data-rich environment. Data quality varies but is
sufficiently reliable to inform decision-making.102 Yet, data collection requires substantial manual
effort, which is time-consuming, inefficient, and prone to errors.103 This negatively affects daily
operations and inhibits the much-needed transition to evidence-based decision-making in the
sector.




102
    For discussion of how data was used in the Functional Review, see Annex 1 Methodology of the Functional
Review Report. The Functional Review team found that the data environment in Serbia is relatively rich
relative to comparable jurisdictions. Data across the system contained numerous errors but generally minor
ones. However, data were deeply fragmented across the system, and thus required processing, cleaning and
triangulation to validate findings. The process highlighted that stakeholders could generally rely on data from
existing systems to identify broad trends to inform decision-making, particularly at the individual court level.
Unfortunately however, the use by stakeholders of existing data has been limited to date.
103
    For example, the judiciary created a centralized, standalone dashboard application to examine court
performance and resources use. However, the courts enter data manually instead of downloading or exporting
them from the case management system.

                                                      77
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                             Summary of Findings >> ICT


         ii.    Recommendations and Next Steps
41.      Develop more robust ICT governance structures to ensure future investments target
justice sector goals and meet business needs.104 Activities should commence in the short term and
require few costs:
     Establish a strategic cross-institutional ICT Governance
         Group to include senior managers of relevant
         institutions. (MOJ, HCC, SCC, SPC, RPPO – short term)
     Establish an Operational Data Working Group that sits
         as a second tier in the ICT governance structure to
         enable front-line managers and staff to provide input
         to information management reforms. (ICT Governance
         Group – short term)
     Establish a technical working group of ICT staff across
         the sector to discuss detailed aspects of rollout.

42.     To enhance ICT funding: conduct a cross-judiciary
technology architecture assessment; establish a long-range
budget plan to sustain automation initiatives; and conduct
cost- benefit and total cost of ownership (TCO) analyses for
all proposed projects.105 Costs would be moderate and
additional staffing may be required. Activities could begin Title: Efikasna Primena Technologije,
immediately, but build in the medium term:                      submitted by an entrant to the Justice
     Conduct a Technology Architecture Assessment to Competition, World Bank 2014
        assess the current technology environment across all judicial sector institutions, and develop
        a blueprint of future Target State Technology architecture including a transition strategy,
        roadmap, and solution architecture. (MOJ ICT division and Architecture Consultancy – short
        term, endorsed by ICT Governance Group)

104
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.3: Ensuring sustainable development OF ICT
system through financial management and user support services during entire life cycle.
105
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.14: Improving the fundraising capacities for
ICT and efficient fund management.

                                                     78
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                             Summary of Findings >> ICT


       Establish a defined methodology for conducting business case analyses for proposed
        projects and analyzing their likely total cost of operations. (ICT Governance Group – short
        term)
       Create a complete inventory of ICT hardware and software assets, and ICT HR capacities in
        the judiciary beginning with information in BPMIS. (MOJ – medium term)
       Based on the inventory, develop a sector-wide long-range ICT budget plan. (ICT Governance
        Group in cooperation with MOF – medium term)
       Review future donor-funded proposals to determine TCO and assess whether the life-cycle
        costs can be supported with available funding. (MOJ – medium term)

43.     Invest in some ICT management capability, particularly in contact negotiation and
oversight.106 Effective contract management would increase value for money and reduce excessive,
costly reliance on ICT vendors (vendor lock-in). Beginning immediately, contract arrangements for
ICT vendor support should be more explicit and benefit the State more. Analysis of services to be
brought in-house should begin in the medium term. These activities are likely to result in cost
savings, particularly in light of moderate upfront investment in contract analysis and negotiation.
     Negotiate the terms of future ICT contracts to ensure that the judiciary, and not vendors,
        own the data and control ICT operations. As they come due, re-negotiate service-level
        agreements to specify key details.107 (ICT Governance Group, Directorate for E-Government,
        Ministry of State Administration and Local Self-Government – medium term)
     Evaluate which ICT services should be brought in-house by preparing feasibility and cost
        studies comparing vendor and government-provided services. (ICT Governance Group –
        medium term)
     Create a disaster recovery site for data collected by courts and prosecutors. (MOJ – medium
        term)

106
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.7: Achieving sound balance between external
and internal services with emphasis on efficiency.
107
    Details should include: level and ownership of source code; how corrective preventative and upgrade
maintenance will be provided, and fixed rates for regular maintenance; details of the development services to
be provided; effective version release management so there are no conflicting versions; specifics of how help
desk services will be provided (online, on the phone, in person) and the times of services for each mode of
delivery; a requirement that vendors create trouble tickets and report on most common help desk assistance
and interventions; and specific sanctions if contract terms are not met.

                                                     79
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                              Summary of Findings >> ICT


44.     Develop a cadre of well-trained local ICT staff with defined responsibilities.108 Even with
more robust central ICT support services, individual courts require local ICT staff for front-line
support which, if not rectified can reduce employee effectiveness and inhibit service delivery. Most
of the recommendations in this section can be expected to require mid-range upfront investments
(of between 100,000 and 500,000 EUR) and could begin in the medium term after critical ICT
operations are stabilized.
     Develop a staffing plan to add more specialized ICT staff in critical areas109 with appropriate
        education and experience and knowledge of court operations.110 (ICT Governance Group –
        short term)
     Establish ICT career streams in critical areas to ensure that the interests of the judicial sector
        are well managed in partnership with the private sector and other implementation partners.
        (MOJ – medium term)
     Create ICT staffing norms within courts and PPOs relative to total number of staff in each
        location. Hire sufficient and appropriately experienced staff at each court, or regionally to
        cover a number of smaller Courts. (MOJ, HJC, SPC – medium term)
     Conduct a needs assessment of ICT staff training needs. Based on the needs assessment,
        develop a training program for ICT staff. (ICT Governance Group – medium term)

45.     Enhance existing case management systems by ensuring all available functions are used
and that sufficient training is provided. Add several critical features and fields that are generally
present in case management systems. Improve server performance.111 Upgrading AVP software
and servers, while more costly, should begin now.
     Provide training on case management functionality for judges and court staff. Provide
        specific training on data entry for court staff, applying lessons from the Commercial Courts.
        (MOJ – short term)

108
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.13: Motivating well-performing ICT staff.
109
     Critical areas include project management, enterprise architecture, system integration, application
management, infrastructure and operations management, information security, business process analysis,
information management, ICT procurement, technical writing, and so forth.
110
    There is also a clear need for trained statisticians, data management professionals, and reporting analysts
within the judiciary sector. See discussion in Governance and Management chapter.
111
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.6: Improving efficiency of ICT operations
through performance measurement.

                                                      80
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                              Summary of Findings >> ICT


       Conduct periodic audits of case management system entries to ensure accuracy and
        consistency. (MOJ – medium term)
       Develop a cost estimate for identified improvements in AVP that do not require a complete
        overhaul of the system. (MOJ – short term)
       Extend functionality of AVP to include electronic document flows. (MOJ – medium term)
       Investigate causes of slow server communication speed, and upgrade servers and WAN
        connections where needed to improve the speed of transactions. Replace distributed AVP
        architecture (where each court has its own server) with larger server ‘farms’, as
        recommended by the ICT Strategy Report. (MOJ – medium term)

46.     Implement standard (or at least consistent) information management practices across the
judiciary to improve the quality of record-keeping and enable sector-wide data analysis.112 Resolve
problems with the statistical reporting in the judiciary’s automated systems so that data from courts
are consistently submitted, accurate and, to the extent possible, generated by the system and not by
manual calculations. Low-cost but high-return activities should commence in the short term.
Introduction of a statistical umbrella is estimated at three to six months of person effort and should
be implemented in the short to medium term.
     Determine which data fields in AVP should be mandatory and introduce those and greater
        field validation to AVP to enhance the quality of system data. (ICT Governance Group, MOJ –
        short term)
     Evaluate how the dashboard function of BPMIS can be aligned into existing case
        management systems. (ICT Governance Group, HJC – medium term)
     Define detailed technical requirements, architecture, and implementation plans for an
        Information Integration, Data Warehouse and Business Intelligence Solution to support
        decision-making, management reporting, and access to case file information and history
        regardless of format and system of record. (ICT Governance Group, MOJ – medium term)113
     Develop and formalize data management mechanisms consistent with ISO/IEC TR
        10032:2003 framework to include (ICT Governance Group – medium term and ongoing):



112
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.4: Achieving uniformity of ICT services, tools
and methods across the entire judicial sector.
113
    This task should follow the overall Technology Architecture assessment

                                                      81
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                              Summary of Findings >> ICT


             o   A sector-wide Corporate Data Model and Data Dictionary to document and maintain
                 business and technical definitions across time and facilitate dialogue with judges,
                 managers and staff. 114
             o   Data management processes, including data management roles and responsibility,
                 data ownership and stewardship.
             o   A data quality management process that includes ongoing maintenance and review
                 of the data across subject areas (see ISO 8000 Standard for Data quality and Master
                 Data).
             o   Data quality audits on a regular basis, including audits of business processes.

47.      Link the judiciary’s ICT systems and share documents electronically wherever possible. 115
Establishing standards should begin in the short term and continue into the medium term. These
activities will require a moderate investment. The first and most critical of these activities is
estimated at 20,000 to 100,000 EUR. Development of data exchange protocols is likely to be in the
100,000 Euro range.116 While electronic data flows between the courts would be quite costly,
improving scanning to allow document sharing is a low-cost alternative.
     Ensure interoperability by developing and implementing standards required of vendors/
         developers. For example, every ICT system needs to be able to export data from particular
         fields (e.g., parties’ names, relevant dates, assigned judge) using XML structures. (ICT
         Governance Group – short term)
     Review standards for scanning documents to increase the number and types of documents
         scanned. Address existing barriers to scanning by increasing the quantity and quality of
         scanners and strengthening server capability. (ICT Governance Group, MOJ – medium term)

114
    This also will be the basis for a Metadata registry that will enable a metadata-driven exchange of data
internally and externally (see ISO/IEC 11179 standard for representing an organizations data in a metadata
registry).The exchange is based on exact semantic definitions of data elements independent of their
representation in particular systems.
115
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.11: Introducing diversified communication
channels by using modern ICT tools.
116
    This contrasts to migrating to a single system, which is estimated at a minimum of 500,000 EUR and in
excess of 1,000 person days of effort not including associated licenses and communication connections. The
judiciary also does not have the specialized staff needed to manage this transition and is unlikely to for the
medium to longer term.

                                                     82
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                           Summary of Findings >> ICT


       Develop data exchange protocols to improve interoperability between existing systems.
        Install middleware to allow integration of data among existing systems. (MOJ – medium
        term)
       Install and use middleware to share data between the courts and prosecutors. (ICT
        Governance Group, MOJ – long term)
       Expand data exchange protocols and common technical standards to allow interoperability
        between the judiciary and external institutions, the law enforcement, the National Criminal
        Sanction database, and financial institutions. (MOJ – long term)

48.     Capitalize on e-justice by moving beyond providing information about the system to
providing specific case information and allowing two-way interaction (e.g., paying fees,
completing forms).117 Doing so will also allow Serbia to take advantage of the European Justice
Portal as a one-stop shop for citizen access. The cost of implementing the short-and medium term
recommendations is estimated in the ICT Strategy Report at less than 20,000 EUR:
     Evaluate the e-filing pilot,118 make changes as needed, and expand to other Courts.119 Upon
        expansion, shift resources in courts from data entry to tasks which support the modest costs
        of implementing e-filing. (ICT Governance Group – medium term)
     Create common look-and-feel standards for all court websites. Improve existing websites or
        create new websites for all first instance courts to move from basic functionality to providing
        dynamic, case-specific information and allowing two-way interaction, including forms to be
        downloaded for completion. (HJC, SCC – medium term)
     Develop common standards about appellate decisions to be uploaded to the public
        websites. (SCC – medium term)
     Prepare to participate in the EU’s e-justice strategy prescribing a European Justice Portal as a
        one-stop shop for citizen access. (ICT Governance Group – long term)



117
     This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.13: Increasing the level of information
available across judicial sector.
118
    Implementation at the pilot courts required only that two personal computers, two printers, one reader
and scanner for each court, a smart card for each participant, and a shared time stamp account.
119
     This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.15: Improving of the functionality and
coverage of the judicial sector by ICT systems.

                                                   83
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                            Summary of Findings >> ICT


49.      Require new and continuing employees to demonstrate computer literacy and provide
staff with relevant ICT training.120 Computer literacy requirements should be introduced in the short
term with training in case management systems implemented in the medium term. Costs of this
item are unknown but are likely to be moderate.
     Require that all future job classifications in the sector require a minimum level computer
         software and word processing skills. (MOJ, HJC, SPC, Courts – short term)
     Provide ICT literacy course to judges, prosecutors and court staff. Offer ICT refresher courses
         on-site in courts. (MOJ, HJC, SCC – short term)
     Develop a training program focusing on case management system training. Distinguish
         between ICT specialists, super-users, and other employees to tailor ICT needs to different
         staff, including on the benefits of information management (case data capture and quality)
         and how statistical reporting can assist their work. (HJC, SPC, Judicial Academy – medium
         term)




120
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.2.9: Improving ICT competencies of end users,
ICT staff and management.

                                                    84
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                            Summary of Findings >> Infrastructure


        e. Infrastructure Management
         i.    Main Findings
The overall condition of justice sector infrastructure is very poor. The new court network brings
                                     Serbia to the EU average of number of court locations per
  Most facilities are between 30     100,000 inhabitants. However, most facilities are between 30
     to 60 years old and have        to 60 years old and have received only minimal maintenance
      received only minimal          for the last 20 years or more. Electrical installations in many
    maintenance for the last 20      judicial facilities are so dire that they are unable to support
          years or more.             much needed investments in ICT. It is clear that significant
                                     investments in infrastructure will be required to enable the
system to perform in a manner that is consistent with European standards.

 The insufficient capacity of existing infrastructure affects service delivery. There is a lack of
 courtrooms in courts and interview rooms in PPOs. Poor working conditions are identified by many
                                      stakeholders as a significant reason for reduced quality of
                                      court services. Courts commonly occupy buildings designated
                                      as cultural heritage sites, which makes maintenance and
                                      renovation difficult and expensive. In addition to maintenance
                                      challenges, some buildings were not designed to be courts
                                      and do not provide a functional space. In many cases, two or
                                      three judges share a single office space and use this
                                      ‘chambers’ as their courtrooms, creating concerns for privacy
                                      and security. Despite this, existing courtrooms are not used
                                      optimally. Hearings are held only in the mornings and
                                       schedules could be tighter to maximize the use of this scarce
Image of cramped workspace in a        resource. The lack of space also creates obstacle to reforms
Misdemeanor Court, 2013.
                                       that would improve service delivery, such as the
 establishment of preparatory departments.




                                                85
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                             Summary of Findings >> Infrastructure


Management of judicial infrastructure is ineffective. Data are only partially available and the
system lacks basic information, such as the number of facilities
                                                                            The sector lacks basic
under its control and confirmation of their ownership.
                                                                          information, such as the
Responsibilities were split between the MOJ for facilities, and
                                                                        number of facilities under its
the HJC and the SPC for operating costs. This is now
                                                                         control and confirmation of
consolidated with the MOJ. The MOJ’s Investment
                                                                              their ownership.
Department, which is currently in charge, has insufficient
capacity in terms of staff, skills and funding to perform its functions. At the same time, the Councils
lack staff dedicated to this task and do not yet have a plan for how to build their capacity for this
purpose. The disbursement rates for capital expenditures are low, and funds are routinely lost or
reallocated in the supplementary budget process to meet other needs, such as payment of arrears.

There are no design standards or maintenance protocols for courts and PPOs. This results an
inadequate number, size, and type of courtrooms and PPOs as
                                                                Disbursement rates for capital
well as inadequate access for people with limited mobility and
                                                               are low, and funds are routinely
sub-optimal working conditions in judicial facilities.
                                                                   lost or reallocated in the
                                                               supplementary budget process
                                                                 to meet other needs, such as
                                                                     payment of arrears.




                                                  86
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                  Summary of Findings >> Infrastructure


         ii.    Recommendations and Next Steps
50.    Conduct an inventory of all buildings in the judiciary, clarify ownership of each building
and assess its current condition.121 This activity can commence in the short term and continue in the
medium term for moderate costs.
     Confirm that the MOJ (and not the HJC) is responsible for maintaining the inventory and
       secure funding through the state budget to prepare the inventory. (MOJ, HJC, MOF – short
       term)
     Conduct the inventory, applying lessons from the USAID-funded JRGA project for the
       Misdemeanor Courts. Include basic information, such as ownership of buildings, and an
       assessment of conditions. (MOJ with HJC, SPC – medium term)

51.      Based on the inventory, create an adequately-funded infrastructure plan that enables
multi-year implementation. Closely monitor the implementation of the plan to ensure that
budgets are fully executed in accordance with the plan.122 These items can be accomplished in the
medium and long term. Overall costs for full implementation will be significant, but donors may be
willing to provide support, particularly if the judiciary makes progress in the implementation of other
recommendations outlined in this Review.
      Increase the capacity of the Investment Department by re-allocating staff within the MOJ (or
         from other ministries) and provide relevant training. (MOJ – short term)
      Develop, regularly update and continuously implement a long term investment strategy for
         renovation of facilities. (MOJ, HJC, SPC, with international assistance – medium to long term)




121
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 1.2.2: Analysis and division of competences
between the HJC and SPC on one side and the MOJ on the other in regards to competences related with the
budget; Strategic Guideline 1.2.3.
122
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.1.6: Development of infrastructural investment
planning procedures based on the level of priority to enable the Ministry’s assessment of a clearly defined and
prioritized list submitted by the HJC and the SPC.

                                                      87
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                   Summary of Findings >> Infrastructure


52.     Ensure the maximum use of scarce courtrooms and investigative chambers.123 Maximizing
use of courtrooms can be done quickly, without funds.
     Expand the daily court schedule to ensure that hearings take place throughout the day using
        facilities to their maximum capacity. (Court Presidents with Court Managers – short term)

53.     Develop guidelines with minimum rules for design and maintenance standards for Courts
and PPOs.124 An expert team or working group should develop terms of reference for developing
design and maintenance guidelines. IMG developed a ‘Model Court Guideline’ that can be used as a
baseline for design and operation standards. Standards for the number, size and configuration of
courtrooms and chambers are needed to determine each facility’s requirements.125 The standards
should reflect full use of existing space. Tasks commence in the medium term and involve moderate
costs.
     Conduct a functional analysis of the current needs of users. (MOJ in coordination with HJC,
        SPC – medium term)
     Develop the design and maintenance guidelines. (MOJ through external consultants –
        medium term)
     Form an infrastructure team with appropriate background and experience representing the
        primary institutions to set standards for number of needed courtrooms and chambers, as
        well as appropriate size and configuration standards taking into account the profile of the
        Court/PPO and the physical limitations of each facility. (MOJ, HJC, SPC – medium term)
     Secure state and international funding support. (MOJ – long term)




123
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.3.4: Infrastructural investments in courts and
prosecution facilities targeted at tackling the lack of courtrooms and prosecutorial cabinets, thereby increasing
the number of trial days per judge, reducing the time between the two hearings and significantly expediting
the investigative proceedings.
124
    This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.1.6: Development of infrastructural investment
planning procedures based on the level of priority to enable the Ministry’s assessment of a clearly defined and
prioritized list submitted by the HJC and the SPC.
125
    Recommendation Number CM/Rec(2010)12, Council of Ministers on judges: independence, efficiency and
responsibilities.

                                                       88
Serbia Judicial Functional Review                                  Summary of Findings >> Infrastructure


54.    Improve access to courthouses and PPOs to persons with physical disabilities.126 Improved
information can be provided and initial assessments conducted in the short term at low cost.
     Provide physical layout information on court websites, including information about
       restrictions to accessibility. (HJC, SCC – short term)
     Conduct a campaign to raise awareness among judges and staff about access limitations for
       those with physical disabilities, applying lessons from the current campaign in Leskovac Basic
       Court. (HJC – short term)
     Assess structural impediments for persons with physical disabilities and evaluate the
       effectiveness of signs and markers. (MOJ – medium term)
     Improve court and prosecutor facilities to accommodate the needs of persons with physical
       disabilities. (MOJ– long term)




126
   This recommendation aligns with NJRS Strategic Guideline 5.1.6: Development of infrastructural investment
planning procedures based on the level of priority to enable the Ministry’s assessment of a clearly defined and
prioritized list submitted by the HJC and the SPC.

                                                      89
