                                                                                      94086

                                            WWW.EMIS.AF

     The Impact of Information Technology on the Education Sector in Afghanistan
                                          By
             Samantha de Silva (Task Team Leader, EQUIP II, World Bank)
            Pradeep Valsangkar (EMIS Specialist/IT Consultant, World Bank)
   Mohammad Ismail Khattab (Director EMIS, Ministry of Education, Government of Islamic
                                Republic of Afghanistan)

In insecure and fragile environments and especially in countries such as Afghanistan where the education
sector comes under direct attack by insurgents, monitoring of project sites becomes hugely complex and
physical monitoring becomes near impossible without putting lives at risk. In this context, Afghanistan is
an excellent example of how innovative use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has
not only strengthened overall monitoring systems such as Education Management Information System
(EMIS), but also improved thecollection and verification of data using the latest in mobile technology.

Background

The Education System was one of the biggest casualties of the three decade old war in Afghanistan. In
2000, when the American led International Security Forces reached Afghanistan, there were less than one
million children enrolled in school and virtually no girls in the system. Today, there are over eight million
children in school of which 40 percent are girls. Even before the Taliban, investment in the education
system was weak. During the rule of the King as well as the Communists the number of schools providing
modern education was minuscule. By 1980 only 11 percent of the country’s population beyond the age of
25 had any formal education. By 1996, only 22 percent of the eligible population of children was studying
in formal schools.

At the end of the war in 2001, rebuilding the education sector was one of the first priorities of the new
government as well as the international community. However, with no accurate and/or reliable data,
planning and financing of the sector proved difficult. Data collection, collation and analysis except in the
most rudimentary forms were virtually non-existent. Most of the reports were based on extrapolation of
historic data. Supported by the World Bank and the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF), the
Education Quality Improvement Project (EQUIP) was launched in 2004. At USD 460 million, EQUIP II
is today the largest education program in the country. Increasing use of Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) in the education sector and strengthening the Education Management Information
System (EMIS) has been a priority under EQUIP II. Indeed, the evolution of EMIS has been one of the
most important achievements of the project.

Evolution of the Education Management Information System

In the last few years, several ICT based initiatives were undertaken to ensure accurate education data got
collected, collated and reported to all stakeholders in a meaningful manner and within a reasonable
timeframe. In turn, it has enabled policy makers to fine tune the planning and budgeting process in order
to make education services available in a manner that is cost effective and need based. Today a single
centralized portal, www.emis.af provides comprehensive education data to stakeholders on a need to
know basis. This portal enables visitors to slice and dice the data as per provinces, districts and individual
schools. The portal provides a number of reports in terms of gender ratios, teacher pupil ratios,
availability of school infrastructure etc. MOE argues that the use of electronic data systems has improved
transparency and accountability at every level of the education system. As the education sector grew, the
government realized the importance of accurate data for decision-making – not only how data is collected
and analyzed but also how data is applied during every step of the process. No decision could be made
without reliable data.




At the start of EQUIP II the EMIS had a few rudimentary applications and a cumbersome centralized
system of data collection. Data pertaining to schools and students used to be collected through a paper
based system once every year. (Stories of student information sheets being brought to Kabul hidden in
vegetable trucks is Ministry lore!) During the course of the next few years a number of ICT initiatives
were undertaken by EQUIP II leading to a comprehensive electronic system of data collection, collation
and analysis that provides accurate information at the click of button. Apart from education data
collection and analysis systems, a number of new technologies including mobile and GIS technologies
were introduced to ensure that data analysis happens in real time and becomes available to all
stakeholders seamlessly on a device of their choice.

School Management System: The system provides details of all schools with information on school
location, type of school, number of class rooms, infrastructure, toilets, library, science labs etc. It provides
stakeholders with important information on the number, types and quality of school infrastructure in
Afghanistan. An independent Infrastructure Management InformationSystem is currently under
development. This system computerizes all stages of infrastructure development.

Yet another system under development is the Asset Management System that provides the financial and
operations and maintenance information of all the infrastructure assets in the country. Thus these three
systems namely the “School Management System?, “Infrastructure Management System? and the “Asset
Management System? completely tracks the school infrastructure in the country from its inception till its
regular use and maintenance.

Student Management System: The system provides details regarding students, their demographic data,
class status etc. Each student is mapped to a school and each school is identified by a unique code. Thus
the system provides facility to list details of all students in any given school. An attempt is at hand to
identify each student in any given school through the use of a unique ID. Each student entering the
education system will be allocated a unique ID which will be used to track the student from his/her entry
in to the school system until passing out.
Teacher Management Information System (TMIS): This system tracks the induction, training and
professional development of teachers. The Ministry started by developing a system which tracks the
training status of hundreds of thousands of teachers. Mobile applications are now being used to capture
all aspects of pre-service and in-service teacher training and are transmitted to central servers in Kabul for
collation. In line with the focus on quality, this system will be further strengthened to include a Teacher
Performance Appraisal system that will be based upon Teacher Professional Standards (TPS) and will
make a link with Teacher Career Path (TCP). The TCP will be based upon, TPAS, Teacher Course
Completion, Teacher Experience, and Teacher Qualifications and allow The Teacher Education
Department (TED) to develop needs-based individualized career development programs for teachers. In
order to strengthen the current M&E systems at TED, mobile applications and tablets have being
introduced allowing field monitors to gather information on handheld devices while at school or at
Teacher Training Colleges. This is likely to increase system level efficiency and reduce paperwork that
the current system is burdened with.

Learning Assessment System: The first ever learning assessment for students at the primary and
secondary level is being done using tests specially configured over computing tablets. Students are
expected to take the tests using multiple choice formats over the tablets. Once the tests are completed the
scoring happens automatically and test results are transferred on to standardized computing platforms.
Learning Assessment Applications then pick up these test results and provide the outcomes for the
assessment.

Education Data Centre: The Ministry has recently established a state of the art data center. This data
center is capable of housing all the applications developed at the ministry on a series of servers housed on
racks with in the center. Availability of such a data center highly enhances the capability of MoE to
centrally host the applications and make them available to all the stakeholders spread across the country
as well as outside of it.

Certificate Distribution System: In an education system that can be easily manipulated this system
allows the Ministry to easily identify authentic students registered in the system and distribute school
leaving certificates only to them. The authentication of students is conducted by the General Education
Department. The system picks up data from this database and prints the certificates and arranges them as
per the distribution lists for the various schools. This automated process has reduced the time of
distribution of certificates from as long as 3 years to a few months.

Human Resource Management System: An HRMS application was developed to manage the entire life
cycle of Technical Assistants working in the Ministry. Since the Ministry employees over thousand TA
this application has led to easy facilitation of all functions related to the management of TAs including
their selection, induction, performance assessment, payment and promotion. Using this system as a
model, an initiative is currently underway to roll out a comprehensive HRMIS system for the entire
‘Tashkil’ (civil servants) of the Ministry that accounts for over 250,000 employees including the teacher
community. Such a system will effectively facilitate management of the entire establishment at the
Ministry from selection to retirement.

Mobile Applications: In 2013, Ministry of education undertook an important experiment in hosting a
mobile based application in schools within the Uruzgan province, one of the most insecure provinces in
the country. Data pertaining to school management was recorded on mobile devices and transferred to a
central server in the data center using the mobile technology. Principals of the schools and the school
shuras (equivalent to Parents Teacher Associations) were involved in monitoring the data and giving their
inputs using mobile devices. The experiment proved to be very successful and has led to development and
hosting of similar applications in other spheres of MoE. Now the Teacher Education Department is
monitoring the performance of Teacher Training Colleges using mobile technology; similar technology is
being used in monitoring infrastructure development/school construction. The rapid increase in the use of
mobile technology is expected to move a number of applications to the mobile platform in the days to
come. Geographical Information System (GIS) technology is being effectively used to depict data on
maps. Such visualization provides contextual understanding of the data being presented. One such
example is as shown in the GIS Map below.




This GIS presentation depicts the number of students, teachers and the Pupil Teacher Ratios in different
districts of Afghanistan. Since Green shows better density and red shows poor, a reader of this map
immediately understands which provinces in Afghanistan have better Pupil Teacher Ratios.

Capacity Strengthening

Despite capacity constraints at every level and without the use of huge numbers of expatriate staff, the
EMIS Department of the MOE has developed robust capacities in building and maintaining modern
computerized systems. The department is not part of any Project Implementation Unit and is led entirely
by civil servants. While they bring in outside technical assistance as necessary, capacity has been built
within the Ministry to develop, implement and manage this decentralized system in all 34 provinces.
Internal programmers and system architects are now able to conceptualize, design, architect, build and
implement a number of user friendly ICT systems that are invigorating the decision making and
functioning within the Ministry. Third party monitors are engaged in verifying data.
Some of the systems built are captured in the figure below:




Riding on the success of different initiatives in the domains of school management, mobil-based
applications, GIS applications and centrally implemented education data management, MoE has rapidly
moved towards a modern, highly integrated electronic environment that supports decision-making in real
time. All this has contributed to modernizing the education environment in the country from a stagnant
system in the early part of the century to a very vibrant system that is moving head in keeping with the
times. This is as captured in the figure below.
