94089
THE WORLD BANK YANGON OFFICE
No.57, Pyay Road,
6 1/2 Mile,
Hlaing Township,
Yangon, Myanmar
Tel: +95 1 654824


Printed in October 2014

Myanmar Enterprises Survey 2014 is a product of staff of the World Bank. The findings,
interpretation and conclusion expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the government they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denomination and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement of acceptance of such boundaries.

Cover photo taken by Markus Kostner and inside page photo by Meriem Gray, are Copyright @ The
World Bank. All rights reserved.
                           Foreword
Myanmar’s private sector is underdeveloped, even as there is much
optimism for the country’s future. Improved growth in the private
sector is needed for a growing, innovative economy and the full
realization of its benefits to the public. Evidence suggests that a
critical limiting factor for private sector development, even after the
sustained political transition in recent years, is the difficult investment
climate.

In order to support the efforts of the government and the people
of Myanmar to improve the investment climate, we are happy to
share some of the key findings of the World Bank Group’s 2014
Enterprise Survey. What are the most urgent issues to be addressed by
government for private sector firms to succeed? How do these issues
compare with the constraints that firms face in neighboring countries?
Through analogous Enterprise Surveys the World Bank Group has
collected data from over 130,000 firms in 130 countries, enabling
regional and global comparisons. The findings from the survey offer
not only a good snapshot of Myanmar’s current situation, but also
allow comparison across countries and – in the future – across time,
in order to assess the progress of the government’s current reform
program. The survey’s results are a major input into the forthcoming
Myanmar Investment Climate Assessment.

This work is supported by the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development, and has been carried out in close
collaboration with the Ministry of National Planning and Economic
Development and in particular with the Directorate of Investment and
Company Administration.

  Abdoulaye Seck             U Aung Naing Oo             Gavin McGillivray




 Country Manager        Director General                      Head
   World Bank    Directorate of Investment and              DFID Office
                   Company Administration
                 Ministry of National Planning
                 and Economic Development
                                            Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                            Early Findings




     Enterprise Survey illuminates
       private sector constraints

This is the first time the World Bank has carried out an Enterprise
Survey in Myanmar.

Enterprise Survey is the world's most comprehensive company-
level data in emerging markets and developing economies. The
survey

•	   Is answered by owners and top managers;
•	   Focuses on manufacturing and services (excluding
     agriculture);
•	   Surveys enough firms for nationally representative sample;
     and
•	   Focuses on formal (registered) firms with 5 or more
     employees.

The Enterprise Survey is standardized, so it allows comparisons (i)
across countries, and (ii) across time – when the survey is repeated.
Therefore, today’s early findings are also a baseline for measuring
future changes.

These findings will feed into the World Bank’s Investment
Climate Assessment for Myanmar. The assessment will provide a
comprehensive analysis of constraints for private businesses, using
quantitative and qualitative data.

Similar Investment Climate Assessments have been done in over
100 countries since 2002. When evaluating the assessments’
impact, it was found that their effectiveness depends on the
frank acknowledgment of constraints and ownership of agenda
for reform by the government and other stakeholders. This very
discussion of early findings and continued dialogue is a critical
ingredient to successful reforms in the future.



                                1
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




            Data collection focused on five
                  main urban areas




                                    2
                                                                        Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                                                        Early Findings




               Emphasis on making
            the samples representative

Since there is no reliable registry or list of firms in Myanmar, the
survey started with block enumeration (i.e. a census of all firms)
in 5 large business cities: literally going door to door. From that
collection of firms, a stratified random sample was drawn.

This resulted in a sample of 632 registered1 small, medium, and
large enterprises, classified by number of full-time employees.




Two additional samples were surveyed in Myanmar:

•	     460 registered micro enterprises (i.e. firms with less than 5
       employees); and
•	     300 informal or non-registered enterprises.



1
  Registered or “formal” is any firm registered either with (i) DICA, (ii) Directorate of Industrial Supervision
and Inspection of the Ministry of Industry, (iii) City Development Committees or Department of Development
Affairs, or (iv) Department of Small Industries under the Ministry of Cooperatives.




                                                    3
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




            What are the main constraints
                      for firms?

       The main constraints faced by firms are access to critical inputs, in
       particular:

       •	   Almost 23% find access to finance the top constraint;
       •	   Just over 21% indicated access to land is the main problem;
       •	   For almost 17%, the key is access to electricity; and
       •	   For over 9%, it is access to skilled workers.




       Crime, on the other hand, is not a constraint firms see much of. In
       fact, crime is – relative to other countries in the region – almost
       non-existent. The lack of concern about crime, as well as losses due
       to crime, provides some much needed good news for Myanmar’s
       investment climate.




                                      4
                                             Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                             Early Findings




Main constraints change with firm
         size and sector

While access to electricity becomes more important as firms
become larger, access to land becomes relatively less important as
a constraint.




And while access to finance is the top constraint for firms in retail,
for manufacturing firms the top constraint is access to electricity.




                                 5
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




                          Access to finance

       A remarkable 46% of private sector firms report having invested
       in fixed assets in the past year. This is a clear confirmation of the
       strong prospects for Myanmar’s economic growth.

       However, almost none of the fixed assets are purchased with bank
       loans. The use of bank loans for financing is less than in any other
       country in the region.




       Remarkably, a mere 30% of firms in Myanmar even have a current
       or checking account. That too, is the lowest figure by far in the
       region.




                                       6
                                           Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                           Early Findings




                    Access to land

Secure access to land is one of the main constraints.
Most firms report that they own their land; 72% overall, a high
figure in regional comparison. However, all land in Myanmar
ultimately belongs to the state and “ownership” refers to some
form of land-use agreement.

The uncertainty about land ownership is very high and a serious
constraint on the private sector. Uncompensated confiscation of
land without due process is a source of significant conflict and
abuse.

Services firms most often report access to land as an obstacle, and
they also revert to renting from other private entities most often.
For manufacturing firms, where almost 85% lease their land from
the state, access to land is considered less of an obstacle.




Other measures, such as the Doing Business indicator on
registering property on which Myanmar ranks low in international
comparison, confirm that even the process of obtaining the
uncertain land-use agreement is complicated and lengthy.



                               7
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




                       Access to electricity

       Even in the major cities, where the access to electricity is much
       better than in rural areas, power outages are pervasive and a
       serious constraint.




       The highest rate of power outages in the region has led to the
       highest ownership of (inefficient and expensive) generators. The
       lack of access to electricity is the worst in the region.




                                      8
                                         Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                         Early Findings




         Access to skilled workers

Firms agree that the educational system does not produce workers
with the type of skills that they need …




… and yet they provide their workers not nearly the amount of
training that other firms in the region typically provide.




                             9
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




                       Business regulation

       The policies and procedures for entering the formal economy are
       outdated and cumbersome. Most firms stay either completely
       informal or register only with the City Development Committees
       (¾ of firms). Informal firms cite fear of government interference
       and complicated registration procedures as the main reasons for
       not registering at all, as well as the perceived lack of benefits from
       registration.

       Larger firms who don’t have the option of hiding in (relative)
       informality, spend more time complying with government
       regulations.




       Coordination among government agencies is sorely lacking.
       Firms complain about the high number of agencies and ministries
       they have to visit and the numerous, separate inspections carried
       out by different government entities.

       Comparative measures of government regulation, such as the
       World Bank’s Doing Business or the Heritage Foundation’s Index of
       Economic Freedom, echo the impression that significant reform is
       needed especially in the government’s approach to regulating the
       private sector.



                                      10
                                           Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                           Early Findings




                             Taxes

Most firms are unaware of the rate of tax or current tax laws, even
as 65% of firms report being visited by a tax official. There are
significant differences: almost all the firms in Monywa, but only
about half in Bago are visited.




With tax receipts hovering at a very low 5% of GDP, the challenge
of broadening the tax base will have to be combined with making
it simpler, quicker, and cheaper to pay taxes. Far too often, paying
taxes is combined with the requirement to pay a bribe. Only
Bangladesh has a higher incidence of bribes accompanying tax
payment.




                               11
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




                                Corruption

       Beyond paying taxes, corruption occurs frequently when
       interacting with the government. Firms report that obtaining an
       import license requires paying a bribe more than half the time.
       Again, only Bangladesh reports a higher rate of bribes in the
       region.




       Even though the incidence of corrupt practices by government
       officials is high – and significantly higher than in most other
       countries – firms did not identify corruption as one of the major
       constraints. This may be partly because it is the first Enterprise
       Survey conducted in Myanmar, and because the political reforms
       and freedom of speech are still fairly recent. Respondents may
       accept corruption as an inconvenient ‘fact of life’, even if it is
       frequent. The perception of corruption may also be low in the
       context of government agencies that are struggling to design and
       implement the basic policies and practices of transparent and fair
       oversight.

       It will be interesting to see how the perception of corruption vs.
       the incidence of corruption changes in future surveys.




                                     12
                                             Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                                             Early Findings




                       In summary

The early findings of the Enterprise Survey tell us that reforms of
Myanmar’s investment climate are urgent across a number of
areas. For the private sector to contribute fully to the well-being
of Myanmar and its people, the identified constraints need to be
addressed.

We learn that for the ambitious economic reforms to be successful,
the government itself still needs to complete a shift in how it
interacts with the economy. Instead of the state being the primary
actor, the most urgent business is the provision of a level playing
field and of fair, transparent oversight for all. Completing this
change is neither easy nor quick.

Among the constraints identified by the private sector, two main
groups of policies can be distinguished:

(i) Policies to improve the access to inputs – their effect on the
    private sector is indirect (e.g. the government grants new
    banking licenses, but the expansion of banking services is a
    response to this policy action); and

(ii) Direct regulation/taxation of private sector firms – its effect
     is more immediate since it governs interactions between
     government agencies and private firms (note: land tenure
     policies would fall also under this category).

The distinction matters, because the reforms of the two sets of
policies imply different challenges. Policies intended to improve
the access to inputs tend to be technically difficult, but politically
relatively easy. There are fewer opponents to policies that expand
the availability of inputs. On the other hand, policies that change
the interaction of government agencies with firms tend to be more
difficult to implement fully for political reasons.




                                13
Myanmar Enterprise Survey 2014
                   Early Findings




            Emerging policy recommendations

       Since 2011, Myanmar has been going through broad political and
       economic reforms to foster a more open, integrated, and inclusive
       economy. A key principle of these reforms is ensuring greater
       participation of the domestic and foreign private sector.

       The pace of reforms has been impressive. Indeed, efforts to improve at
       least some aspects of the investment climate are ongoing along most
       of the dimensions identified here. Examples of reforms include:

       •	   New banking licenses granted, and new laws passed for the Central
            Bank, microfinance, and securities exchange;
       •	   New laws to improve land tenure for farmers, even though the laws
            are not without their critics; and
       •	   Master plans for energy and power sectors, and for national
            electrification (a declared goal for 2030).

       Also improvements in how government agencies interact with private
       firms directly have been initiated, though clearly more is needed. Here,
       the government’s resolve may be tested for its ability to overcome the
       political resistance to such change.

       Importantly, the government has established mechanisms for
       exchanging views with the private sector. The new Business Forum, for
       example, is where priorities for investment climate reform – and inputs
       like the forthcoming Investment Climate Assessment – can be debated.

       The World Bank Group and other development partners are committed
       to continued support of these efforts. Emerging results are encouraging
       and let us hope for a more dynamic and more prosperous future in
       Myanmar.




                                     14
