                                                     94202




                        VIETNAM
 PROGRAMMATIC COUNTRY PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE REVIEW

                        September 2014




EACVF


EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
                                                                  Table of Content



ABBREVIATION LIST .............................................................................................................................................II
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................................1
CHAPTER 1: HEALTH OF THE PORTFOLIO .....................................................................................................3
CHAPTER 2: IMPLEMENTATION OF DISBURSEMENT ACTION PLAN FY14 ........................................ 10
CHAPTER 3: VIEWS FROM THE PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNITS (PMUS) .......................................... 16
CHAPTER 4: MAIN LESSONS FROM 2012 – 2013 ICRS .................................................................................. 20
CHAPTER 5: MOVING FORWARD ..................................................................................................................... 27
ANNEX 1: FY13-15 RESULTS FRAMEWORK ................................................................................................... 29
ANNEX 2: TRANSPORT PORTFOLIO REVIEW ............................................................................................... 31
ANNEX 3: DIALOGUE WITH THE NATIONAL ODA STEERING COMMITTEE ...................................... 31




                                                                                  i
          ABBREVIATION LIST

AAA     Analytical & Advisory Assistance
ADB     Asian Development Bank
BW      Business Warehouse
CMU     Country Management Unit
CPOs    Central Project Offices
CPPR    Country Portfolio Performance Review
DO      Development Objectives
DPLs    Development Policy Lending
DPM     Deputy Prime Minister
DPOs    Development Policy Operations
EAP     East Asia and Pacific
EAPDE   East Asia Pacific Development Effective
ECA     Europe and Central Asia
ESW     Economic Sector Work
FM      Finance Management
FPD     Financial & Private Sector Development
FY      Fiscal year
GOV     Government
HCMC    Ho Chi Minh City
HD      Human Development
IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICRs    Implementation Completion and Results Reports
ICT     Information and Communication Technology
IDA     International Development Associates
IDF     Institutional Development Fund
IEG     Institutional Evaluation Group
IP      Implementation Progress
IPF     Investment Project Financing
ISRs    Implementation Status Reports
JICA    Japan International Cooperation Agency


                        ii
JPPR     Joint Portfolio Performance Review
KFW      Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MARD     Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
MOET     Ministry of Education and Training
MOF      Ministry of Finance
MOH      Ministry of Health
MOJ      Ministry of Justice
MOT      Ministry of Transport
MPI      Ministry of Planning and Investment
MS       Moderately Satisfactory
MU       Moderately Unsatisfactory
ODA      Official Development Assistance
PCN      Project Concept Note
P-CPPR   Programmatic Country Portfolio Performance Review
PDO      Project Development Objectives
P4R      Program for Results
PMU      Project Management Unit
PPMU     Provincial Project Management Unit
PPTAF    Project Preparation and Technical Assistance Facility
PREM     Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
PSRC     Presidential Sector Reform Commission
QAG      Quality Assurance Group
RNIP     Road Network Improvement Program
S        Satisfactory
SAR      South Asia Region
SBV      State Bank of Vietnam
SDN      Sustainable Development Sector
SIL      Specific Investment Loan
SMU      Sector Management Unit
SOE      Statement of Expense
SOP      Standard Operating Procedures


                         iii
TA     Technical Assistance
U      Unsatisfactory
UWSP   Urban Water and Sanitation Project
VDR    Vietnam Development Report
VN     Vietnam




                        iv
                                                  INTRODUCTION

1.     The Vietnam Programmatic Country Portfolio Performance Review (P-CPPR) is a
three year program which started in FY13 and aims at “Improving Operational Efficiency
for Achieving Results Faster” with a set of quantifiable indicators to measure the
achievements1. This objective is being achieved through:
         (a)        maintaining a continuous assessment of the health of the portfolio with a view to
                    achieving the intended results and acting upon identified problems;
         (b)        addressing, in consultation with the government, obstacles to smooth preparation
                    and faster implementation; and
         (c)        strengthening the capacity of decentralized Project Management Units (PMUs),
                    which are critical for managing the smooth implementation of investment
                    operations.

2.   The Review set forth a simple Results Framework to monitor the progress as below.
Outcomes     Portfolio proactively               Accelerated               Strengthened
          managed for better results        implementation of SILs        capacity of sub-
                                                                          national PMUs

                      Proactivity ratio                         Disbursement ratio        # of PPMUs
                       improved from 25% in                       increased to 22% for       reduced or re-used
                       FY12 to 80% in FY15                        IDA for FY13, 14, 15       for new projects
                      Projects at risk improved                 Board to Effectiveness     from over 300 in
                       from 19.6% in FY12 to                      time shortened from 6      FY12
                       around 15% in FY15                         months in FY12 to 3       Satisfactory rating
                      All problem projects                       months in FY15             of Project
Indicators             having a clear time                       First year disbursement    Management
                       bound action plan for                      for new projects exceeds   Training
                       improvement                                10% in FY14 and FY15

                                  FY12    FY13    FY14                  FY12   FY13    FY14


                    Proactivity   25.0%   50.0%   50.0%   IDA Disb.    18.8%   21.1%   20.8%
                    ratio                                 ratio


                    Projects at   19.6%   19.0%   16.7%   Board to      5.7m   4.7m     5m
                    risk                                  Eff. Time




1
 See Annex 1 for the three year Results Framework. The CPPR focuses on the review of IDA and IBRD operations
as agreed during the PCN review. While the trust funded operations are outside the scope of review, the portfolio
data presented in chapters includes those operations. This is to be consistent with other portfolio reports such as the
Regional Dashboard and Vietnam Dashboard.

                                                              1
3.       Based on the encouraging achievements of the first year P-CPPR, a second year
program was formulated and implemented. The results have been positive in several areas yet
serious challenges remain. The review of health of the portfolio shows that the proactivity and
candor lag behind the other countries in the Region. Problem projects tend to stay in the status
for much longer than other countries’ problem projects. While the speed of preparation and
implementation has been accelerated as evidenced by (a) reduced time between PCN and the
Board, and (b) an improved disbursement ratio, the quality of completed projects has declined as
measured by the IEG review of Implementation Completion Reports. The review of ICRs points
out factors such as overly complex project design, weak results framework and delay in taking
remedial actions leading to an unsatisfactory outcome. For the PMU capacity, a structured PMU
training program was rolled out. The early results from a PMU survey show positive feedback. A
series of studies and workshops on the structure of PPMUs led some provinces to begin an
initiative to consolidate multiple PMUs, or to utilize existing PMUs to undertake new projects.

4.       This report presents a summary of the progress and achievements made during the
second year of implementing the P-CPPR. It also points to areas needing attention and
further work. The report is presented in five Chapters: Chapter 1 assesses the overall health of
the portfolio; Chapter 2 reports on the progress with the Disbursement Action Plan; Chapter 3
covers PMU issues; learning from the PMU surveys and the PMU training; Chapter 4 looks at
lessons from ICRs filed between January 2012 and December 2013; and Chapter 5 lays out the
activities for the third year of the P-CPPR.




                                               2
                           CHAPTER 1: HEALTH OF THE PORTFOLIO

5.      This chapter examines the health of the portfolio by reviewing portfolio indicators
and ISRs of ongoing operations. It follows up on the findings from the previous year’s review
and summarizes the issues and recommendations to improve portfolio performance. Issues,
actions and recommendations on disbursements, improvement of the capacity of PMUs and
findings of the ICR review will be discussed in detail in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this report and,
therefore, this chapter will not touch upon the topics.

A. Vietnam portfolio performance: status, challenges and achievements

Portfolio Composition

6.      Vietnam has a large and diversified portfolio. The number of projects in the Vietnam
portfolio grew steadily from 46 to 52 between the end of FY10 and FY14. The net commitments
increased from $6.37 billion to $9.71 billion. While Investment Project Financing (IPF)
operations are dominant, the portfolio also includes two Program-for-Results (P4R) operations,
the only active P4R operations in the EAP region, and three Development Policy Operations
(DPO) which complement investment operations in priority areas such as Macro Economic,
Energy, and Climate Change. The share of IDA vis-a-vis IBRD remained in the range of 85%
over last three years. The portfolio covers all 14 Global Practices (GP) with four GPs
dominating: Social, Urban & Rural, Transport & ICT, and Water and Energy. The Portfolio is
also substantial in “soft” sectors such as Education, Health and Environment. Table 1 below
summarizes portfolio trends and indicators from FY10 to FY14.

                                   Table 1: Vietnam Portfolio Trends2




Projects at Risk and Proactivity

2
    Source: Vietnam Dashboard of July 2014.

                                                   3
7.      Projects at risk and problem projects increased in FY12&13 to over 19%, but
dropped to 16.7% in FY14. The main factor affecting such a change relate to the regional and
CMU led initiatives to improve candor in reporting, which resulted in increased downgrading of
project performance (Implementation Performance in particular). Simultaneously, the project
teams and CMU management have increased attention and efforts to inform the government
about portfolio issues and also pursued remedial actions to ensure smooth implementation and to
effectively remove the projects out of problem status. Note that the share of commitments at risk
has been lower than the share of projects at risk (16.7% vs 12.5%) which points to relatively
more implementation challenges for smaller projects.

8.      While the ISR candor has been improved the “proactivity” in taking remedial
actions remains low - 50% vs 63.8% region wide. Two key factors play a critical role in
proactivity: identifying the problems as early as possible and taking measures. Delays in starting
project activities in the first 12-18 months of implementation should be deemed an important
signal that the project may need some adjustments. For example, most of the current projects at
problem status were categorized as such around the second and third year of implementation
although the issues with implementation had been identified and recorded earlier.Vietnam
problem projects tend to stay in problem status in more than one year as seen below.

                        Table 2: Duration of Projects in Problem Status in FY143

                                                                                 Age          %          Months in
      Resp Unit      Proj ID                     Project Name                                            Problem
                                                                                in Yrs       Disb         Status
    EASFP - HIS     P088759     Fin Sector Modern and Info Mgnt System            5.7         14            1
    EASHE - HIS     P110693     VN New Model University                          4.0           3              12
    EASHH - HIS     P119090     Hospital Waste Management Support                3.3           9              19
    EASPV - HIS     P099376     Tax Administration Modernization                 6.8           2              34
    EASVS - HIS     P083581     VN-Hanoi Urban Transport                         7.0          36              60
    EASVS - HIS     P103238     VN-Renewable Energy Development                  5.2          29              27
    EASVS - HIS     P113151     VN- Industrial Pollution Management              1.7          10              1
    EASVS - HIS     P118610     VN-Project Preparation TA Facility               4.0          25              26
             Country: Vietnam (15.3% Projects at Risk, 12.1% Commitments at Risk, 8 Actual Problem Projects


9.     At the end of FY14 Vietnam portfolio had the highest share of long term problem
projects (in problem status for more than 24 months) in the region. This status is consistent with
low proactivity in Vietnam. Figure 1 shows the comparison.




3
    Source: Vietnam Dashboard of July 2014 and ISRs of the projects.

                                                                   4
                  Figure 1. Percentage of Long Term Problem Projects by CMU

                        Percentage of long term problem projects at the end of FY14
         60%                                                     50%
                                    40%
         40%               33%                                     33%        Percentage of projects in problem
                                                                              status for > 24 mos
                 20%
         20%       14%       14%                                              Percentage of projects in problem
                                                                              status for >24mos, but < 30 mos
                                        0%    0%0%      0%0%
           0%
                 EACCF     EACIF    EACNF     EACPF    EACTF     EACVF




10.     Taking project specific and portfolio wide measures to turn around the problem
projects is critically needed. The issues with problem projects are complex involving design,
capacity, readiness, among others. It may require radical actions, beyond the ones that the project
teams can take. Some projects report that proactive follow up on agreed implementation targets
(monthly or quarterly monitoring as relevant), clearly makes a difference in implementation
progress but may require much more than the teams can remedy. One issue that has affected
many transport and urban projects is the recent lack of counterpart funds for land acquisition and
resettlement. The country team’s efforts in addressing these systemic issues through the
Disbursement Action Plan have had good impacts and should be continued in this regard.4

11.     Other proactive measures such as partial or full cancellation of underperforming
projects could be implemented to shift IDA resources where they can be used more
productively. Experience and lessons from other regions (SAR and ECA), where substantial
cancellations were successfully carried out, could be of value to Vietnam and would help in
taking a strategic approach and actions to improve the health of the whole portfolio.

Realism and Outcomes

12.     While the Vietnam portfolio has had a good record of realism and a high level of
achievement of satisfactory outcomes for a number of years, it has seen a decline in both
aspects recently. The realism ratio of the Vietnam portfolio has dropped to 80% in FY14 and
will likely drop further in FY15 with recent IEG evaluations of the two ICRs. Accordingly, net
disconnect may increase and the level of satisfactory outcomes may go down. This is a key area
that the country team needs to address as the program tries to addresses more complex and
challenging issues. While findings from the review of the ICRs of the Vietnam portfolio will be
discussed in details in Chapter 4, the review of ICRs clearly shows that (a) acknowledging issues
early on of project implementation and (b) taking remedial actions, either through intensive
supervision and/or restructuring are critically needed to improve the quality.

Quality of ISRs and Candor of Ratings
4
 Chapter 2 discusses in detail the challenges in streamlining government procedures to facilitate timely restructuring
of the projects.

                                                          5
13.     Quality and Candor in ISR ratings has improved in Vietnam but further attention is
needed. As discussed above, the country team made a concerted effort in assessing ongoing
projects’ implementation status. However, out of 54 active projects in FY14, 85% were rated MS
and above for DO and 84% rated MS and above for IP. These rates are higher than the realism
ratio which indicates that ISR ratings of some projects are still over-optimistic. Figure 2 shows
the active portfolio DO/IP rating distribution of all projects in the Vietnam portfolio at the end of
FY14.

                                        Figure 2: DO/IP Ratings5

                                      Active Portfolio DO/IP Rating
            60%                                    57%59%
                     55%54%

            50%
                                                                                          DO (All)
            40%
                                           30%30%                                         DO (IPF)
                             30%
            30%                 27%
                                                                                          IP (All)
                                                                                          IP (IPF)
            20%                                                  15%16%
                                                                       13%14%
            10%
                            S                    MS                    MU


14.      Progress in disbursments, paricularly those showing a substantial lag, is an
important indicator to check the adequacy of project ratings. At the end of FY14 there were
23 projects older than two years which disbursed less than 40%, seven out of them were in
problem status. Out of 40 projects approved between FY08-12, 31 of them (78%) were rated
perfoming satisfactorily. However, only seven of them disbursed more than 40%. Moreover, nine
projects disbursed less than 10% and eight projects less than 20%.6 While some projects have a
good reason to be rated MS or above, as they are in line with the disbursmenet schedule by and
large, it is likely that overall satisfactory ratings are overoptimistic for some other projects.

15.    It is worth noting, however, that out of good practice examples of the ISRs of closing
projects in EAP in FY13&14, four out of eight and three out of nine ISRs (respectively in
FY13 and FY14) in the region, were from Vietnam. 7 However, almost all ISRs need to
provide a stronger and up to date evidence-based justification for the ratings and ensure
internal consistency. Internal consistency between the ratings and messages in different sections

5
  Source: EAP Dashboard, BW data as of June 30, 2014. Note that one IPF project did not have DO rating, but it
was included for IP calculation.
6
  Source: EAP Dashboard data for end June 2014. EASDE monitors the slow disbursing projects as part of ABCD
exercise.
7
  EAPDE has been reviewing the ISRs in the region for a number of years and providing comments and guidance to
the teams and management. ISRs of the following closing projects in FY13&14 were considered as good practice
examples: Natural Disaster Risk Management, 3rd Rural Finance, 2nd Transmission and Distribution and Avian
and Human Influenza Control in FY14 and Rural Distribution, Priority Infrastructure Investment, RRD RWSS and
System Energy, Equitation and Renewable projects in FY13.

                                                      6
of the ISR also needs more attention, particularly where DO ratings remain MS or higher. Only
two projects (Hanoi Urban Transport and Hospital Waste Management, both in problem status)
rated Safeguard Compliance as MU; four projects rated Project Management MU or U (Central
North Region Health Support, New Model University, Science & Technology Innovation and
Hospital Waste Management) and only six projects (three of them in problem status) rated
Procurement as MU. Note that none of the Vietnam projects have been assigned a High rating
for overall risk to achieving the Development Objectives. Some long term problem projects
should reconsider the risk ratings.

B. Relative portfolio quality

16.     Table 3 further below compares the Vietnam Portfolio quality with the two other
large EAP Portfolios: China (CN) and Indonesia (IN), as well as with the overall EAP and
Bank portfolios in FY13&14. The Vietnam Portfolio remains the second largest portfolio in EAP
after China, both in terms of number of projects and net commitments.

17.     The stellar realism ratio of 100% of the Vietnam Portfolio has dropped in FY14, and
although it still remains higher than the corresponding ratio in the EAP and the Bank, 69% and
61% accordingly, it is now lower than China and Indonesia. Candor gap8, another indicator that
is being used to assess regional portfolio performance, increased from 11.8% to 15.1% in FY14
in Vietnam and is close to the EAP ratio of 15.4%. It is the second lowest gap indicator in the
region and compares with the gap of 6.1% in China/Mongolia and 15.6% in the Pacific Islands.
Indonesia’s candor gap was at 19.7% in FY14.9

18.   The Vietnam Portfolio’s Proactivity Index has improved in FY14 but lower than
China’s and falls behind the EAP and Bank averages of 64% and 70%, respectively.

                        Table 3: Comparison of Portfolio Quality in FY13&1410

                                       VN                     CN                  IN                 EAP             Bank
    Key Indicators/FY13&14
                                FY13        FY14       FY13        FY14    FY13        FY14       FY13    FY14    FY13    FY14
# of Projects                      50          52        107         104      33          32        273     287    1540     1646
Net Commitments ($billion)         8.8        9.7       11.1        11.9     7.5         6.6       30.1    31.6   176.2   195.2
Disbursement Ratio (%)           19.9        18.6       18.8        15.8    17.1        23.2       19.6    19.4    20.6     202
# of Projects at Risk              11              8      17          20          5           9      61      58     388     382
# of Problem Projects              11              8      13          18          5           9      47      48     269     285
Realism Ratio (%)                 100          80        100         100      51          98         88      69      63      61
Rolling Proactivity (%)            50          50         64          73      83          40         63      64      66      70

8
  Definition: The difference between % of projects with Satisfactory DO in a FY’s active portfolio (including IPF,
DPO) and IEG Satisfactory outcome based on projects evaluated in the past 18 months as of the date of data
download.
9
  Source: Status of EAP Portfolio Performance. EAPDE, June 30, 2014 (available on EAP web page).
10
   Sources: Except for Vietnam, data from this table are from the EAP Dashboard for July 2013, data as of July 15,
2013 and EAP Dashboard for July 2014, data as of July 18, 2014. To ensure the comparability of data between
countries, this table uses the data from the EAP Dashboards for July 2013&2014. The figures for Vietnam are based
on the Country Dashboard to ensure the consistency of the report.

                                                               7
C. Duration of preparation and implementation start up

19.     Duration of project preparation in Vietnam significantly dropped in FY14 to 16
months from PCN to Board for all type of operations. Historically, preparation time of
investment projects in Vietnam has been quite high compared with EAP and Bank averages;
usually it took approximately two years to prepare a project. Figure 2 below shows the historical
trends of preparation time in Vietnam, EAP and Bank wide.

                                 Figure 3: Elapsed Time from PCN to Board11

                                            Elapsed time from PCN to Board (mos.)
                                            28
                                            26
                                            24
                                            22
                                            20
                                            18
                                   Months




                                            16
                                            14
                                            12
                                            10
                                                   FY 09    FY10     FY11      FY12   FY 13   FY14
               Average SIL + P4R (VN)              25.6     24.3      25.7     20.6   25.0    19
               Average SIL + P4R + AF (VN)         22.3     15.9      18.3     15.1   24.0    19
               Average SIL + P4R + DPL (EAP)       15.8     14.5      16.1     16.7   16.6    10.8
               Average SIL + P4R + DPL (VN)        16.4     12.7      16.2     13.1   20.7    15.9
               Average SIL + P4R + DPL (Bank)      12.4     12.3      12.1     12.1   12.6    10.7




20.     In FY13 the Vietnam Portfolio Team conducted an analysis to find out whether
specific sector or project related factors determine slow preparation. The results of the
analysis showed that none of the examined factors, such as the sector, use of Trust Fund
proceeds along with other funding, Environmental Category or a need for resettlement can
explain a long duration of project preparation. Furthermore, the application of the readiness filter
did not lengthen the preparation time either. Based on the findings and in accordance with the
key preparation activities required from the government and the Bank, the team has proposed an
Action Plan to shorten preparation time. The main highlights of the plan focus on: (i) alignment
of some Bank and government preparation milestones; (ii) tailored funding including use of
“business development” budget, advanced project funding and subsidizing preparation from
active projects where relevant; (iii) aligning ESW and AAA to preparation needs, and (iv)
supporting capacity building of project preparation counterparts.

21.     The efforts of the country team have resulted in faster preparation . Project
complexity or novelty has also contributed to long gestation periods of some projects in previous
years. The programmatic approach (for two programmatic DPOs) has made it possible to reduce
the overall preparation time. Going forward, the use of the programmatic approach for IPF
operations (SOP) could be considered in order to allow focusing on activities of one phase


11
     Source: BW.

                                                              8
instead of on the whole program. The development of realistic project preparation estimates for
different types of projects could help to expedite overall preparation periods.

22.     With the improved trends in start up, disbursements in the Vietnam portfolio have
improved in FY13&14, but sustaining the achieved levels is a challenge. Further concerted
actions of the government at all levels and the country team will be needed to address a set of
previously identified and newly emerging issues which are discussed in detail in Chapter 2.

           Figure 4: Total Elapsed Time from Board Approval to First Disbursements12

                                                  Elapsed Times
                                              (Boar - Sign - Effe - Disb)
                             20

                             15
                    Months




                                                                                 Effe-Disb
                             10
                                                                                 Sign-Effe
                              5                                                  Boar-Sign

                              0
                                  FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13



Recommendations:


23.     The Vietnam portfolio, as discussed above, has strengthened its performance in many
areas, including the accelerated project preparation time, disbursement and candor in reporting
implementation problems. The recent trend in realism and proactivity, however, is worrisome as
it points to the portfolio’s decline in quality. The long period required to move problem projects
out of the status is also a concern. The team should focus attention to these areas during the final
year of P-CPPR.




12
     Source, Vietnam Portfolio Team.

                                                          9
                                        CHAPTER 2: IMPLEMENTATION OF
                                        DISBURSEMENT ACTION PLAN FY14


Disbursement Performance:

24.    The overall disbursement continued to perform well, disbursing $1.35 billion in
FY14: investment portfolio $1,036 million, development policy operations $396 million and
the Program for Results $22 million. The disbursement ratio was 19% overall and 21% for
the IDA portfolio. The ratios were slightly lower than the previous year’s achievements and
lagged behind the region’s average because of a large increase in the opening undisbursed
amount 13 . Nonetheless, the country’s disbursement performance has seen a continuous
improvement from the 12% to 15% levels of the past.

                                     Figure 5: Vietnam Total Disbursements FY04 – FY14

                                            Vietnam: Total Disbursements (US$ bn)
                                                         FY04 - FY14
                                     2.00                                                                     25%
                                                                                                  20%
                                                                              19%                       19%



                                                                                                                    Average Disb Ratio %
                                                                                                              20%
                                                                                            16%
                 Disb in FY US$bil




                                     1.50   15%                                      15%
                                                                      15%
                                                  13% 12% 12% 13%
                                                                                                              15%
                                     1.00
                                                                              1.72                            10%
                                                                                            1.39 1.36 1.35
                                     0.50                                            1.17
                                                                                                              5%
                                                                  0.64 0.68
                                            0.42 0.41 0.42 0.48
                                     0.00                                                                     0%
                                            FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14



25.     The rural, energy and education sector portfolios had good results, all exceeding the 20%
disbursement ratio. While the rural portfolio continued to perform well as a whole, it is worth
pointing out that it is a result of continuous efforts to proactively turn around non-performing
projects such as the Agriculture Competitiveness Project and Livestock Improvement Project.
Both projects had suffered from slow implementation at an earlier stage. The performance got
turned around in the last two years, which led to a higher disbursement ratio. Intensive
supervision with clear milestones agreed upon with the counterparts has resulted in an improved


   13
     The opening undisbursed amount increased by $500 million from the previous year as the portfolio grew by
   almost $2 billion.

                                                                       10
status. The energy sector performed well with the experienced counterparts and advanced
procurement preparedness at the Board approval stage. The education sector, on the other hand,
has a unique portfolio mix with one results-based investment, another one “on budget” support
and three regular investment operations. Together with the Global Partnership for Education
project, which has a restricted project implementation period of three years, the results-based
investment and the budget support operations, the disbursement has reached a high level.

26.     On the other hand, the urban, transport and health sectors did not perform as well as
expected. For both the transport and urban sectors, a major issue impeding smooth
implementation was the inadequate allocation of counterpart funds for land acquisition and
resettlement, as discussed later in the report. The transport team underwent a sector portfolio
review14 which confirmed issues such as the counterpart’s funds, overly complex procurement
approval processes in the government, inadequate readiness of projects, and the capacity and
decision-making authority of PMUs. The health portfolio suffers from an overly complex
approval procedure at the MOH as well as the relatively weak capacity of departments at the
provincial level. The minister has requested the Bank to thoroughly review the portfolio and
recommend an action plan for improvement; this will be a priority action during FY15. PREM
and FPD have a project each and their disbursement performance is influenced by the project’s
characteristics. Both projects include large and complex ICT packages which have taken a long
period of time in procurement processes. The FPD project has seen an improvement recently
with the signing of several contracts, whereas for the PREM project, an agreement was reached
between MOF and the Bank to cancel it15.

                                   Figure 6: Disbursement Ratio by Sector

                                   Disbursement Ratio (%) by
                                            Sector
                                                   (FY12-FY14)
                      50
                      40
                      30
                                                                                           FY12
                      20
                      10                                                                   FY13
                       0                                                                   FY14




14
     The Transport Portfolio Review as discussed with the Vice Minister in charge is attached as Annex 2.
15
     More discussions on the project are provided in the section on individual project level actions.

                                                          11
Strategic Action Plan of FY14: Achievements and Challenges

Achievements:

27.     The Strategic Action Plan on Disbursement was initiated in late FY12 to address the
bottlenecks of implementing investment operations. The first action plan resulted in
significant achievements, increasing the IDA disbursement ratio to the 20% level for the first
time in history.

28.      The Action Plan of FY14 was initiated in September 2013, focusing on three levels:
institutional, portfolio and project levels, and using the lessons of the first year. At the
institutional level, it specifically focused on the implementation circulars of the new ODA
Decree, Procurement and Land Laws as they most affect the implementation of operations. At
the portfolio level, concerted efforts were made to address the capacity of PMUs and to remove
the perceived bottlenecks on procurement. At the project level, concerted efforts were made to
restructure problem projects and to improve the performance of these projects.

29.    Achievements during FY14 have been positive. Perhaps the most noteworthy
achievements, while not directly impacting short-term disbursement performance, are the good
outcomes on the revision of Procurement Law and Land Law, a reinforced working relationship
with the National ODA Steering Committee led by the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of ODA,
and an excellent progress made on the PMUs’ capacity building. Several projects also saw a
major turnaround and started to achieve the intended results as discussed later in this report. Yet,
new issues have emerged which have hampered the smooth implementation of projects.

30.     Revisions to the Procurement and Land Laws promise to pave the way for better
ODA project management. During the fiscal year, the revisions to these two critical laws were
approved by the National Assembly and became effective as of July 2014. The Bank teams
worked very closely with the government counterparts to make the laws more in line with
international best practices. The teams are now working on implementation decrees which are
expected to impact the ODA-financed projects positively, as steps to streamline and eliminate
overly complex procedures for approval on procurement and land related transactions are
incorporated. On the Land Law, the revision clearly recognizes the ODA-funded projects’
resettlement policy requirements and eliminates a Prime Minister approval process on the
resettlement policy framework which was previously required for Bank-financed projects.

31.    A solid working relationship was established with the new ODA National Steering
Committee, and a series of sessions resulted in concrete actions from the Government. 16
The Committee was established in January 2013 to propose to the Prime Minister policies on
resource mobilization and management of ODA, address issues pertaining to ODA programming

16
  See Annex 3 for the details of the Committee and its instructions to the Project Owners to improve the ODA
project performance.

                                                       12
and implementation, and to promote dialogue with donors, especially the large development
partners including the Six Development Banks17 (6 Banks). The 6 Banks has engaged with the
Committee to raise structural issues such as the adequate provision of counterpart funds, the use
of ODA resources for land acquisition and resettlement compensation, and the PMU capacity.
The dialogues led the Committee to issue a series of instructions to improve the investment
projects’ performance. One of the key decisions is to professionalize the capacity of PMUs,
while at the same time acknowledging the capacity issue of PMUs. MPI was instructed to
prepare a country-wide capacity building program for PMUs. The 6 Banks have agreed to
support MPI for the initiative, with the World Bank taking the lead in a scoping study for the
program.

32.    At the portfolio level, one of the key outcomes from the Action Plan was the roll out
of a structured training program for PMU staff members. As discussed in Chapter 3 the
program, which was developed based on the first PMU survey conducted in FY13, covered
general project management issues, fiduciary and safeguards’ aspects, and monitoring and
evaluation. The feedback from the trainees was overwhelmingly positive. The second year PMU
survey confirmed the effectiveness of the training program as can be seen in the figure below.

              Figure 7: Impact of FY14 training program on staff performance




33.    At the project level, out of nine problem projects at the end of FY13, two
restructurings were completed, one project was upgraded and another one was closed. In
addition, a key decision was made between the government and the Bank to cancel a long
17
 Asian Development Bank, Agency for Development, Korea EXIM, KFW, Japan International Cooperation
Agency and the World Bank.

                                                  13
standing, slow disbursing project managed by MOF. The rolling proactivity ratio has thus risen
to 54.5% at the beginning of FY15 from the 50% level at the start of FY14.

Challenges:

34.     Despite the achievements, newer issues emerged in FY14 that limited smooth
disbursement activities. The government faced serious budgetary constraints during FY14 and a
number of measures were undertaken by the MOF to control expenditures of investment
operations, including the ODA projects. One such action was to limit the total amount that a
project owner can pay as an advance payment to contractors. This was directed by the Prime
Minister’s instruction 1792 and has had negative impacts on the withdrawal applications of
infrastructure projects requiring large contracts. The Bank’s transport projects were adversely
affected by this decision, requiring a couple of PMUs to split the payments into smaller amounts
in order to circumvent instruction 1792. While the ODA projects were eventually exempted from
the instruction, this incident highlighted the need for a better and proactive dialogue with MOF
on the overall portfolio management.

35.     The budget situation also seriously affected the allocation of counterpart funds for
land acquisition and resettlement. Projects in the urban and transport sectors have been
affected the most. As a result of the 6 Banks’ discussion with the National ODA Steering
Committee, the government has issued bonds to allocate funds to ODA-supported projects in
2013. The allocation, however, has not been adequate for 2014. The transport team estimates that
over $1.2 billion worth of civil works under the Bank’s transport projects are affected by the lack
of $130 million counterpart funds. In order to avoid further delays, the ADB and the Bank have
started to discuss with the MPI and MOF possible use of Bank/ADB financial resources for land
acquisition and resettlement. Currently, the government is reluctant to let project owners to use
ODA resources for land and resettlement compensation. The issue will be pursued further and
together with other development banks during FY15.

36.     The revised Constitution, which took effect as of January 2014, has instituted an
additional process for approving negotiations, signing and effectiveness of the World Bank
financing agreements. This requirement has lengthened the time needed for negotiations.
Previously, the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) required 45 days to obtain authorization for
negotiations from the date the invitation to negotiate was issued. It now requires additional seven
to 10 days for them to receive such authorization. The Bank has suggested measures to the SBV
and to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to shorten the procedures and will review the experience
of the first year to once again engage with them for accelerating the process.

37.    On the institutional level support, one of the actions that the Bank together with
other five development banks took, was to make the ODA circulars clear and consistent
with other regulations. Two circulars related to the new ODA Decree were prepared with
inputs from the Six Banks. While some issues were further clarified, such as the advance

                                                14
procurement activities, these circulars accompanying Decree 38 did not fully address the
concerns of the ODA donors. Specifically, the circular on financial management could have
promoted the use of country systems and efficiency further. Suggestions from the Bank included,
for example, the risk-based verification of the State Treasury, an approval of a multi-year plan
which will be used as basis for annual budget allocation, and an adoption of e-transactions for
withdrawal applications process. These were not included in the revised circular. Nonetheless,
the country team plans to continue working with the government to seize any opportunity to
address these systemic issues so that the ODA management becomes clearer, is consistent with
the government’s overall public investment and debt management policies, and brings about
accelerated implementation.

38.     As to the individual project, despite the efforts made by the teams, the process of
restructuring takes a long time given the government’s process of requiring an approval from
the Prime Minister for even a simple extension of a project’s closing date. Together with the
development partners, the Bank will continue to request the government to streamline the
process and to delegate authority for non-substantial decisions to lower levels. The proactivity
ratio should be improved in FY15.

Moving Forward

39.    It is clear that the disbursement performance continues to need close attention from
the entire country team and the management at the institutional, portfolio and project
levels as discussed above. Concerted efforts are necessary to maintain the improved
performance of the Vietnam portfolio disbursement. The joint efforts with other development
partners to address systemic issues, such as the restrictions on the advance payments for
contractors, will continue via the National ODA Steering Committee.




                                              15
     CHAPTER 3: VIEWS FROM THE PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNITS
                            (PMUS)

PMU Survey Results and Lessons from the PMU Training Program

40.     The ODA Program in Vietnam generated a large number of Project Management
Units (PMUs) at the central government level as well as at the provincial level. This is partly
because the previous ODA decrees mandated Project Owners to establish a unit to manage an
ODA project regardless of its size and content. Also, the country’s decentralization of investment
management has encouraged the provinces to establish their own units in implementing ODA
projects. While they are all established within the government and very few PMUs exist outside
the government structure, the proliferation of PMUs18 and their relative weak capacity, especially
at the provincial level, have been identified as challenges for smooth implementation by many
development partners19. In addition to the capacity issue, the PMUs are often not provided with
decision-making authority on key actions, such as procurement decisions, and often they wait for
the responsible ministry and/or Provincial People’s Committee to approve their decisions.

PMU Survey of FY13

41.    To understand the implementation issues from the PMU perspective, a first PMU
survey was conducted in April 2013. The survey covered 64 PMUs at the central government
level and 225 PPMUs at the provincial level and received responses from 59% of PMUs and
66% of PPMUs. The results served to (a) identify areas where the Bank team’s support is most
needed; (b) develop a comprehensive training program for PMU staff members and (c) provide
feedback to the central government officials who oversee the portfolio of the World Bank.

42.     The FY13 survey identified a number of issues relevant to smooth project
implementation. Three issues stood out in the first Survey. First, at the project design stage,
while the central PMU often played an active role in the design, the provincial PMUs appeared
to have limited involvement. Provincial PMUs were not adequately consulted, beneficiaries were
not properly identified at the provincial level, and the risk mitigation measures could have been
strengthened. The provincial PMUs’ relatively inactive role during the project design stage has
been considered as one of the factors leading to their lack of ownership of the project. Secondly,
during project implementation, procurement seemed to have been a major issue. In addition, an
approval/clearance procedure and a lack of counterpart funds were pointed out as delaying the
implementation. Thirdly, both central and provincial PMUs confirmed the need for further
training opportunities as they believe that the opportunity to learn while working at the PMU is
one of the most effective motivational tools for staff members. These issues were shared with the
Bank operational staff and were addressed in part via a comprehensive training program.

Comprehensive Training Program

18
   There are close to 300 PMUs for the World Bank-supported 52 projects as each province created one provincial
level PMU for their component.
19
   See P-CPPR FY13 Chapter 3 for further discussions on the PMU structure and issues.

                                                       16
43.     Based on the findings from the FY13 survey, a comprehensive training program on
Bank policies and procedures was designed for PMU directors, project managers and staff
members and rolled out between September 2013 and March 2014. It focused on overall
project management, procurement, financial management, safeguards’ issues and monitoring and
evaluation topics.

                      Figure 8: Participants for FY14 training programs




44.    The program was designed to address the learning needs of new and experienced PMU
staff members, and was offered to a total of 758 participants in FY14. The training was delivered
mostly by the World Bank Country Office staff members from the FM, Procurement, Safeguard,
Disbursement and Portfolio teams.

45.    The assessment of the training program was overwhelmingly positive. Participants
requested for the program to be continued with emphasis on using “more scenarios and/or real
cases so that the participants can discuss and learn from the cases”, and also requested additional
time for group work and peer learning. Participants also suggested to include other countries’
experiences and the creation of a PMU forum or network for knowledge and experience sharing.




                                                17
                     Figure 8: Post course evaluation for Procurement module




46.     Due to the very positive feedback from participants, the Country Office plans to continue
the training program in FY15. However, the program needs to be sustainable and manageable by
the operational staff in the office. The team has started to look into possible twinning
arrangements with universities and/or training institutes so that in the medium term, the program
can be managed by a professional training institute on a fee-for-service basis. In addition, the
MPI has been tasked by the National ODA Steering Committee to roll out a comprehensive
training program of all ODA PMUs. The materials of the World Bank’s training program could
also be transferred to the MPI-supported program. The team will continue exploring all the
options.

PMU Survey of FY14

47.     A second PMU survey was conducted between April and May of 2014 to continue
identifying implementation issues and also to determine the opinion of PMUs a year after
the comprehensive training program had been conducted. The survey had good responses
from the PMUs and PPMUs. The Bank’s project implementation support is deemed very positive.
Interesting observations emerged regarding issues affecting smooth project implementation.
While FY13’s survey identified the “procurement process” as the most important issue, FY14’s
survey named the “approval and clearance procedures” of the government and the Bank as the
number one issue affecting project implementation, followed by land acquisition. The
procurement process was ranked as the fourth issue in the FY14 survey.




                                               18
               Figure 10: Responses on major issues affecting implementing progress




48.    While the survey findings need to be carefully verified with face to face discussions, they
provide useful information for the Bank’s team to provide better support for smoother project
implementation. The team intends to continue conducting the survey on an annual basis to gather
information about the PMUs’ concerns and to improve the support from the Bank’s operational
team.




                                               19
            CHAPTER 4: MAIN LESSONS FROM 2012 – 2013 ICRS

A. Overview

49.     Sixteen Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICR) – eight per year -
were completed during calendar years 2012 and 2013. Of these, 13 were for investment
operations (12 Specific Investment Loans and one Financial Intermediary Loan), and three were
for Development Policy Loans (DPLs). Eleven of these ICRs (including one DPO) have been
reviewed by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) (see Table 4 and 5).

50.      Most of the ICRs rated project development outcomes (DO) and performance
positively: 14 out of 16 ICRs rated project outcomes Moderately Satisfactory or better, and 14
rated the risk to development outcome to be Moderate or Low. Similarly, Quality at Entry and of
Supervision were rated Moderately Satisfactory or better in the vast majority of cases (12and 14
respectively).

51.      ICR assessments were generally more positive than the IEG reviews.. Of the 11
ICRs reviewed by IEG, more than a third (4/11) were rated Moderately Unsatisfactory on
outcome, while the risk to development outcome was rated Significant in 5 of the reviewed
projects. IEG also rated Quality at Entry Moderately Unsatisfactory in 5 of reviewed ICRs, while
Quality of Supervision ratings were more closely aligned, with 9 being rated Moderately
Satisfactory or better. While for FY12 closings IEG only rated one additional project as MU
compared to the ICR self-assessments, for FY13 ones the difference was more marked, with the
ICRs rating all projects MS, and IEG rating one of them MU and one U. Of the five projects that
closed in FY13 and whose ICRs have not yet been reviewed by IEG, two were rated S, two MS,
and one MU.

             Table 4: ICR PDO Ratings ICRs vs. IEG Reviews – FY12 and FY13 Exits

                  Exit FY                FY12          FY13
                                      ICR IEG          ICR      IEG

                  Satisfactory        2       3
                  Moderately          4       2        4        2
                  Satisfactory
                  Moderately          1       2                 1
                  Unsatisfactory
                  Unsatisfactory                                1
                  Sub-total           7       7        4        4




                                              20
B. Key lessons from ICRs and IEG ICR reviews

1    Investment Lending Operations

Cross-cutting lessons

52.     The key lessons summarized below emerged from the ICRs themselves, as well as from
the IEG reviews of the ICRs. While project-specific and more technical lessons were also
highlighted across ICRs, the focus below is on cross-portfolio lessons that, although to varying
degrees and depending on the context, apply to most of the reviewed operations.

53.      Simplicity of design helps accelerate implementation and reduce implementation
efforts and costs. In both the Road Safety Project and Water Resources Assistance Project
(P065898)20, IEG found the design to be overly complex. The Road Safety Project included 18
sub-components, which triggered the procurement of more than 60 packages, involved 63 cities
and provinces all over Vietnam, posing serious implementation challenges compounded by a
lack of clear and effective institutional arrangements. Similarly, during the implementation phase
of the Water Resource Assistance Project it proved difficult to handle the “myriad of activities
targeted at appraisal”, and the conclusion was that two separate projects would have been
advisable to address the two broad thrusts of irrigation and agricultural improvement on one side,
and water resources management and dam safety on the other. Both these operations closed with
a Moderately Satisfactory outcome rating, but at the cost of lengthy duration and intensive
supervision efforts, which could have otherwise focused elsewhere. The System Efficiency
project21, on the other hand, was rated MU by IEG, on the basis that it tried to address too many
objectives, and in doing so the project became too ambitious and very complex.

54.      A well-designed and measurable PDO is critical, but needs to be accompanied by
good quality M&E. PDOs were found, for the most part, to be relevant and measurable. In the
case of the HCMC Environmental Sanitation Project, the PDO was found to be overly ambitious
and generic, and thus difficult to measure and attribute to the project’s activities. The project,
however, underwent a Level 1 restructuring and eventually closed with an MS rating for
outcome. At the same time, the quality of M&E was rated Modest in all the ICRs reviewed by
IEG (see paragraph 2.1), due to weaknesses in M&E design and/or implementation. Ultimately,
these shortcomings prevent a fully adequate measurement of project development objectives,
regardless of how well formulated they are. It is thus important that well-designed PDOs are
supported by M&E frameworks that are as well designed and implemented.

55.     More regular monitoring, from the onset, is necessary to detect issues on a timely
basis. Lack of early detection of issues has led to poor supervision quality and, in turn, to delays
and less than satisfactory outcomes. In the case of the Road Safety Project (P085080) 22 the
disbursement ratio was below 8 percent during the first two years of implementation, but Bank
formal supervision remained limited in spite of this. Prior to the project being flagged as being in

20
   Source: IEG ICR Review
21
   Source: IEG ICR Review
22
   Source: IEG ICR Review
22
   Source: IEG ICR Review

                                                21
a problem status in July 2008, only three official supervision missions had been conducted, while
only three ISRs had been completed - one in 2006, one in 2007, and one in 2008. As a result, and
also because of the complex institutional arrangements and the high number of packages in the
project design, procurement problems were not thoroughly followed up and the closing date had
to be extended twice.

56.     Both quality and timing of remedial actions are important. Most notably, all the
operations whose outcome rating were Moderately Unsatisfactory or less, have had very late
restructurings, with the exception of the System Energy, Equitization and Renewable Project, or
no restructuring at all (as was the case for the Public Investment Reform 2 Project). Furthermore,
all the restructurings were Level 2, mostly involving reallocations of funds, extensions, and
revisions of results indicators (see Table 5). The Road Network project, whose outcome was
rated MU both in the ICR and in IEG’s ICR review, underwent a Level 2 restructuring almost
eight years after approval and seven months from the closing date, involving reallocation of
credit proceeds, inclusion of new implementing agencies, and a revision of indicators. However,
while the IEG review acknowledges that design was overall robust and highly relevant, it also
points to substantive issues that were not adequately addressed, and resulted in a less than
satisfactory outcome and Bank supervision quality. The HIFU Development Project, whose
outcome was rated Unsatisfactory by IEG, underwent a restructuring to revise some outcome
indicators 1.5 years before closing. Nonetheless, outcome was rated Unsatisfactory by IEG on
the grounds that the Project’s results framework did not provide adequate measures of outcomes
and efficacy, and on the modest relevance of the objective and design. Cases like this suggest
that a Level 1 restructuring of the PDO may at times be more appropriate. The Urban Water
Supply Development Project, rated MU, underwent a comprehensive Level 2 restructuring only
12 months before the closing date, despite a history of unsatisfactory performance dating back to
2007, and reflected in various ISRs. Finally, the System Energy, Equitization and Renewable
Project was restructured five times, but nonetheless closed with an MU outcome rating by IEG.
These cases suggest the need for more timely and correct adequate identification of issues and
their resolution. The appropriateness of the selected level of restructurings, as noted above, may
also need to be monitored closely, to ensure that PDO-level design issues are adequately
addressed.

57.     Proactive implementation support makes a difference, particularly for more
problematic or complex operations. While design issues should be ideally resolved through an
early restructuring, a number of ICR reviews noted that proactive Bank support and interactions
with the implementing agency and other stakeholders often compensated for some of the
structural issues, and helped in addressing issues and thus accelerate implementation.

64.     Implementation capacity needs to be carefully assessed upfront, to ensure adequate
and feasible designs, and/or to introduce remedial actions to compensate for any
shortcomings. In the case of the System Effectiveness Project, despite the considerable
experience gained under other Bank operations in Vietnam, IEG found that the implementation
capacity was overestimated across the board, which led to serious implementation delays. In
particular, there ICR review refers to a lack of realism regarding the actual capacity of the local
organizations.



                                                22
65.    A project with significant innovation needs adequate time for project preparation
and subsequent familiarization with stakeholders. This was noted for the Water Resource
Assistance Project, 23 where detailed designs for the new structures in the irrigation
modernization program were only partly ready at project commencement. Software areas such as
modernization guidelines, performance benchmarking and computerized water control plans
were developed only at the end of the project.

2     Monitoring & Evaluation

66.    M&E quality was rated Modest in all of the ICRs. Although individual operations
display aspects of M&E design and/or implementation that are strong, in general there were a
number of shortcomings, the main ones of which are highlighted below:

67.    Weakness in baseline quality and reliability, preventing adequate measurement of
changes during implementation. In the Road Safety project, for example, the baselines were
found to be based on unreliable and inappropriate data for the Vietnam context. The IEG review
noted that this issue was addressed by including a contract for monitoring and evaluation which
confirmed the problem of significant data underreporting and inconsistencies across sources.
However, because the results of this M&E work were only available at the end of the project,
they could not be effectively utilized.

68.     Output focus of M&E frameworks. From the ICR review it emerged that the focus of
the Results Frameworks should increasingly shift towards measuring outcomes and a closer link
to the PDO. In the case of the Water Resources Project, for example, most monitorable indicators
measured outputs (such as new irrigated area) without considering outcomes (e.g. changes in
agricultural productivity). In the Mekong Regional Health Support project 24 , a QAG review
found that the intermediate result indicators were not adequately formulated to measure the
achievement of the project with reasonable validity and accuracy. The initial set of indicators
was considered as lacking focus on outcomes, not specific on quality dimension to be measured,
and vaguely formulated on patient satisfaction. This issue was eventually addressed through a
restructuring. Similar issues were identified for the Water Resource Assistance Project, where
indicators were mostly related to outputs rather than outcomes.

69.     Implementation and utilization of M&E should be an integral part of the M&E
framework. The HCMC Environmental Sanitation Project, for example, posed a lack of
evidence and attribution issue, with regard to its objective. Specifically, the public health impact
of the project was not adequately monitored, as data on sanitary and health conditions of affected
beneficiaries was collected by the Department of Health only up to 2006, whereas the project
closed in 2012.

3     Development Lending Operations

70.     Several factors make the Vietnam DPOs effective development support instrument
for the Government. These include:

23
     Source: IEG ICR Review
24
     Source: IEG ICR Review

                                                23
      a. Overall strong ownership: All three DPOs benefitted from strong Government
         ownership of the reform agenda. In the case of PSRC, although the commitment to
         key structural reforms, such as SOE reform, wanted in the later part of the series,
         authorities exhibited a strong and sustained push to meet the high level goal of
         achieving middle income status, which yielded a positive enabling environment for
         the reform dialogue especially in the first half of the series.

      b. Solid, underpinning analytical work: The DPLs benefitted from supporting
         analytical work, including technical assistance, in the identification of potential prior
         actions and triggers. The Vietnam Development Report (VDRs) supporting the PRSC
         program is a good example of a underpinning work which benefitted from
         contributions by a large number of development. Topics were chosen to link closely
         with the policy actions supported by the PRSCs, including individual reports covering
         each of the four pillars.

      c. Close cooperation and complementarity with Development Partners (DP): The
         Bank took the lead in coordinating the contributions of key DPs to the policy actions
         supported under the development lending operations. The PRSC series, as noted
         above with regard to the VDR, served as an effective framework for policy dialogue
         and interactions between the government and donors. The benefits were fundamental
         and manifold. An Independent Evaluation Group review in 2009 found the Vietnam
         PRSC series to be exemplary in its predictability, continuity, and development partner
         coordination. At the same time, the Bank bore the coordination cost, especially in
         prioritizing the policy actions proposed by various DPs. In the case of PRSC6, 198
         policy actions were proposed by 10 DPs, which the Bank had to prioritize into a
         concise list for discussion with Government.

71.    At the same time, DPOs pose specific challenges, some of which were highlighted as
part of the ICR reviews.

      a. DPO leverage has been, at times, limited. The budget support modality provided less
         leverage to the Bank and other DPs in pressing for deeper reforms, particularly in
         public procurement and community participation procurement, as these require the
         participation of line ministries in time intensive dialogue. In addition, in order to be
         successful, complex decentralization reforms need to be long term, gradual and on an
         extended time scale (e.g., five to ten years) with active engagement at both the
         national and sub-national levels of government. Actions and reforms at the national
         level (e.g., enhanced financial reporting and auditing, baseline and end line surveys)
         were more successful than those that were implemented at the local level (e.g.,
         demand driven approach, community contracting, land acquisition and resettlement).

      b. Measuring results stemming from policy actions is difficult, and requires balancing
         higher-level outcomes with realistic indicators and targets that can be measured
         within the DPO timeframe. The annual cycle of the DPLs contributed to the
         difficulty in framing an appropriate results framework (RF). ICRs found the RFs to be

                                              24
unrealistic, as more time was needed for realization of some targets. Issues included:
Government procedures for issuing legal documents; and coordination issues among
Government agencies. There was lack of clarity in the policy monitoring matrix on
how the policy actions in a particular area tied together over time toward a specific
goal. There were also too many indicators, e.g., in the case of the PRSCs, 12 of the 51
original monitoring indicators were dropped either due to conceptual or data issues.




                                    25
Table 5: Detailed list of IEG ICR Review Ratings and ICR WB Rating




                               26
                            CHAPTER 5: MOVING FORWARD

72.     The Second year review showed good achievements in the accelerated project
preparation time, disbursement performance, and PMU training. The country team’s recent
efforts in improving the quality and candor of ISRs, addressing systemic issues hampering
smooth implementation, and intensified working relationship with the government’s National
ODA Steering Committee have contributed to the first goal of Programmatic CPPR; faster and
better results.

73.     Yet, many issues have been identified as needing attention. The most critical of all is
the decline in portfolio quality, which have affected the indicators in many ways; realism,
proactivity, and disconnect between IEG ratings and the team’s ratings. The review also
points out the long time it takes to make problem projects out from the status. The need for much
more decisive actions in addressing the problem projects is clear. The candor in assessing the
implementation of projects early in their implementation stage is questionable. The ICR review
also points out the need for much more attention at the design stage with a sharper focus on the
design of results framework and Monitoring and Evaluation framework. It also points out to the
stronger support during the implementation period – proactively support the counterparts and
address obstacles early on.

74.     With the above, the final year of P-CPPR, FY15, will address the following areas so
that the portfolio will achieve the objectives laid out at the beginning of P-CPPR: Improving
Operational Efficiency for Achieving Results Faster.

       a. Continue the efforts in improving the quality of portfolio. For the ongoing
          projects, this may involve taking decisive actions for long term problem status
          projects and identifying/addressing obstacles for projects in early stage of
          implementation. For new operations, strengthening the results framework design is
          crucial. The country team will enlist support from M&E specialists.
       b. Expand the ICR review of CPPR FY14 and identify areas for support to the
          teams. Chapter 4 already points to many factors that led to a decline in the portfolio’s
          outcomes. During FY15, further efforts will be made to understand factors leading to
          the decline and an action plan will be prepared to address the issues.
       c. Revise the Disbursement Action Plan and continue the country team’s efforts in
          maintaining the good performance over the past two years. The team will work with
          the ODA National Steering Committee to support the government’s efforts in
          improving the disbursement performance and tackling obstacles, including the
          possible use of ODA resources for land acquisition and resettlement.
          And;
       d. Continue working closely with the National ODA Steering Committee to
          improve the country’s ODA management. The Committee requested the
                                               27
development partners’ support in revising the ODA Decree, prepare a new External
Financing Strategy for 2016 to 2020, and continue working on action plans to move
problem projects out of the status and strengthen the capacity of PMUs.




                                  28
                                               ANNEX 1: FY13-15 Results Framework
                                    Programmatic Country Portfolio Performance Review FY13 - FY15


                P-CPPR Outcomes                  1st year actions              2nd year actions                        3rd year actions
Portfolio proactively managed for better     * ISR Review [Realistic       * Second ISR Review           * Third ISR Review [Realistic assessment of
results                                      assessment of project         [Realistic assessment of      project ratings; time bound action plan for
     Proactivity ratio improved from        ratings; time bound action    project ratings; time bound   improvement for problem projects prepared]
        25% in FY12 to 80% in FY15           plan for improvement for      action plan for
     Projects at risk improved from         problem projects prepared]    improvement for problem       *Detailed problem projects review conducted with
        19.6% in FY12 to around 15% in        * Proactive engagement       projects prepared]            at least two long term problem projects get out
        FY15                                 with MPI for DPM’s                                          from the status
     All problem projects having a clear    meeting with project          Proactive engagement
        time bound action plan for           owners of problem             with MPI for DPM’s            *National ODA Steering Committee and 6
        improvement                          projects                      meeting with project          Banks agree on concerted efforts in taking the
                    FY12    FY13     FY14    *Addressing cross cutting     owners of problem             problem projects out from the status in less
                                             issues arising from           projects                      than a year with decisive actions.
  Proactivity       25.0%   50.0%    50%     problem projects review
  ratio
                                                                           *Integrated fiduciary         *IEG ICR evaluation reports for the past 10
  Project at risk   19.6%   19.0%    16.7%
                                                                           assessment conducted          years carefully reviewed, lessons clearly
                                                                                                         identified for overall portfolio and used for
                                                                                                         new operations.

Accelerated implementation of SILs           *Disbursement Action          * Disbursement Action         *Disbursement Action Plan updated and
    Disbursement ratio increased to         Plan acted upon               Plan updated and acted        acted upon
       22% for IDA for FY13, 14, 15                                        upon
    Board to Effectiveness time             *Elapsed time from Board                                    *Use of ODA resources for land acquisition
       shortened from 6 months in FY12       to Effectiveness time         *IDF grant for MOJ            and resettlement piloted for a Bank project
       to 3 months in FY15                   discussed with SBV and        implemented and
    First year disbursement for new         MOJ and agreements            streamlined ODA               *ODA Decree revised with streamlined
       projects exceeds 10% in FY14 and      reached on necessary steps    management measures           Government procedures; supported by the 6
       FY15                                                                agreed                        Banks
                                             *Learn from peers on

                                                                          29
                                                modality and tools              *Review of FY11, 12 and
               FY12         FY13        FY14    (Indonesia and China)           13 projects on their
                                                                                readiness and
 IDA Disb.     18.8%        21.1%       20.8%
                                                                                disbursement performance
 ratio
                                                                                of its first year; Readiness
 Board to    5.7 months   4.7 months      5                                     filter critically reviewed
 Eff. Time                             months


Strengthened capacity of sub-national           * PMU survey conducted          * PMU survey conducted         * PMU survey conducted
PMUs                                            to assess the current set up
     # of PPMUs reduced or re-used for                                         *Structured PMU training       *Structured PMU training continuously
       new projects from over 300 in            * Provincial Portfolio          on project management          implemented
       FY12                                     Review conducted (#2)           launched
     Satisfactory rating of Project            and lessons from the first                                     * Provincial Portfolio Review #4 and lessons
       Management Training                      and second distilled            *Provincial Portfolio          shared
                                                                                Review #3 and lessons
                                                                                shared

                                                                                *PMU workshop
                                                                                conducted to follow up on
                                                                                the discussions held in
                                                                                June 2012




                                                                               30
ANNEX 2: Transport Portfolio Review

            Transport Portfolio
           Review (ML, 12Aug2014).pdf



            Transport Portfolio
           Review (Minutes, 12Aug2014).pdf




                   31
        ANNEX 3: Dialogue with the National ODA Steering Committee
1.     The National ODA Steering Committee (NODASC) was established on 23 January 2013,
under the Decision No. 216/QD-TTg of the Prime Minister with the key tasks of:
          Proposing to the Prime Minister on the orientation, directions and policies along the
           mobilization and management of ODA and concessional loans;
          Assisting the Prime Minister in coordinating the line ministries and provinces to take
           measures to resolve cross-cutting issues under their authorities with regards to the
           preparation and implementation of the ODA programs and projects and to accelerate
           the progress of ODA programs and projects;
          Promoting dialogues with donors or donor groups to seek for consensus with the
           orientation, policies of the government at the macro level in mobilization,
           management and utilization of ODA and concessional loans; directing the realization
           of commitments and enhancing aid effectiveness.
2.      NODASC is chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister H.E. Mr. Hoang Trung Hai and vice-
chaired by the Minister of Planning and Investment H.E. Mr. Bui Quang Vinh. The members of
the NSC include Vice Ministers of the Ministries: Planning and Investment, Finance, Foreign
Affairs, Construction, Natural Resources and Environment, Transportation, Agricultural and
Rural Development, Industry and Trade, Health, Education and Training, and Deputy Governor
of State Bank of Viet Nam, Vice Chairman of Office of Government, Vice Chairman of Hanoi
People’s Committee and Vice Chairman of Ho Chi Minh city People’s Committee (See Prime
Minister’s Decision #216 in Attachments).
3.      On 29 March 2014, DPM Hoang Trung Hai chaired the first joint NODASC and Six
Banks’ Meeting in Ha Noi. The meeting focused on discussing the issues and recommended
actions to be taken for improving performance of the selected problem projects of the Six Banks.
The meeting also discussed the cross-cutting issues for further accelerating the pace of project
implementation and disbursement of the Six banks’ programs and projects, especially the
meeting focused on the following areas: (i) counterpart funds (ii) land compensation and
resettlement (iii) procurement and financial management (iv) PMU capacity building (v) impact
of Constitution 2013 on the negotiation, signing and implementation of international agreements;
(vi) enhanced transparency and anti-corruption, and (vi) coordination and problem solving
regime.
4.      Based on the results of the first joint meeting, on 10 April 2014 the Prime Minister’s
Office issued the instruction No: 149/TB-VPCP to assign the line ministries and provinces under
their authorities to resolve problems arising in the process of preparing and implementing
programs and projects financed by the Six Banks (See OOG’s Instruction #149 in Attachments)
5.      Several follow up meetings were held internally among the government agencies as well
as jointly with the development partners. Among the key meetings were the joint meeting of the
Ministry of Finance with ADB and WB to address the payment limit by 30% of the annual
budget plan as promulgated under the government’s instruction #1792. In addition, quite a few
number of follow up meetings were held by DPM Hoang Trung Hai with the line ministries
(ADB and WB were also invited) to review the business timeline for negotiations, signing and
effectiveness of the ADB and WB operations. MPI and WB also started working on the PMU


                                               32
capacity building through a study on PMU Scoping Study. (See PM’s Instructions #870/TTg-
KTTH and MOF’s Instruction #1365/KBNN-KSC in Attachments.)
6.      The most achievable outcomes of the collaboration with the NODASC can be seen in the
payment processing i.e. removal of the payment limit by 30% of the annual budget plan, as well
as in shortening the government processing for negotiation, and signing of the FY14 operations
which partly contributed to improve the WB’s FY14 delivery as well as the disbursement
performance.
7.      Another major initiative of the NODASC was the Prime Minister’s approval for the
launching of the Action Plan for improving the performance of ODA programs, projects and
concessional loans in the period of 2014-2015, which is designed for further accelerating and
upgrading ODA project performance (Decision No: 1257/QD-TTg dated July 25, 2014). This
was started by supporting the 25-points categorized under the six-action plan for implementation
in 2014 and 2015 (See Prime Minister’s Decision #1257 in Attachments). The Action Plan
covered the key activities of the OOG’s instruction No: 149/TB-VPCP and some new activities
that had emerged as constraints on investment performance.
   (i)        Developing strategies, policies for ODA and concessional loans
   (ii)       Improving legal framework and institution of ODA and concessional loan
   (iii)      Improving the quality of program and project documents, ensuring the negotiation
              and signing progress of international treaties
   (iv)       Enhancing capacity for project management and implementation
   (v)        Increasing responsibility of different levels in handling difficulties and constraints;
              transparency, anti-corruption enhancement
   (vi)       Enhancing supervision and evaluation
8.     Future activities with the NODASC: in the coming period, the WB together with the
other development partners will maintain discussions on the future agenda with NODASC
through occasional meetings during the year. Main points that emerged for these meetings are as
follows:
             Maintain a close interest in the revision of Decree 38 and exchange views with the
              drafting committee when needed;
             Bi-annual meetings with NODASC to review the implementation status of problem
              projects and reviewing progress with implementing previous recommendations;
             Review of portfolio performance in one or two key sectors (Transport and Urban?).
              Specific issues such as counterpart fund allocation; use of donor funds for land
              compensation and resettlement; on-lending arrangement to the provinces will be
              selected for the discussion;
             Special studies on topics of concern e.g. PMU capacity building.
In File:

   i)         Prime Minister’s Decision on establishment of the National ODA Steering Committee
   ii)        Prime Minister Office’s Instruction for the 1st ODASC Meeting


                                                  33
iii)   Prime Minister’s approval on Action Plan for improving the performance of ODA
       programs, projects and concessional loans in the period of 2014-2015
iv)    PM’s Instructions #870/TTg-KTTH
v)     MOF’s Instruction #1365/KBNN-KSC




                                         34
