                                         94268




                                 RES-Research
               Resilience in Education Systems
                                        Bhutan


     The Education Resilience of
Out-of-school Children in Bhutan
       A Methodology and Pilot Study
                                 RES-Research
               Resilience in Education Systems
                                        Bhutan


     The Education Resilience of
Out-of-school Children in Bhutan
         A Methology and Pilot Study
                                      Research Team

                                        Tashi Choden
                                          Team Leader

                                           Yangkee
                                        Data Collection

                                     Tshering Wangmo
                                        Data Collection

                                       Sonam Tshering
                                Local RES-Research Coordinator


                                       Dechen Zangmo
                                       Technical Support




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the Education Resilience Approaches
program team, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Photo: Children looking out on terraced fields. Bhutan. © Curt Carnemark / World Bank
									                                                      		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Acknowledgments
 We acknowledge the support of the Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program from the
 World Bank, through the research methodology training workshops we attended in New Delhi,
 India, and in Kathmandu, Nepal. Similarly, our gratitude goes to all the research participants in
 Bhutan that shared their time and knowledge with us.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   7
									                                               		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014



 Contents
 About the RES-Research Studies Series				                                             10
 I. Introduction: Defining Resilience							                                           11
 II. Context of Adversity and Desirable Outcomes in this Study			                      12
 III. Overview of the Methodology							                                               14
 III.I Sample											                                                               15
 III.II Data collection methods									                                               16
 III.III Data analysis										                                                       19
 III.IV Ethical clearance and participation							                                     20

 IV. Preliminary Findings and Analysis							                                          21
 IV.I Policy level findings									                                                   21
 IV.II Community level findings								                                                22

 V. Tentative Recommendations for Policy and Practice				                              25
 VI. Conclusion: Researcher Critical Reflections 					                                 26
 References											                                                                 27
 Annexes											                                                                    28
 Annex A. Interview guide for national level data collection					                      28
 Annex B. Interview guide for local level data collection 			       	                  30
 Annex C. Questionnaire template 								                                              33




		                                                    EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   9
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      About the RES-Research Studies Series
      Development practitioners in fragile, conflict, and violence-affected contexts are demanding
      better support for research, evaluation and assessments: this can range from conducting an
      exploratory needs assessment for an emergency intervention, monitoring and evaluating
      ongoing project impact, or building the evidence base to design a reconstruction or post-conflict
      program. In contexts of overwhelming adversity it is crucial not only to get reliable and valid data
      but to also ensure that we are going about this data collection in the right way. Doing research
      “right” in these contexts requires asking the right questions, talking to the relevant participants
      and stakeholders, using the most pertinent methods, and paying particular attention to ethics
      and power differentials.

      To address these concerns, the ERA Program developed the Resilience in Education Settings
      (RES)-Research training module. The training is specifically targeted for researchers
                                              living in context of conflict, violence and other
        As with all SABER tools, the RES-     adversities. It brings together resilience theory and a
        Research training module is openly    transformative research paradigm. Resilience theory
        available for education practitioners seeks to understand the process by which individuals,
        within the World Bank, as well as     communities and organizations recover from crisis,
        other agencies. The module consists   continue to perform in the midst of adversities and
        of a research manual and handouts,    even radically change to prevent future risk exposure
        power point presentations and         and continue their development process (Reyes
        additional guidance materials.        2013). The transformative research paradigm provides
        If you are interested in using this   methodological guidance to conduct studies with
        tool please contact the ERA team      vulnerable populations, while recognizing both their
        for the appropriate resources:        exposure to overwhelming threats but also their assets
        educationresilience@worldbank.org     such as strengths, opportunities and available services
                                              (Mertens 2009).

      Through a nine-month training program, RES-Research builds on the capacities of academics
      and education practitioners in fragile, conflict and violence-affected contexts to undertake
      locally relevant and rigorous education resilience research. First piloted in Central America, the
      training program was improved and recently implemented in the South Asia region as part of a
      multi-donor trust fund for the Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) initiative
      supported by DfID-UKAID, DFAT-Australian AID and the World Bank.

      This report presents the ongoing application of research design and implementation skills gained
      by the Bhutanese participants in the RES-Research training module, delivered in November 2013,
      in Delhi, India, and in April 2014, in Kathmandu, Nepal. It provides valuable contributions to our
      on-going understanding of resilience in education settings in difficult contexts.




 10   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 I. Introduction: Defining Resilience
 Accessibility and quality of education is a much-debated issue today. In Bhutan this is especially
 a concern for the population scattered across the extreme mountainous terrain of the country.
 Difficult access and spatial isolation leads to an unequal distribution of the quality services in
 Bhutan. It is also an issue for children in urban communities despite the easy access to schools.
 Poverty and disability hold children back from enrolling in and completing school. Hence, the
 education resilience in these vulnerable communities can differ accordingly even despite the fact
 that the government provides free basic education in Bhutan. We define resilience as the ability
 of students, education institutions, and communities to achieve positive education outcomes
 in spite of adversities, such as the marginalization, isolation and poverty that exist in pockets in
 Bhutan.

 The World Bank’s Education Resilience Approaches Program (ERA) is aimed at improving education
 policies and systems by offering tools to systematically assess resilience processes that protect
 from risks and promote education outcomes in difficult contexts as mentioned above. Thus, this
 study draws from the “Resilience in Education Settings Research” (RES-Research) method and
 the RES-360° Tool, developed by ERA, to map relevant policies and programs to the real risks and
 assets that children face in school enrollment and attendance.

 Our aim was to gain an understanding of the educational situation in a sample of poor, urban
 and rural communities in Bhutan identified from secondary data. This report presents the results
 of our pilot study. We consulted with education policy makers and implementers at the national
 level, and communities, parents and children themselves at the local level, to conduct an in-depth
 analysis of the risks and the assets (strengths, opportunities and resources), that exist in schools,
 homes and in communities. Accordingly, recommendations are also made in this report with a
 view towards filling the gaps and enhancing the relevance of education policies and programs
 based on the evidence collected from the field during the study.




		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     11
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      II. Context of Adversity and Desirable Outcomes
      in this Study
      Over the last decade, Bhutan has made tremendous progress in the field of education. The rising
      enrollment and primary school completion rates indicate that Bhutan is on track to achieve the
      Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Progress made within the primary education program
      over the last decade to meet the MDGs and the Education for All goals has placed enormous
      pressure on limited teaching, infrastructure and financial resources, and severely tested the
      capacity of the system to deliver Bhutan’s commitment to provide quality education for all. The
      Bhutan Multiple Indicator Survey (Bhutan, National Statistics Bureau 2010) indicates that about
      0.7 percent of 6 to 12 year old children attend monastic schools and about 0.4 percent are studying
      outside Bhutan. Based on the above, the Ministry of Education concluded that the adjusted net
      primary enrollment rate of 6 to 12 year old children is 98 percent (Bhutan, MoE 2012). This is an
      impressive achievement.

      This study is concerned with the approximate 2 percent of primary-school-age children who
      are out of school. We suspect these children may be those who reside in remote and hard-to-
      reach areas, children of nomadic communities and migrant populations, children with learning
      disabilities whose special learning needs are currently not catered for and children of the urban
      poor. These children have different needs
      from the majority of students, and the key     Educating for Gross National Happiness
      challenge is to put in place innovative and    Bhutan’s Ministry of Education initiated a nationwide
      cost effective strategies to provide equal     educational reform in December 2009, Education
      and equitable access to quality education      for Gross National Happiness. The initiative was
      for all children. The Bhutan Living Standards  introduced to approach learning from a more
      Survey (Bhutan, National Statistics Bureau     holistic perspective in an effort to restore the true
      2012) found that as many as 21 percent         essence of education (Bhutan, National Environment
      of children who are out of school stated       Commission, 2012). The education system has been
      that they could not afford school despite      tasked to:
      the free education provided by the               ...effectively cultivate GNH values and practices,
      government. The same report showed that          including critical and creative thinking, ecological
      among children who are not in school, 4          literacy, practice of the country’s profound
      percent of urban children and 3 percent of       traditional wisdom and culture, contemplative
      rural children struggle with some kind of        learning, a holistic understanding of the
      disability. Thirty percent of these children     world, genuine care for nature and for others,
      residing in urban areas are girls, and 4.4       competency to deal effectively with the modern
      percent of girls in rural areas reported that    world, preparation for the right livelihood, and
      their schools are too far away for them to       informed civic engagement.
      attend.
                                                       Efforts to infuse GNH principles and values into the
      The Bhutan Living Standards Survey data          education curricula began in 2007. The eduation
      also showed that primary school net              system is assessed using four broad domains: quality
      attendance rates are particularly low            of education, values in education, challenges and
      in some dzongkhags (districts), namely           barriers, and GNH Principles in education.


 12   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Chukha (89 percent), Wangdue (88 percent) and Lhuntse (87 percent). The rates are lower among
 females in these dzongkhags except for Wangdue. This remains a concern. Enrollment gaps,
 despite the Ministry of Education’s efforts to reach all children by 2015, need attention. They
 could represent those children from vulnerable communities that the education system finds
 difficult to reach as their particular needs may be different from those of less vulnerable children.
 This would call for

 This study aims to understand the factors that keep children out of school despite the free
 education provided by the government. More importantly, this study attempts to understand
 the resilience of the children, parents, and communities that enable children to remain in school.
 Bhutan’s objective to reach every child needs to be approached differently if all children’s needs
 are to be fulfilled. This report also provides a set of recommendations for policy makers and
 implementers based on evidence collected in this study from out-of-school children aged 6 to 16
 years old, their parents and also their community.

 The 1990 Education for All (EFA) goals launched in Jomtien, Thailand, were initiated to bring the
 benefits of education to “every citizen in every society”. Since then the World Bank has been
 working with the national governments, civil society groups, and other development agencies
 in line with the objectives of its Learning for All Education Strategy 2020. The study contributes
 to the Strategy’s efforts to ensure that by 2015, all children, particularly girls, those in difficult
 circumstances, and those belonging to ethnic minorities, have access to and complete, free, and
 compulsory primary education of good quality in Bhutan. We use the framework developed by
 the Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program of the World Bank. We contextualize the
 framework to assess how adversity such as poverty fuelled by remoteness and social culture in
 Bhutan impedes children from attending school.

 We take this resilience angle, shifting the paradigm of our thinking and support, with a view to
 understanding the resilience of vulnerable children and build on their assets to include them in
 the education system in an effective way. Special attention is also required to understand the
 changes desired by individuals, cultural sensitivity and how social, cultural and institutional forces
 influence their individual behaviour. The mixed-methods and resilience approach used for this
 study not only helps us understand such complexity in human behaviour but also provides us with
 avenues to address them.

 The desired outcomes of this study was to both develop a resilience-based study methodology
 and to gather information on the assets and sources of resilience that children from poor, urban
 and isolated, rural communities draw on in their family, school and community. It also aims to
 show how schools and the Ministry of Education can provide targeted support to ensure that the
 remaining out-of-school children in these vulnerable communities can go to school and complete
 basic education. We aspire to show how out-of-school children in vulnerable communities can
 be integrated into the education system and contribute to the development of the country. As a
 pilot study, these objectives are only partially met, but we hope to use this tested methodology
 in planned future resilience-based research in the country.




		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     13
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                              		


      III. Overview of the Methodology
      This section discusses the research questions and describes the methodology designed for the
      resilience study tailored to the local context in Bhutan. It presents the mixed-methods approach
      planned for the study, and the steps taken to complete the pilot of the qualitative phase.
      Research Question:
              How can the education system in Bhutan foster the education resilience of rural
              and urban out-of-school children?

      To answer this research question, we developed three research sub-questions.
          1.	 What are the challenges faced by out-of-school children in the selected communities and
              how do these challenges serve as obstacles to going to school?
          2.	 What are the sources of resilience of children and parents in these communities, and how
              can teachers and the schools use these assets to support out-of school children to enroll
              and complete basic education?
          3.	 How can these communities participate in the education of their children?
      To answer the research sub-questions above, we broke them down into the following categories
      to gather information with as much detail as possible. These questions also guided the data
      collection methods as shown in the table below.
                                                      Table 1
                                           Research questions for the study

             Research question                    Data collection tool                    Type of data
                                                            RISKS

        R1: What are the challenges
                                              Qualitative: desk review, focus
        faced by out-of-school children                                          Survey, school data, verbal,
                                              group discussions (FGD) and key
        in the selected communities to                                           written, recall
                                              interviews
        go to school?

        R2: How do these challenges
                                              Qualitative: desk review, FGD      Survey, school data, written,
        serve as obstacles to going to
                                              and key interviews                 verbal, recall
        school?

                                         ASSETS (Protective and Promotive Processes)

        R3: What are the sources of           Qualitative: FGD with parents
        resilience of children and            and children who are out of        written, verbal, recall
        parents in these communities?         school

        R4: How can teachers and
                                              Qualitative: interview with
        schools use these assets to
                                              service providers and key
        support out-of school children                                           written, verbal, recall
                                              informants and FGD with
        to enroll and complete basic
                                              teachers
        education?

        R5: How can these communities         Qualitative: FGD with parents,
        participate in the education of       teachers and out-of-school         written, verbal, recall
        their children?                       children



 14   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 III.I Sample
 The qualitative phase of our mixed-methods study collected data from education officials and
 specialists in the first phase, and from a sample of community members, children and parents
 from poor, urban and isolated, rural communities in the second phase.

 First, key officials who have knowledge on the education policies, systems and policies were
 purposely sampled to obtain information on their perceptions regarding the possible risks
 experienced by children, and the promotive and protective factors within the education system
 that enable these children to attend school. Interviews with key focal points also focused on
 perceptions of how education services and policies can serve as risks for children as well as
 promote school attendance.

 The key personnel interviewed at the national level, in the first phase, were one representative
 from each of the following:
     1.	 Ministry of Education
     2.	 Parliamentarian
     3.	 The Rural Education Foundation (Executive Director)
     4.	 Local education expert/consultant

 Second, communities were also recognized as critically important agents to assist families and
 their children to complete schooling. At the community level, two communities were selected
 based on the lowest net attendance rates and highest school dropout rates according to the
 Bhutan Living Standard Survey (2012). One rural and urban community was selected. Within
 these communities, Nyisho (rural) and Bajo Throm (urban) in Wangdue district, approximately 12
 children, (6 boys and 6 girls) who are presently out of school were selected for the Focus Group
 Discussions (FGD). The out-of-school children were identified through the Bhutan Living Standard
 Survey (2012).

 In addition to the sample of out-of-school children, the study interviewed a sample of parents
 and teachers in the community. The criteria for each sample type at the community level was the
 following:

     1.	 Out-of-School Children: Children 6 to 16 years of age, who have never been to school or
         who dropped out. They participated in a focus group discussion (FGD) on the challenges
         in their lives and the difficulties they face in going to school, as well as on the assets
         (people that support them, what makes them proud, etc.). Children who had been to
         school before were interviewed about what they liked and did not like about school and
         why they dropped out.

     2.	 Parents of Out-of-School Children: Twelve parents, 6 from each community, whose
         children have never attended school or have dropped out. They participated in an FGD
         about the challenges within the family and the reasons why their children are not in school
         or dropped out. Information was also collected on the family and community assets,
         and how these assets support their children, how communities support each other and

		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    15
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


             about society values. Finally, we asked questions about how communities can support the
             education of their children.

          3.	 Teachers: Twelve teachers, 6 from each school serving in each selected community. They
              participated in an FGD on their perceptions of the challenges within families that children
              face in enrolling and staying in school, and how schools and teachers can help. The
              teachers’ FGD took place after the FGD with out-of-school children and parents, which
              gave the researchers the opportunity to ask the teachers some specific questions related
              to the challenges and assets identified in the earlier FGDs.

      III.II Data collection methods
      Four Bhutanese researchers, trained in mixed-methods research by the World Bank, carried out
      the pilot study. The research team members are shown in Table 2.
                                                   Table 2
                                                 Study team

                             Tashi Choden                             Team leader

                               Yangkee                               Data collection

                           Tshering Wangmo                           Data collection

                           Dechen Zangmo                            Technical support


      Since the researchers share a nationality with the respondents and speak their language, the
      respondents felt more comfortable talking about sensitive issues such as family problems.

      This study adopted a Mixed-Methods Research (MMR) design as the RES-Research approach
      advises, and drew from the ERA Program’s RES-360° research tool. It will utilize qualitative and
      quantitative data collection approaches in three sequential phases. These are detailed next.

      Phase 1. National level: Literature review and key informants interviews
      Phase 1 of the RES-360° approach focuses on identifying the perceptions of national level actors
      (such as the Ministry of Education, or MoE, officials). It collects perceptual information on the
      risks related to the school enrollment and attendance of vulnerable children (the remaining 8
      percent out-of-school in Bhutan) and the institutional assets that could support them (such as
      schools, teachers, education programs, etc.).

      The research team took notes during the interviews on the perceptions of education-related
      policies and programs, and the risks identified. Based on the information on risks and especially
      assets identified at the national level, researchers reviewed the FGD questions for follow up at the
      community and school level (Phase 2). The data from both levels fed into the design of the 360°
      questionnaire, which was applied to a larger sample (Phase 3).

      The national level MoE discussions also confirmed the school sample selected for Phase 2 of the
      study (see diagram on Phase 1, below).

 16   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                            Figure 1
                            Phase 1: Assessment at the national level
                                                            1.2 National Level FGD
 1.1 Literature Review                                      a. Present basic conceptual
 a. Risks                                                   framework
 Identify risks from national reports and                   b. Discuss the information and data
 data                                                       gaps
                                                            c. Present risk-related programs
 b. Education response and programs
                                                            d. Discuss national program on
 Identify risk-relevant strategies, and
                                                            protection and preventive measures
 existing mitigation to address risks
 c. Legal and policy framework
 Identify the legal and policy framework
 related to child protection, risk prevention,           1.3 Select study sample / justify
 social cohesion, inclusion etc.                         selection of the community



                                 Results
                                 1. Typology of national risks
                                 2. Education response and programs identified
                                 3. Selection of sample school

 Phase 2. Community level: Focus groups with children, parents, and teachers
 The second phase consisted of a qualitative exploration of risks and assets in the selected
 communities and the schools that serve them. The research team formed a Local Advisory
 Committee (LAC) made up of members from the selected communities, to provide feedback
 and guidance on the sample participants, data collection and analysis of data. The data at the
 community and school level was collected through FGDs.

 All three sets of FGDs (with parents, teachers and children) attempted to identify:
     •	 the challenges faced by communities,
     •	 the obstacles impeding children from going to school in these communities
     •	 the assets within families and communities that can support children to enroll in and
        attend school;
     •	 the programs and services in schools that could support out-of-school children to enroll in
        and complete their basic education.

 We gathered data on the risks at all levels (individual, family and school). The risks at the individual
 level gave the context and backdrop for the data collection on external assets at the family and
 school level, which mitigate those risks experienced by children, such as communities and schools,
 and policies and programs.
 These findings fed into and were included in the design of the RES-360° questionnaire.

		                                                               EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      17
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		

                                                Figure 2
                               Phase 2: Assessment at the community level

         1.1 Logistics in community (LAC                   1.3 Focus group discussions with LAC
         formed)                                           a. FGD with parents
         1.2 Informative workshop with LAC                 b. FGD with teachers
                                                           c. FGD with children


                             Results
                             1. Typology of local risks
                             2. Local strengths and coping strategies within the family,
                             school and community identified
                             3. Children’s individual risks and strengths identified




                                    Inputs into RES-360° questionnaire


      Phase 3. Development of the RES- 360° questionnaire
      The qualitative phase identified both the risks and assets present in isolated rural communities
      in Bhutan, and how they relate to education access and completion. Based on these findings, the
      research team designed a questionnaire that will be applied in a second stage of the study, to a
      larger number of participants. The ERA team’s RES-360° manual helped guide its development.

      In the second, quantitative phase of the study, the RES-360° questionnaire will be administered
      to selected households to collect further data regarding the risks and available assets that are
      considered most prevalent and relevant within the local community. It will be pre-tested and re-
      validated to gather more accurate information.

      The findings serve as local evidence to inform education policies addressing vulnerable populations
      and enable practitioners to design strategies for targeted interventions.

      The Risks and Assets sections of the RES-360° questionnaire was structured as shown in the table
      below. For the full questionnaire see Annex 3.




 18   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                              Table 3
                                       RES-360° questionnaire

                                           SECTION I: RISKS

     Section 1.1                The challenges faced by communities

     Section 1.2                The obstacles impeding children from going to school

                                          SECTION II: ASSETS

     Section 2.1                The assets within families and communities that can support
                                children’s education

     Section 2.2                Programs and school services that can support children’s
                                education


 III.III Data analysis
 The qualitative analysis of data collected through interviews and focus groups included coding.
 Coding played an important role in the analysis, serving to summarize as well as reduce data.
 During the coding process the team generated many different codes, categories and themes. It
 also developed a framework for the process that organized the data to facilitate its analysis. The
 process was exploratory and iterative meaning that each cycle of coding built upon the previous
 one. The team ended up with three different levels of coding: open (or free coding), second level
 coding (or formation of categories), and axial coding (or relations across the codes that tell a
 story).

 The steps for the coding process were as follows.
      1.	 Review of other data available (especially the Bhutan Living Standard Survey 2012)
      2.	 Review of transcripts and notes from key informant interviews and focus group discussions.
      3.	 Identification of an initial codes list from the data. (This list was long and identified all
          relevant resilience findings and themes.)
      4.	 Grouping together of similar codes as categories. Categories included resources (additional
          cost for schooling, walking distance to schools, low morale in children), relationships (with
          parents, teachers and friends) events and others.
      5.	 Identification of sub-categories within each broad list
      6.	 Identification of a final level of ‘axial’ codes linked to resilience theory and concepts
          analyzed from our data, using a process of collapsing and grouping codes.

 As mentioned above, the findings from the qualitative analysis guided the design of the RES-360°
 questionnaire that will be applied in Phase 3. This process considered: (i) the list of main risks
 identified by isolated rural communities, including those that prevent children from accessing
 or completing basic education; (ii) the list of individual, family and community assets (strengths,
 opportunities and indigenous resources) that can support children in their education opportunities;


		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     19
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		

      and (iii) the list of education programs and social services that are considered important to protect
      children from risks and promote their access and completion of basic education.
      The research team conducted a final integrated analysis of the qualitative findings through an
      interpretation of all the data gathered from the secondary sources, interviews, focus group
      discussions and the survey. Through this process, the RES- 360° was validated redesigned which
      can be applied again in similar contexts in Bhutan. Follow up cycles of this study will be considered
      based on the need, resources and feasibility

      III.IV Ethical clearance and participation
      We sought ethical clearance for the study from the Ministry of Education. The district education
      officer and the gup (local leader), who headed the Local Advisory Group for arrangement of the
      logistics, were also informed.
      Participation of stakeholders was a key component of both project design and implementation.
      The Local Advisory Committee included one representative from the following stakeholder groups:
          1.	 Gup
          2.	 School principal
          3.	 Teacher from each school
          4.	 Children from the communities
          5.	 Business community representative
      In Phase 2, the committee was briefed on the objectives of the study and entrusted with the
      following roles:
          1.	 Approval from gup for logistical arrangements (transportation, information)
          2.	 Stakeholder consultation (refinement of research questions and objectives based on
              feasibility, timeline, etc.)
          3.	 Facilitation of data collection
          4.	 Interpretation
          5.	 Dissemination of findings as well as evidence-based planning
      The LAC not only assisted in arranging logistics but also in gaining the confidence of the children
      and parents to open up during discussions. Also, without the support of the local authority, it
      would have been difficult to locate the children in the communities and bring them together for
      discussions as they reside in very scattered settlements.




 20   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 IV. Preliminary Findings and Analysis
 This study is in progress; however, based on the completion of the first research cycle and
 preliminary analysis, some preliminary findings can be noted. These are divided into policy and
 program level, community and school resources. This emphasis is important as our definition
 of resilience looks at the external resources available to support individuals at risk, rather than
 focusing on how individuals fend for themselves in adversity.

 IV.I Policy level findings
 The desk study of relevant documents and data revealed that there are many policies that suit
 the needs of children to enable them to go to school. Each of these education-related policies
 and programs were discussed with different key informants at the national level to identify the
 sample for Phase 2 and also to gain an understanding of the risks and assets for out-of-school
 children in Bhutan.

 Policies
 School Admission Policy 2014: This policy allows children to be enrolled in school from age 6 to
 13. It also allows children who failed to attend school at the corresponding age for their grade
 level to attend until age 13. Education officials were of the opinion that twice-yearly admissions
 should be conducted for the convenience of parents.

 Early Childhood Care Development Policy 2011: This policy aims to increase children’s school-
 readiness, mitigate school dropout and improve individual achievement levels and retention
 rates. However, the general consensus among the members of our national level focus groups
 was that childcare is an urban phenomena and therefore mostly available to parents who can
 afford it.

 School Discipline Policy 2012: This policy banned corporal punishment in schools. Informants
 reported that it caused more harm than it helped, however. There has been an increase in cases
 of discipline issues, and students are unable to re-integrate into school after they are expelled.

 National Youth Policy 2011: The policy facilitates youth skill building. It has very little reach and
 coverage as Bhutan has only 13 youth centres mostly clustered in the towns. Rural children do not
 have access. According to interviewees, schools should have provisions to reintegrate children
 after they are suspended and expelled from the schools.	

 National Education Policy 2011: The National Education Policy provisions include free and
 compulsory basic education and ensure accessibility. It outlines the government oversight over
 private schooling as well, and high enrollment numbers in these schools not are encouraged.
 However, respondents claimed that the general quality of all schools is a major issue as the skills
 taught do not match the needs of the job market. This could be one of the reasons why parents’
 cost-benefit analysis leans towards keeping their children at home.

 National Policy on Special Education Needs 2012: This policy calls for the inclusive education
 of children with special education needs. It supports retaining the majority of children who are

		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     21
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      cognitively or physically disabled to attend schools along with other children. However, members
      of the focus group remarked that there are still gaps whereby rural disabled children cannot
      enroll in normal schools. Few schools offer boarding facilities and the majority are located in
      urban areas.

      Programs
      Educating for Gross National Happiness: This program aims to promote mutual respect and
      cooperation – between the educated, the intellectuals and the non-educated. It aims to create
      the right conditions for children to think, reflect and show concern for each other. The perception
      of our key informants was that this fostered a conducive learning environment and also reduced
      discipline problems in school. The program takes a holistic approach to improve the quality of
      education and ensures principals deal with teachers, and teachers deal with students, in a just
      and equitable manner.

      Extended Classrooms (ECR) Program: This program was designed to fill the gap when primary
      schools are downgraded, upgraded or closed depending on the need. It aims to enhance enrollment
      and primary school completion by clustering lower primary classrooms around upper primary
      schools with boarding facilities. This model avoids the need for boarding facilities at lower grades
      and increases parents’ motivation to send their children to school as boarding is guaranteed in
      later grades. However, the quality of ECRs is an issue. Low quality leads to low attendance as
      the children fail to achieve good marks and hence drop out. Our informants remarked that they
      expect the provision of boarding and feeding will increase net enrollment. This will attract the
      children to come to schools and also study well without the need to worry about their lunch.
      According to some key informants, multigrade teaching would also address the risks of teacher
      shortage especially in rural areas. This in turn would help children to remain in school who could
      otherwise leave because of the shortage of teachers.

      Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Program: A key informant shared their perspective about how
      girls stay home from school and eventually drop out when they have to share toilets or there is
      no water at school.

      IV.II Community level findings
      We conducted three sets of FGDs (with parents, teachers and children) to assess the risks that
      these children face in going to school in the communities and to understand the assets within
      families and communities that can help children continue their education. Based on the findings,
      the following analyses were made at the individual, family and school-community level.

      Risks at the individual level
      Children belonging to the study sample were from two different locations; that is, from an urban
      town and a rural area. During the focus group discussions, children participated and discussed
      at length about the risks they face. Not surprisingly, children from the poorer rural families said
      that they faced the risk of not being able to afford extra schooling expenses such as uniforms
      and other things. Participants from the urban area also expressed similar views. Thus, children’s


 22   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 education is deeply affected by family poverty, regardless of urban or rural location, despite the
 policy for free education enacted by the government.

 Orphanhood is another risk faced by children in both locations. When their parents die they
 risk dropping out of school, especially if they are from a poor family. Children also face the risk
 of having to work at home and look after their ageing parents. Poor parents tend to send their
 children to the monastic schools, especially boys, as it is less expensive. The risks of not going to
 school are higher because when children drop out of monastic schools and they are not permitted
 to go back to school. This phenomenon is very prominent in rural areas where many children do
 not go to school because they are too old, despite the government’s flexible admission policy for
 children age 6 to 13, and despite ban on corporal punishment in schools.

 None of the children we spoke with had attended an early childcare development centre (ECCD).
 This highlighted the importance of ECCD to prepare children to perform well in school and hence
 reduce dropout. Disability is another reason why children in both urban and rural areas cannot
 go to school.

 Children who had already dropped out of school expressed that they thought the present
 curriculum was too demanding. They reported that they quickly became confused and lost interest
 in their studies, which eventually prompted them to drop out of school. A few children explained
 that they dropped out because they lost their morale as teachers were strict and looked down on
 the low performers. Children from urban areas feel that their parents try to better understand the
 pressures they face at school, and their need for clean uniforms. Children who had dropped out
 also stated they wanted more freedom to enjoy the school’s extra-curricular activities.

 In the above context of adversity for these children, our study identified both the risks and assets
 that were present in their community and schools. This approach is consistent with our view of
 resilience not as individual coping, but as in the resources available in the children’s environment
 that are potential assets for their educational well-being. We discuss these next.

 Risks and assets at the family level
 The study found that most parents keep their children home from school when they cannot to
 afford uniforms and school supplies for their children. Parents also felt that there is lack of future
 job opportunities due to high unemployment and prefer their children work on the farms and look
 after their parents and younger siblings. Some parents also expressed that they find it difficult to
 force their children to go to school if their children want to stay home. The children of divorced
 parents suffer low morale and prefer to remain home, in both rural and urban areas.

 In terms of assets, children and parents both stated that family support is the most important
 factor that determines whether children go to school or not. Relatives play a very important
 mentorship role in such cases. Peers also have a strong influence over the decision to remain
 in school. Parents also reported that parent-teacher meetings organized by the schools greatly
 affect their decision to keep their children in school.




		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     23
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      Risks and assets at the school level
      After the discussions with children, parents, and teachers, we concluded that there were risks
      related to school enrollment and completion, as well as much needed financial support for poor
      families. Respondents mentioned such support has never been made available and could also
      make a positive difference. Limited counselling for parents and needed school infrastructure
      were also noted as risks. Teachers also recommended more social cohesion practices in the
      communities to help children remain in schools.

      As for school assets, teachers reported that they are available and often approached for help
      when children face problem at school. The school Student Support Service also helps students to
      continue their studies. School counsellors are sometimes approached by students when they face
      the problems that might lead them to drop out of school. Training of teachers to better assume
      this counselling role, can able them to better mitigate school-community risks.

      School programs such as Life Skills Talks help children to understand the need to develop skills to
      be able to get a job later. Teachers were of the opinion that this needs to be strengthened through
      offering skills development as well, not only lectures. They stated that the Green Lunch program
      helps keep children healthy and as such should be continued. (A program in select schools that
      provides children with vegetable-rich meals.)

      As noted earlier the primary goal of this pilot study was to develop and test a methodology
      on resilience education research, relevant for the out-of-school population in Bhutan. Some
      preliminary findings of our pilot data collection have been noted here. However, the next section
      presents our reflections regarding the process of design and piloting such methodology in the
      context of Bhutan.




 24   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                      		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 V. Tentative Recommendations for Policy and
 Practice
 Some of the policy, program, school and community recommendations from this pilot study are:

     1.	 The National Education Policy should be reviewed with a view to enhancing the quality
         of education. Because skills development at school does not match the needs of the job
         market, parents are more likely to keeping children at home.

     2.	 The Special Education Policy should address the challenges of education access for rural
         disabled children to make schools more inclusive.

     3.	 The Early Child Care Development programs should be made more inclusive.

     4.	 Extended Classrooms should provide boarding and feeding tare to increases net enrollment.

     5.	 Extended Classrooms should offer multigrade teaching to address the teacher shortage
         especially in rural areas.

     6.	 Corporal punishment is banned in the schools, but there are no alternative discipline
         programs in place. Thus, more and repeated cases of discipline issues are reported as
         expressed in the interview. Child-friendly discipline is needed to allow the students who
         are offenders to integrate well into schools through relevant corrective practices.

     7.	 More counselling for parents is required through parent-teacher meetings. Strengthen
         parent-school relations through discussions about the risks and assets for children’s
         education, to foster family support and mentoring roles.

     8.	 Raise awareness in the community about the importance of education and garner their
         support.




		                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   25
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      VI. Conclusion: Researcher Critical Reflections
      Lastly, as this was a first pilot study using a resilience framework by the researchers, this section
      presents our reflections regarding both the relevance of the methodology and the approach for
      Bhutan.
      The resilience mixed-methods research approach is designed to identify and understand the
      risks, assets, and supports that are present in schools and communities that can help education
      systems deliver relevant services of high quality for learning, capacity development, and the well-
      being of students and teachers in difficult situations and in contexts of adversity. However, the
      method can also be applied in peaceful contexts. Bhutan is a peaceful country but there are many
      gaps to address nonetheless. Equity is much talked about issues in Bhutan and there are many
      pockets of poor people who suffer. This has a major implication on their children’s education. The
      resilience mixed-methods approach was contextualized, tested and applied and proved to be an
      effective tool. It provided a holistic picture of how and where children face risks, and also helped
      us develop an understanding of the Ministry of Education’s assets and targeted interventions.
      Some lessons learned during this study are listed as follows:
          1.	 The top-down approach to assessing policies and programs at the national level is very
              effective are we were able to confirm how each of these are designed and what gaps exist.
          2.	 It was important to involve high-level audiences in the design of the study to help them
              understand the need and urgency to reach out-of-school children in order to achieve the
              MDGs.
          3.	 Using existing information and further mining this data from recent surveys saved time
              and money, especially as the sample was scattered.
          4.	 The support of the Local Authority is very important. This was proved when we had to
              identify the sample, which was scatted over mountains and valleys. The parents and
              students felt more comfortable talking to the team when they were being interviewed
              because of this support.
          5.	 Sample should be disaggregated by location. By disaggregating our sample, we found that
              urban children face different risks and have different assets as compared to their rural
              counterparts.
          6.	 Facilitation skills are very important when talking to children about their education. Many
              children we spoke with had dropped out of school as their parents could not afford it, and
              this topic was sensitive for them.
          7.	 The research approach also helps the researcher easily link the risks children face to
              existing policies and programs, and assess their gaps. Based on the assets identified in
              the communities, the Ministry of Education could design targeted interventions and also
              review existing policies and programs.
          8.	 The mixed-methods approach also enabled us to compile and prepare a questionnaire that
              covered all aspects of the risks that children face. Upon pre-testing of the questionnaire,
              it was found to be holistic.

 26   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                     		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 References
 Bhutan, National Environment Commission. 2012. Bhutan: In Pursuit of Sustainable Development.
 National Report the for United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.

 Bhutan, National Statistics Bureau. 2010. Bhutan Multiple Indicator Survey. Thimpu.

 Bhutan, MoE (Ministry of Education). 2012. Annual Education Statistics. Policy and Planning
 Division. Thimpu.

 Bhutan, National Statistics Bureau. 2012. Bhutan Living Standards Survey. Thimpu.

 World Bank. 2011. “Education Strategy 2020, Learning for All: Investing in People’s Knowledge
 and Skills to Promote Development”. Washington, DC: World Bank.

 World Bank. 2013. “Resilience in Education Systems (RES-360°): Rapid Assessment Manual.”
 Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better Education Results
 (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.

 World Conference on Education for All (EFA). 1990. World Declaration on Education for All.
 Jomtien, Thailand, 5-9 March.




		                                                          EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   27
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                             		


      Annexes
      Annex A. Interview guide for national level data collection
                                                    Section 1: Risk Assessment - Ministry of Education
       1.1.1 Risks Identified in the National Data Review
       Identified Risk           Source Document/s               Brief description regarding source, details, prevalence, and           Name:
                                                                 location of risk                                                       Date:




       1.3 Assessment of Protective or Promotive Programs
           •	   Interview to focus on identifying the national level resources (programs and services) available to children that address risks.
       1.3.1. Protection
           •	   Explain how this part of the meeting focuses on establishing a framework of what is expected from the country’s government in general
                and the MoE in particular with regards to child protection. Additional laws that may not pertain to the local context may also be
                presented as reference points.
           •	   Explain the difference between protective programs (that protect students from risks of isolated rural areas, including poverty, lack of
                nutrition, isolation, abuse, etc.) and promotive programs (that help students achieve desirable education outcomes, such as school
                buildings, teachers, textbooks, etc.).
           •	   Explain how these laws or policies related to children can provide useful frameworks for the consideration of prevention and protection
                supports.
           •	   Provide MoE members the opportunity to identify any additional key policies or protective measures which have not been found by the
                research team
       1.3.2 National & International Laws and Policies Related to Child Protection
       Note: Once this review is complete proceed to a review of identified programs.
       Identified Law/ Policy    Source Document/s               Brief description regarding details, impact, and reach of program      Name:
                                                                 and the kind of risks addressed                                        Date:




 28   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
                                									                                                                      		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


1.3.3. Programs Identified in National Level Desk Study
    •	   Introduce the list of resources and programs identified in the earlier desk study to MoE members to obtain their feedback on the findings.
    •	   Validate these findings with MoE members.
Note: Once all assets identified during the desk review have been presented to MoE members, the interviewer should encourage participants
to identify additional key policies, programs, and protective measures employed by the MoE and the education system that have not been
addressed in the “Any other” column.
Identified MoE            Source Document                 Brief description regarding details, impact, and reach of program    Risks Addressed
Program                                                                                                                        Name:
                                                                                                                               Date:




                                		                                                                          EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     29
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                    		


      Annex B. Interview guide for local level data collection 			
      				
      Names of the participant/s:
      Age:
      Sex: 									
      Location:
      Name of school/community:
      Interviewer:
      Date:

       1.Risks established in the typology at     Participant discussion and comments
       school level                               Where?                                Who is affected by it?

       1.1 Could not afford ………….. (probe)

       1.2.Disability

       1.3 Schools are too far

       1.4 Need to take care of a sick person

       1.5 Not interested

       1.6 Need to work

       1.7 Too young or too old

       1.8 Unable to qualify for the next grade

       1.9 Illness

       1.10 Parents’ support

       1.11 School atmosphere



 30   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
                                   									                                                               		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014


1.11 Job opportunities in future

1.12 Others

1.11 Are there teachers that form special        Yes - Who are they? What role does this play in
relationships with children and youth?           the lives of youth?
1.12 Are there people that children and youth    Yes- Who are they? What role does this play in
can talk to?                                     the lives of youth?
1.13 What role does connection to community
and between community members play in
positive outcomes?
     What role does trust and respect play in
     this?
     What about working together and doing
     things together?
1.14 What about teachers? How can they
adapt their teaching methodologies?
     How can the curricular programs be
     adapted?
     What role does this or can this play in
     positive outcomes for children and youth?
1.15 How could or does parental involvement
in school and schooling promote positive
outcomes for children and youth?
1.6 What about community involvement in
schools?

1.7 Any other views

2. Assets or coping strategies within            Which risk(s) does it help to mitigate?           Who exhibits this asset or coping
the community/family                             Who exhibits this asset?                          strategy?
2.1 Family income

2.2 Extended family




                                   		                                                                   EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   31
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                          		


       2.3 Family mentors

       2.4 Community leaders

       3. Name of program or resource                   Which risk(s) does it help to mitigate?   Who executes the program or support?
       received
       3.1 Educating for GNH

       3.2 Extended classroom program

       3.3 Multigrade teaching

       3.4 Performance compact

       3.5 Multisectoral approach

       3.6 Free basic education

       3.7 Community ECCD centre

       3.8 School Admission Policy

       3.9 WASH program

       3.10 Provision of boarding and feeding to
       increase net enrollment

       3.11 Others

       3.12 Are there informal programs? If so, where
       are these programs located? Who is running
       these programs? How do these programs
       operate?




 32   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                               		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Annex C. Questionnaire template
                                            FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
     PARTICIPANT ID
     SAMPLE ID
     SITE ID
     DATE OF ADMINISTRATION
     PARTICIPANT ID
     Are you male or female?
     How old are you?



                                             SECTION 1A: RISKS
               How prevalent are the following risks in your home, school, community, or
                                            neighborhood?
                                              Not at all   A little     Somewhat      Often        Very

     1.1 Could not afford                         O          O              O           O           O

     1.2 Disability                               O          O              O           O           O

     1.3 Schools are too far                      O          O              O           O           O

     1.4 Need to take care of a sick              O          O              O           O           O
     person

     1.5 Not interested                           O          O              O           O           O

     1.6 Need to work                             O          O              O           O           O

     1.7 Too young or too old                     O          O              O           O           O

     1.8 Unable to qualify for the next           O          O              O           O           O
     grade

     1.9 Illness                                  O          O              O           O           O

     1.10 Parents’ support                        O          O              O           O           O

     1.11 School atmosphere                       O          O              O           O           O

     1.12 Job opportunities in the future         O          O              O           O           O

     1.13 Enrollled in monastic school            O          O              O           O           O

     1.14 Peer pressure                           O          O              O           O           O

     1.15 Unsuitable school                       O          O              O           O           O

     1.16 Low morale                              O          O              O           O           O

     1.17 Other                                   O           O             O           O           O



		                                                                    EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   33
BHUTAN| EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		



                                           SECTION 1B: LOCATION OF RISKS
                                     Where do you experience these risks?

                                                       At home        At school   In community
        1.1 Could not afford                              O                O           O

        1.2.Disability                                    O                O           O

        1.3 Schools are too far                           O                O           O

        1.4 Need to take care of a sick person            O                O           O

        1.5 Not interested                                O                O           O

        1.6 Need to work                                  O                O           O

        1.7 Too young or too old                          O                O           O

        1.8 Unable to qualify for the next grade          O                O           O

        1.9 Illness                                       O                O           O

        1.10 Parents’ support                             O                O           O

        1.11 School atmosphere                            O                O           O

        1.12 Job opportunities in future                  O                O           O

        1.13 Enrolled in monastic school                  O                O           O

        1.14 Peer pressure                                O                O           O

        1.15 Unsuitable school                            O                O           O

        1.16 Low morale                                   O                O           O

        1.17 Other                                        O                O           O




 34   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                             		                     RES-RESEARCH | 2014


                           SECTION 2A: SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY RESOURCES
                                     How important is this to you?
                                           1.Not      2. A little     3. Somewhat                    5. Very
                                                                                    4. Important
                                         important   important         important                   important

     2.1 Extended classrooms                O            O                O              O            O

     2.2 Multigrade teaching                O            O                O              O            O

     2.3 Boarding facilities                O            O                O              O            O

     2.4 Educating for Gross National
                                            O            O                O              O            O
     Happiness

     2.5 Extra-curricular activities        O            O                O              O            O

     2.6 Parent-teacher meetings            O            O                O              O            O

     2.7 School mentoring program           O            O                O              O            O

     2.8 Student Support Service            O            O                O              O            O

     2.9 Green School program               O            O                O              O            O

     2.10 School counsellors                O            O                O              O            O

     2.11 Community leaders                 O            O                O              O            O
 			


                            SECTION 2B: SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY RESOURCES
                                      How often is this happening?
                                                                       3. Some-
                                         1. Never    2. Rarely                       4. Often      5. Always
                                                                         times

     2.1 Extended classrooms                O            O                O              O            O

     2.2 Multigrade teaching                O            O                O              O            O

     2.3 Boarding facilities                O            O                O              O            O

     3.4 Educating for Gross National
                                            O            O                O              O            O
     Happines

     2.5 Extra-curricular activities        O            O                O              O            O

     2.6 Parent-teacher meeting             O            O                O              O            O

     2.7 School mentoring program           O            O                O              O            O

     2.8 Student Support Service            O            O                O              O            O

     2.9 Green School program               O            O                O              O            O

     2.10 School counsellors                O            O                O              O            O

     2.11 Community leaders                 O            O                O              O            O



		                                                                  EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      35
                     The World Bank
                    1818 H Street, NW
           Washington DC 20433 USA
www.worldbank.org/education/resilience
   educationresilience@worldbank.org
