                                              94269




                                      RES-Research
                    Resilience in Education Systems
                                              Nepal


The Educational Resilience of Children
     in Urban Squatter Settlements of
                          Kathmandu
                                      RES-Research
                    Resilience in Education Systems
                                              Nepal


The Educational Resilience of Children
     in Urban Squatter Settlements of
                          Kathmandu
                                      Research Team
                                   Dr. Bal Chandra Luitel
                                      Team Leader
                 Associate Dean, Kathmandu University School of Education

                                 Indra Mani Rai (Yamphu)
                                 Research Coordinator
     PhD Scholar and Freelance Researcher, Kathmandu University School of Education

                                       Suresh Gautam
                                     Team Member
     PhD Scholar and Freelance Researcher, Kathmandu University School of Education

                                     Binod Prasad Pant
                         Team Member, Statistician and Data Analyst
                      Faculty, Kathmandu University School of Education

                                      Santosh Gautam
                                      Team Member
                  MPhil Student, Kathmandu University School of Education




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the Education Resilience Approaches
program team, the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the executive directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
Photos: Cover and photo on page 54, © Aisha Faquit / World Bank. All other pohtos courtesy of
research team.
									                                                       		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014



 Acknowledgments
 Firstly, we would like to express our sincere thanks to the Education Resilience Approaches
 (ERA) Program from the Global Education Practice at the World Bank for giving us the chance to
 conduct this educational resilience research project on children in urban squatter settlements, a
 neglected social group. Particularly, we would like to express our heartfelt thanks to Joel Reyes,
 Sr. Institutional Development Specialist, World Bank, and Jo Kelcey, ERA team member, for their
 active interest and support in conceiving, designing and implementing this study. Moreover, we
 express our special thanks to Michael Ungar and Donna M. Mertens for imparting their expertise
 and educating us on these newly emerging issues of educational resilience and transformative
 mixed methods research approaches through two phases of training workshops, held first in New
 Delhi, India, and then in Kathmandu, Nepal.

 Similarly, special thanks are expressed to those participants with whom we discussed, interacted,
 interviewed, and conversed in the matters of our inquiry. The information they provided and
 their ideas and perceptions were quite important for us. We drew our arguments, analysis and
 interpretations based upon what we listened to from them. Indeed, we do not want to forget to
 express our special thanks to all the ERA training participants from different countries (Bhutan,
 India, Afghanistan, Lebanon) who provided us with feedback during the workshops. Likewise, we
 would like to express our sincere thanks to all settlement residents and Local Advisory Committee
 (LAC) members who supported us to collect both quantitative and qualitative data from the very
 beginning of our research project.

  




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   7
									                                            		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Contents
 Acronyms											                                                                 10
 About the RES-Research Studies Series						                                         11
 I. Introduction										                                                           12
 I.I Context of adversity									                                                   12
 I.II Transformative objectives									                                             13
 I.III Research questions									                                                   13
 I.IV Significance of the study									                                             13
 I.V Scope of the study										                                                    14
 II. Literature Review									                                                      15
 II.I Understanding resilience									                                              15
 II.II Adversities/risks										                                                   15
 II.III Protective/promotive factors								                                         16
 II.IV Policy review										                                                       17
 III. Methodology										                                                          20
 III.I Philosophical underpinnings								                                           20
 III.II Research design										                                                    20
 III.III Transformative approaches								                                           22
 III.IV Ethical considerations									                                              23
 IV. Adversities/Risks Faced by Children in Urban Squatter Settlements 	             24
 IV.I Adverse features of squatter settlements							                                24
 IV.II School level										                                                        25
 IV.III Family level										                                                       26
 IV.IV Community level										                                                     28
 V. Adaptive Strategies and Protective/Promotive Factors			                          33
 V.I Schools as safe zones									                                                  33
 V.II Role of families										                                                     37
 V.III Community’s role										                                                    40
 Chapter VI. Life Skills									                                                    45
 VI.I Education-related skills									                                              45
 VI.II Family-related skills									                                                47
 VI.III Community-related skills								                                             48
 VII. Discussion										                                                           50
 VII.I Key findings										                                                        50
 VII.II Conclusion										                                                         52
 VII.III Recommendations									                                                    53
 References											                                                               55
 Annexes											                                                                  58
 Annex A. Study population and sample distribution						                             58
 Annex B. Demographic survey and resilience questionnaire results				                60
 Annex C. Local Advisory Committees							                            	              68
		                                                  EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   9
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                     		


      Acronyms
      ASIP		         Annual Strategic Implementation Plan

      CFLG		         Child Friendly Local Governance

      CRC		          Convention on the Rights of Child

      DoE 		         Department of Education

      DR		           Dropout Rate

      EFA 		         Education for All

      FGD		          Focus Group Discussion

      I/NGO		        International/Non Governmental Organization

      IMF		          International Monetary Fund

      LAC		          Local Advisory Committee

      LSGS 		        Lumanti Support Group for Shelter

      MDGs		         Millennium Development Goals

      MoE		          Ministry of Education

      NER		          Net Enrolment Rate

      NIR 		         Net Intake Rate

      RRA		          Rapid Rural Appraisal

      SMC		          School Management Committee

      SR		           Survival Rate

      SSRP		         School Sector Reform Program



       




 10   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 About the RES-Research Studies Series
 Development practitioners in fragile, conflict and violence-affected contexts are demanding
 better support for research, evaluation and assessments: this can range from conducting an
 exploratory needs assessment for an emergency intervention, monitoring and evaluating
 ongoing project impact, or building the evidence base to design a reconstruction or post-conflict
 program. In contexts of overwhelming adversity it is crucial not only to get reliable and valid data
 but to also ensure that we are going about this data collection in the right way. Doing research
 “right” in these contexts requires asking the right questions, talking to the relevant participants
 and stakeholders, using the most pertinent methods, and paying particular attention to ethics
 and power differentials.

 To address these concerns, the ERA Program developed the Resilience in Education Settings
 (RES)-Research training module. The training is specifically targeted for researchers
                                         living in context of conflict, violence and other
   As with all SABER tools, the RES-     adversities. It brings together resilience theory and a
   Research training module is openly    transformative research paradigm. Resilience theory
   available for education practitioners seeks to understand the process by which individuals,
   within the World Bank, as well as     communities and organizations recover from crisis,
   other agencies. The module consists   continue to perform in the midst of adversities and
   of a research manual and handouts,    even radically change to prevent future risk exposure
   power point presentations and         and continue their development process (Reyes
   additional guidance materials.        2013). The transformative research paradigm provides
   If you are interested in using this   methodological guidance to conduct studies with
   tool please contact the ERA team      vulnerable populations, while recognizing both their
   for the appropriate resources:        exposure to overwhelming threats but also their assets
   educationresilience@worldbank.org     such as strengths, opportunities and available services
                                         (Mertens 2009).

 Through a nine-month training program, RES-Research builds on the capacities of academics
 and education practitioners in fragile, conflict and violence-affected contexts to undertake
 locally relevant and rigorous education resilience research. First piloted in Central America, the
 training program was improved and recently implemented in the South Asia region as part of a
 multi-donor trust fund for the Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) initiative
 supported by DfID-UKAID, DFAT-Australian AID and the World Bank.

 This report presents the ongoing application of research design and implementation skills gained
 by the Nepalese participants in the RES-Research training module, delivered in November 2013,
 in Delhi, India, and in April 2014, in Kathmandu, Nepal. It provides valuable contributions to our
 on-going understanding of resilience in education settings in difficult contexts.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     11
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      I. Introduction
      Nepal is a partner to the international commitment to achieve the goals of Education for All
      (EFA) and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Efforts have been made through the
      EFA National Plan of Action 2003-2015 and School Sector Reform Program (SSRP) to achieve the
      EFA goals and the MDGs. Over the last few years, Nepal has demonstrated progress in some of
      the indicators related to children’s participation in school. The Department of Education (2012)
      has reported that the primary education Net Enrolment Rate (NER), Grade 1 Net Intake Rate
      (NIR), Grade 5 Survival Rate (SR), and Dropout Rate (DR), are 95.3, 91.2, 84.1, and 5.2 percent
      respectively. However, it will be difficult to close the bigger gaps of 4.7, 8.8, 15.9, and 5.2 percent
      of the NER, NIR, SR, and DR respectively by 2015. The challenge lies in the large number of
      school-aged children who do not attend formal primary schooling. Likewise, a significant number
      of students repeat grades and those promoted may have low achievement. The Ministry of
      Education (MoE) reported in 2011 that the promotion and repetition rates in Grade 1 were 72.5
      and 19.9 percent, respectively and in Grade 8, 87.6 and 5.7 percent. The average achievement of
      boys and girls in Grade 8 was low in Mathematics (boys 45 percent and girls 41 percent), in Nepali
      (boys 48 percent and girls 49 percent) and in Social Studies (boys 50 percent and girls 49 percent).

      Realizing this bleak educational scenario, Nepal has been focusing more on access to quality
      education for the children of economically marginalized people through equity measures
      (scholarships and incentives). These children belong to the poorest groups (Wagley, September
      2013, The Himalayan Times), such as the disadvantaged and the deprived communities of urban
      squatter settlements. Many reasons have been identified for the phenomenon of out-of-school
      children, including poor family economic conditions, an unfavorable school environment, socio-
      cultural beliefs and traditions, parents’ not recognizing the importance of education, inaccessible
      schools for children with disabilities, parents’ unwillingness, corporal punishment and children’s
      domestic responsibilities (Scheuermann 2013). Other factors listed as contributing to primary
      level dropout are violence in school such as corporal punishment by teachers (Nepal, DoE 2010),
      children’s domestic responsibilities, and an unfavorable school environment (Nepal, DoE 2012). In
      this context, in particular, children in urban squatter settlements face more severe adversities/risks
      as most are deprived of government services because of a lack of official national identification.

      I.I Context of adversity
      The term ‘squatter’ “refers not to every person occupying unused buildings or land without a
      legal arrangement but, rather, only to those who are quite literally landless” (Tanaka 2009). In
      many cases, squatters are deprived of basic services, social welfare, and other opportunities
      provided by the government because of lack of citizenship certificates, migration certificates, and
      proof of land ownership. This context has accelerated the poverty in squatter settlements and
      impoverished livelihoods. In Kathmandu, 35.6 percent of households are below the poverty line,
      including the squatter population (Tanaka 2009).

      Squatter settlements have increased in Kathmandu Metro City due to the collapse of livelihood
      means in rural areas and due to displacement by natural disasters or conflict. About one fourth
      of the city’s total squatter population are illiterate and more than half are either barely literate or
      have primary education (LSGS 2001, as cited in Shrestha 2013). Most are struggling financially and

 12   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 lack basic facilities such as food, clothes, shelter, health and sanitation, education and drinking
 water (IMF 2005, as cited in Shrestha 2013). The settlements are located along riverbanks, steep
 slopes and vacant spaces under high-voltage electrical transmission lines, and face challenges
 due to floods in the rainy season.

 There is a strong sense in these communities that they are excluded in public places, including
 schools (Shrestha, 2013). The communities are searched and cordoned off when a crime takes
 place in the city, as there is a general perception that these areas are the breeding place of crime
 and insecurity. Violence, abuse, and exploitation against children and women are common risks
 in the squatter communities. Instances have been reported of negative treatment of students by
 peers and teachers in schools, resulting in dropouts (United Nations 2012).

 I.II Transformative objectives
 Given that there are risks and assets associated with children living in squatter settlements in
 Kathmandu Metropolitan City and who are studying in institutional/private and community/
 public schools, this resilience research investigated key adversities/risks faced by the children
 and the coping strategies that contribute to the development of life skills (attitudes, values, and
 beliefs). It aims ultimately at promoting inclusive and equitable educational processes.

 I.III Research questions
 To contribute to the transformative objectives of inclusive and equitable education, in this
 research we have attempted to deal with the following research questions.

     1.	 What adversities/risks (social, psychological, economic, and health related) do the children
         in urban squatter settlements face in their context (individual, family, school, community)
         of learning?

     2.	 How do they cope with the adversities/risks they face? What are the protective and
         promotive factors that mediate the adversities?

     3.	 How do these coping strategies, protective and promotive factors, help them to achieve
         life skills?

 I.IV Significance of the study
 This research is an attempt to highlight the, thus far, neglected issue of the educational resilience
 of children residing in five riverbank settlements located near the Bishnumati and Dhobikhola
 rivers of Kathmandu Metropolitan City. The research explores the key adversities/risks the children
 face, their coping strategies, and life skills. We hope to contribute to the development of better
 strategies and programs for the multiple layers of education stakeholders (schools, municipality,
 and government).

 In addition, the specific findings of this research will help policymakers, educators, and other
 concerned stakeholders in this field bring the children residing in urban squatter settlements into
 mainstream development, enhancing their quality of life. By gaining a greater understanding of
 the processes that promote the resilience of these children and their coping strategies, they will

		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     13
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      be in a better position to support children’s existing strengths and to mitigate and prevent the
      risks children face. Likewise, this study is valuable for civil society organizations to design better
      programs and advocacy plans in favour of neglected and deprived children living in urban squatter
      settlements. This will eventually contribute to the socio-economic empowerment of families and
      their children living in these conditions. Lastly, this study also contributes to academic scholarship
      and the promotion of further comprehensive studies particularly in the field of urban squatter
      settlements. Ultimately, we hope it contributes to re-engineering the education systems and
      processes from the perspective of children from deprived communities.

      I.V Scope of the study
      The research was conducted in five riverbank squatter settlements (two near Bishnumati river
      and three near Dhobikhola river). We focused on children 5 to 19 years of age. Through the
      perspectives of key stakeholders such as teachers, community members, parents, and children
      themselves, we attempted to uncover the risks they face and their coping strategies. We took
      note of the risks children face at the individual, school, family, and community level. This led
      to five major areas of risks and coping strategies: social, psychological, economic, health and
      educational.




 14   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 II. Literature Review
 In this chapter, we review resilience theory as well as national and international policies relevant
 to the educational and social needs of children in vulnerable conditions. First, the aim of reviewing
 the concepts of resilience theory is to understand and visualize the adversities, coping strategies,
 protective/promotive factors, and life skills of children in urban squatter settlements. In addition,
 consistent with the notion of transformative research, the intention behind reviewing the policies
 is to grasp any gaps in the policy context. These gaps may point to human rights violations
 committed against children living in these difficult conditions. Further, a resilience framework,
 we hope, will help to draw the attention of multiple layers of stakeholders in order to educate
 and empower them on the issue of the education needs of children living in squatter conditions.

 II.I Understanding resilience
 According to Braverman (2001, 2), “resilience is a concept that incorporates two components: (a)
 exposure to significant stressors or risks, and (b) demonstration of competence and successful
 adaptation”. The term ‘resilience’ specifically describes the capacity of people to cope with stress
 and crisis in order to mitigate risks and negative events. It represents the manifestation of positive
 adaptation in the face of adversities/risks in their socio-cultural context (Robertson-Hickling et
 al. 2009). This idea of resilience is focused more on individual performance. However, we use
 the term not only to indicate the positive efforts of an individual to resist risks. We use it in its
 broader sense, which includes the social, economic, psychological, health and education related
 struggles to triumph over adversities. In this way, resilience theory enables us to examine both
 the adversities of children in urban squatter settlements and their ability to be resilient with a
 broader social support.
 Within this broader concept of resilience, we focus our study on the education resilience of
 children living in squatter conditions. We explore their ability to attain education and to promote
 life skills, in spite of adversities. Education resilience is a line of inquiry that refers to “students
 who despite economic, cultural, and social barriers still succeed at high levels” (Cabrera and
 Padilla 2004, 152). Education resilience is a complex process that involves a chain of economic,
 cultural and social barriers that lead to “a process of, or capacity for, or the outcome of successful
 adaptation despite challenging and threatening circumstances” (Garmezy and Masten 1992).

 II.II Adversities/risks
 Adversities and risks affect children cognitively, emotionally and behaviorally across all stages of
 their development (Clemens 2006, as cited in Reyes 2013). In our research context, adversities
 are rooted in the poverty status of the children, which leads to impoverished livelihood, social,
 health, and psychological risks in their learning context (family, school, and communities). In
 other words, “risk factors are environmental stressors or conditions that increase the likelihood
 that a child will experience poor overall adjustment or negative outcomes in particular areas
 such as physical health, mental health, academic achievement, or social adjustment” (Braverman
 2001, 1).

 This study explores children’s socioeconomic disadvantages, conflict within their families, exposure


		                                                               EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      15
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      to violence, and parental behavior such as substance abuse and criminality (Kaplan 1999, as cited
      in Braverman 2001). Growing up in poverty is a particular concern because it encompasses a
      host of specific risks to children such as limited access to health care, economic stressors on the
      family, increased exposure to environmental hazards, and limited opportunities for employment
      (Braverman 2001), which can act as barriers to children’s learning. This study explores the kind of
      adversities that affect the learning capacity and performance of children. Further, it also explores
      the protective and promotive measures adopted by children in their learning contexts.

      II.III Protective/promotive factors
      The term ‘protective factor’ is derived from resilience theory to describe the factors that help
      individuals cope with adverse situations. Braverman (2001, 2) defines this as the “characteristics
      of the child or the environment that improve or reduce the potentially negative effects of the
      risk factor”. These protective factors may vary in time and context. Internal protective factors
      involve the personal and social characteristics of the child, such as their energy level, disposition,
      responsiveness to people, social orientation, communication skills, ability to focus, self-concept,
      internal locus of control, and desire for self-improvement (Werner and Smith 1993). External
      protective factors are sources of support and structure in the child’s environment such as
      parental warmth and presence, informal sources of emotional support, peer relationships, rules
      in the household, and access to services (Warner and Smith 1993). This study focused more on
      exploring external protective factors rather than internal protective factors.

      In other words, “protective factors are characteristics of the child or the environment that improve
      or reduce the potentially negative effects of the risk factor” (Braverman, 2001). However, the
      term ‘promotive factors’ refers to the assets of children that help mitigate adversities and achieve
      a desirable outcome. It includes the development of positive cognitive, emotional and behavioral
      skills in spite of contexts of adversity. We explored the promotive factors that allow children
      in urban squatter settlements to develop their resilience such as optimism, tolerance, problem
      solving, sociability and flexibility (Reyes, 2013). Another term for this type of factor that supports
      achieving desirable outcomes in adversity is “development assets.” This term will be discussed in
      the next section.

      Families or family environments can serve as ‘protective factors’ for children facing diverse risks.
      Well-functioning families that discipline their children, engage in meaningful communication
      with their children and create a sense of family cohesion (Noltemeyer and Bush 2013) can serve
      as pertinent protective factors. Research shows how family cohesion and adaptability, effective
      parental communication skills, stable marital/couple relationships, and responsive, nurturing,
      and consistent firm parenting practices generally serve as protective factors for children and
      adolescents across diverse cultures (Bush and Peterson 2012; Peterson and Bush 2012, as cited
      in Noltemeyer and Bush 2013). Individual members of families are able to navigate resources to
      support themselves and their children (Ungar 2011).

      Likewise, caring teachers and peers can also contribute to the positive adjustment of children
      facing adversities. Warm and supportive teacher-student relationships can serve as the protective
      factors (Baker 2006, as cited in Noltemeyer and Bush 2013). Powers, Ressler, and Bradley (2009)
      found that the support of friends protected against depression in maltreated children, but only


 16   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014

 in females; in contrast, Tanigawa, Furlong, Felix, and Sharkey (2011) found that perceived social
 support from a friend buffered the expression of depressive symptoms in children victimized by
 peers, but only in males (as cited in Noltemeyer and Bush 2013).

 Communities can also serve as protective factors for children. Community resilience refers to the
 extent to which various forms of capital are available to residents of a community in general and
 to children in particular. The children living in particular communities can have access to human
 capital (knowledge/education), social capital (support networks, sense of community), natural
 capital (water, land), and physical capital (adequate/safe drinking water, roads) (Noltemeyer and
 Bush 2013). Access to these types of assets serves to promote resilience.

 The term ‘promotive factors’ refers to the assets that help achieve a desirable outcome. It includes
 the development of positive cognitive, emotional and behavioral skills in spite of adversity. We
 explored the promotive factors that allow children in urban squatter settlements to develop
 resilience such as optimism, tolerance, problem solving, sociability and flexibility (Reyes 2013).
 Another term for this type of factors that support achieving desirable outcomes in adversity is
 “development assets”. According to Scales (2000, as cited in Braverman 2001),”developmental
 assets are individual and environmental factors that increase the likelihood of achieving positive
 outcomes” (Scales, Benson, Leffert, and Blyth 2000, as cited in Braverman 2001). When the asset
 is present, there is greater probability of successful developmental outcomes (Braverman 2001).
 Thus, in this research, we also attempted to explore the life skills the children have achieved as
 developmental assets.

 II.IV Policy review
 OIn the following, we review a number of international and national legal frameworks related
 to children and education. These policies helped us to analyze the existing adversities/risks the
 children in urban squatter settlements face from a policy perspective, and to understand any
 violations of the human rights of these children. Importantly, the Treaty Act (1990) states the
 supremacy of international human rights provisions in the case of incompatibility with national
 legal provisions. Further, Nepal’s Interim Constitution stipulates the effective implementation
 of an international human rights framework (2007, Article 33). In this sense, the provisions of
 international human rights instruments are not only morally binding for the government but their
 implementation is also mandatory through national policy arrangements.

 International legal provisions
 Nepal is morally bound to nearly two-dozen international human rights instruments. The
 Convention on the Rights of the Child (United Nations 1990) emphasizes the availability and
 accessibility of free education for every child. It calls for measures to encourage regular school
 attendance and to reduce dropout rates, and stipulates the right of all children to receive education
 without discrimination on any grounds. It further states that children have the right to be cared
 for by their parents (Article 7) and to maintain family relations (Article 8). It addresses parents’
 responsibility for the upbringing and development of the child (Article 18). In addition to these
 rights, children have the right to protection from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or
 abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, and maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse


		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     17
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      (Article, 19). Other relevant Articles include: (i) the right to enjoy the highest attainable standard
      of health facilities for the treatment of illness and the provision of adequate nutritious foods
      (Article, 24); (ii) the right to a standard of living adequate for their physical, mental, spiritual,
      moral and social development (Article, 27.1); (iii) the right to education on the basis of equal
      opportunity (Article, 28); and (iii) the right to protection from economic exploitation and from
      performing work that is likely to interfere with their education, or harm their health or physical,
      mental, spiritual, moral or social development (Article, 32).

      Nepal is also signatory to the International Labor Organization’s Worst Forms of Child Labor
      Convention, 1999 (No. 182). The Convention places emphasis on immediate and effective
      measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labor (Article 1). It
      identifies the worst forms of child labor as all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery (for
      example, debt bondage, serfdom and forced labor), and work that adversely affects the health,
      safety or morals of children (Article 3). Likewise, the Minimum Age Convention 1973 (No. 138)
      ensures the minimum age of employment is over 15 years of age (Article 2.3.). Article 7.1 allows
      employment between the ages of 13 to 15 for light work that is not likely to harm children’s
      health or development, and that does not affect their school attendance.

      National legal provisions
      A number of national legal frameworks related to children and education have been developed in
      Nepal, including the Interim Constitution (2007). The Interim Constitution enshrines the right to
      live with dignity (Article 13.1) and the right to basic health services (Article 16.2). Children have
      the right to nurturing, basic health and social security (Article 22.2), and the right to be protected
      against physical, mental or any other form of exploitation (Article, 22.3). The Interim Constitution
      also contains the ambitious stipulation that every citizen has the right to free education up to the
      secondary level. The seventh amendment of the 1971 Education Act also ensures free primary
      education in community schools and free textbooks. Social inclusion, stated as a critical concern,
      is to be addressed through a rights-based approach to education.
      Nepal has also placed emphasis on access to quality education for all. An inclusive education
      approach has been employed for student enrolment and to address the needs and aspirations of
      all children from diverse backgrounds. The School Sector Reform Program (SSRP, 2009-2015) is a
      major reform agenda that mandates reform in the areas of Structuring of Schools, Governance and
      Management, Capacity Development, Gender and Inclusion, Financing, and Access and Quality.
      Capacity Development of Teachers is an important component of the SSRP that has placed a high
      priority on teacher preparation and development. The plan aims to ensure all teachers have the
      knowledge and skills required to effectively facilitate students’ learning processes. The SSRP also
      prioritizes the capacity building of school headmasters. However, it does not provide for skill
      building in teacher management, for example in management of teacher misconduct.
      Reaffirming a clear obligation to the children’s right to receive quality education, the SSRP ensures
      free basic education that includes free admissions, textbooks, tuition, and examinations. It also
      focuses on ensuring free education for children from economically disadvantaged communities.
      It encourages local governments to adopt a compulsory education policy over their jurisdictions
      in consultation with local stakeholders.


 18   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 These policies, especially the policy on free primary schooling, have been made with the aim of
 achieving participation rates of 100 percent in formal schooling. The current Annual Strategic
 Implementation Plan (ASIP) acknowledges the Nepalese government’s commitment and strategic
 priority to ensuring quality education and equitable access to children deprived of attending schools
 due to geographical or socio-economic-cultural reasons (MoE 2012, as cited in Scheuermann 2013).

 The above education goals are supported by specific acts referencing other family, municipal
 and national responsibilities. The1992 Children’s Act states parents are under obligation to make
 arrangements to raise their children and to provide them with education, health care, sports and
 recreation facilities within the family’s financial means (Article 4.1).

 The 1999 Local Self-Governance Act states the municipal council has the duty to provide programs
 related to children’s welfare (Article 93.3), and of direct benefit to children (Clause, 111.4.e). The
 ten-year National Plan of Action for Children (2004-2014) further encourages the promotion of
 child friendly environments and the elimination of all forms of violence and exploitation against
 children. The plan is committed to the enhancement of children’s quality of life and protection of
 their rights. It aims at promoting the education, development, health, and hygiene of children.

 The state has also implemented a national strategy and guidelines for Child Friendly Local Governance
 (CFLG). The main focus of this strategy is to ensure local governments and municipalities develop
 child friendly programs. It also states that local government should develop programs on child
 protection and promotion.

 The above-mentioned national and international policies all envisage the right to education of all
 children. The state is obligated to make education freely accessible and available to all school-aged
 children. A critical aspect of these policies is the inclusive nature of education, and the principles
 stipulating the self-esteem and dignity of all children from diverse social, cultural, linguistic, and
 economic backgrounds. Further, under these policies children have the right to be nurtured, cared
 for, and raised by their parents or guardians. Legal instruments have focused on the protection
 of children against any form of violation, exploitation, discrimination, neglect, sexual abuse, and
 physical punishment. Similarly, these instruments also protect against the worst forms of child
 labor.

 As noted earlier, the above international and national policy backdrop will serve in this study to
 identify gaps in the social services that seek to both protect children living in squatter conditions,
 and promote desirable outcomes, such as education access and learning.




		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      19
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      III. Methodology
      The methodology section of this study includes a discussion of the philosophical underpinnings
      and methods that substantiate the transformative, mixed-method, research paradigm of this
      study. We have adopted and integrated both post-positivistic and non-positivistic paradigms.

      III.I Philosophical underpinnings
      This research uses a mixed-methods approach and a transformative research paradigm.
      Ontologically, we believe there is a single objective reality as well as multiple subjective truths.
      Epistemologically, we believe that reality can be accessed in a collaborative, interactive, and
      dialectical way with research participants. Regarding the axiology, this study considers ethics as an
      inherent component of any study in contexts of adversity, such as the “respect for cultural norms
      of interaction” and “beneficence…in terms of the promotion of human rights and increase in
      social justice” (Mertens 2010). In line with this belief system, we emphasize bringing the potential
      stakeholders into the research process (Mertens 2010). We attempted to facilitate their agency
      by including them from the very beginning, from the development of the research purpose and
      research questions, to data collection, data analysis, and interpretation.

      Specifically to facilitate our participatory and axiological approach, we formed a Local Advisory
      Committee (LAC) of five to eight members in each settlement, comprised of multiple stakeholders
      from the communities (see Annex C). We disclosed our research purpose and its benefits to the
      community in meetings that were held on a regular basis. One major purpose for forming LACs
      was to achieve broad community support (Mertens 2010). Further, LACs helped us build rapport
      and a bond of trust with the research participants. We mobilized the LACs to share research
      findings through meetings with stakeholders at the community level. In addition, we involved the
      LACs in administering the survey, interviews, and Focus Group Discussions (FGDs).

      III.II Research design
      Positioning ourselves within these broader philosophical premises, we selected study areas,
      samples, data collection methods, and data analysis and interpretation methods.

      Study area, population and sampling
      The target population for this study was children 5 to 19 years of age, living in urban squatter
      settlements, and studying in institutional/private and community/public schools of Kathmandu
      Metropolitan City. According to a survey conducted by the Ministry of Land Reform and
      Management (2011), there are 40 squatter settlements in Kathmandu Metropolitan City with a
      total population of 12,726. The population of children 5 to 19 years of age is 4,441 within 2,735
      households (see Annex A, Table A1). We purposefully selected riverbank squatter settlements
      assuming that these areas are more severe than other non-riverbank areas. Conditions in riverbank
      squatter settlements are often more severe due to the risk of flooding and, as many are dumping
      sites, due to health hazards. In doing so, we selected Bishnumati and Dhobikhola riverbanks
      because they have an equal number of settlements and an approximately equal number of
      households. The Bishnumati riverbank holds five squatter settlements with a population of 1,564,

 20   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 including 306 households and 485 children 5 to 19 years of age. Similarly, Dhobikhola riverbank
 holds five settlements with a population of 1,247, including 271 households and 431 children 5 to
 19 years of age (see Annex A, Table A1). Finally, we chose two squatter settlements in Bishnumati
 riverbank, called Buddha Jyoti and Kuleshwor Balkhu Jagaran Tole, and three squatter settlements
 in Dhobikhola riverbank, called Pathibhara, Santibinayak, and Devinagar.

 We selected participants using a purposive sampling method for generating qualitative data. Five
 FGDs were conducted with the parents of school-going children (one in each settlement area: two
 in Bishnumati and three in Dhobikhola). Drawing from Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA) methodology,
 we aimed at uncovering the collective views or perspectives of the squatter population regarding
 the challenges faced by their children that impacted their learning. We also conducted a rapid
 demographic survey of 306 households in Bishnumati and 271 households in Dhobikhola, which
 identified the types of schools the children attend. The two surveys allowed us to identify 309
 children, using systematic random sampling of households, from both research sites. From this
 number, we interviewed 20 children (four from each settlement) to understand their experience
 with risk, and then surveyed a total of 220 children from the area to identify the level of risks that
 they face using random sampling (see Annex A, Table A2).

 Tools and pilot testing	
 We used both qualitative and quantitative tools
 for data collection, including interviews, focus
 groups, and survey questionnaires. For this latter,
 were aware that it is important to ‘road test’ the
 prototype before commencing the full survey, as
 this often throws up unanticipated problems or
 interpretational difficulties that should be ironed
 out (Simon 2006). Therefore, after the design of
 the quantitative tools (demographic survey and
 resilience questionnaire) and before reaching to the
 field, small pilot surveys were undertaken before
 each formal survey to pre-test them in another
 squatter area, which has similar characteristics (e.g.,
 Hanumante settlement). After evaluating the appropriateness and effectiveness of the tools, we
 made the necessary corrections in a collaborative way among the research team.

 To generate qualitative data, we developed guidelines for in-depth interviewing, life history, and
 FGDs that included possible discussion topics. We involved ourselves in the field by conducting
 interviews, focus groups and observations ourselves. We believe that the researcher’s involvement
 in the field allows for reflection, which helps maintain the rigor of research. We maintained field
 notes, reflective journals and memos. Numeric and narrative text data was collected in an iterative
 way with sequential in-depth understanding of phenomena in phases.




		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     21
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      Data collection and mixed-methods cycle
      Data collection took place in three phases. After piloting and restructuring the tools, the first phase
      of mixed methods data collection applied the rapid assessment of five squatter settlement sites
      to probe the challenges faced by the squatter communities in general and children in particular
      (see Annex A, Table A3). A quick, short, entirely unambiguous and structured demographic survey
      was used to collect basic, straightforward information, through face-to-face interviewing (Simon
      2006). We trained the enumerators to carry this out. The training focused on methods of data
      collection including ethical issues in data collection.

      In the second phase of the study, we attempted to draw out the life histories of children in urban
      squatter settlements to uncover the implicit and explicit coping strategies they adopt to adapt to
      the adversities. To achieve this, we conducted interviews and FGDs with the same children and
      parents to identify the protective and promotive factors that play a role in coping with adversities.
      The key findings of this qualitative inquiry led us to the design of a resilience questionnaire for the
      measurement of the level of those risks found. Again, we followed a qualitative approach with a
      quantitative method, by applying the resilience questionnaire to obtain numeric information on
      these strategies.

      Finally, in the third stage we conducted phenomenological interviews with the children to explore
      their life skills (see Annex A, Table A3). We were tasked in this third stage to respond to our final
      question: How do these coping strategies, protective and promotive factors, help children achieve
      life skills? We answered this by explicating the lived experiences of children and their learning
      processes in schools. Our aim through this question was to draw a qualitative “map” of relations
      between their coping strategies, protective and promotive factors, and learning outcomes in
      terms of life skills.

      Approaches of data analysis and interpretation
      Regarding data analysis and interpretation of the numeric data, first we manually edited, coded,
      and decoded. Second, we entered it into a software program, Statistical Package for Social Scientists
      (SPSS). Third, we tabulated the data, presented it using descriptive statistics, and interpreted it.
      Regarding the qualitative data, first we transcribed the interviews and FGDs with the help of field
      notes and recordings (Lloyd-Evan 2006). Second, we employed a sequential process of coding,
      categorizing, and thematizing (InSites 2007) to analyze the qualitative data. Third, we grouped
      identified grouped and sub-grouped themes under headings. After analyzing both quantitative
      and qualitative data, we derived meaning. We analyzed the phenomena of adversities/risks faced
      by the children residing in urban, their adaptive strategies (protective and promotive factors), and
      their life- skills, through the lens of resilience theory and policy perspectives.

      III.III Transformative approaches
      In keeping with the transformative research paradigm, we attempted to engage multiple layers
      of stakeholders such as students themselves, teachers, parents, community members, political
      leaders, policy makers, education campaigners, and civil society activists to draw their attention
      to the educational resilience of children in urban squatter settlements. To do this, we went back


 22   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 to the schools and communities and verified our interpretations. This was also our approach
 to inform them of their human rights as stated in international and national policies. The Local
 Advisory Committees (LACs) played the crucial role of disseminating and educating them on this
 in more depth.

 At the end of our research, we presented the findings of the report and the examples of the
 human rights violations we found against the squatter population in a national level conference,
 in the presence of policy level stakeholders including municipality representatives. This advocacy
 approach hoped to draw the attention of policy makers to reform the policy, programs, and plans
 in relation to the squatter population and their education. As a result of the presentation, policy
 makers were sensitized to the reform issues and made commitments to the issues of children in
 urban squatter settlements.

 III.IV Ethical considerations
 We sought informed consent from the participants, which helped build rapport and trust
 between the researchers and the communities. We gave participants comprehensive and
 accurate information about the study and they had the autonomy to withdraw at any time
 (Hammersley and Atkinson 2007). To maintain confidentiality and the privacy of the participants,
 we used aliases or pseudonyms in the reporting, including this report (Creswell 2003). We also
 considered the power relationships present within the culture of the research setting, between
 the researcher and the researched. For this reason, we made an effort to train the enumerators in
 how to be ‘value neutral’, ‘unbiased’ or detached from the research context while administering
 survey questionnaires (Brydon 2006).

 When we encountered sensitive subject matter, we were conscious that we had to know when
 and how to ask probing questions, and accept that some of our questions may go unanswered
 (Harrison 2006). Moreover, we were aware that disclosure of sensitive information could be
 politically dangerous and jeopardize the research, and that injudicious use of confidential
 information could be harmful to the person, their family, their household or community. During
 focus groups and interviews, we sought to avoid being overly emotional or too aloof when asking
 interviewees to open up and share sensitive information (Harrison 2006).




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    23
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      IV. Adversities/Risks Faced by Children in Urban
      Squatter Settlements
      All resilience-based research starts from a context of adversity. Understanding the risks that
      children and squatter communities face is an important first step to guide national policies and
      programs that seek to improve the education and well-being of children in these contexts. A
      resilience study does not only aim to address how individuals and communities cope with adversity,
      but it also seeks to shed light on how to mitigate and prevent risks and vulnerabilities. Therefore,
      we explored the adversities or risks faced by the children at the individual, family, school, and
      community levels. We also tried to identify the psychological, social, economic and health related
      risks that hinder their learning. Before discussing these, we present some key features of squatter
      communities under study for general understanding.

      IV.I Adverse features of squatter settlements
      Five squatter settlements were selected for the study: Buddha Jyoti and Kuleshwor Balkhu
      Jagaran Tole in Bishnumati riverbank, and; Pathibhara, Santibinayak, and Devinagar in Dhobikhola
      riverbank. The squatter community had diverse sources of livelihood such as wage laboring,
      government services, carpentry, grocery businesses, and so on. Most earned below the minimum
      wage required to maintain basic needs such as food, shelter, clothes, and education for their
      children. Many had family abroad in the Middle East working as laborers. One of the settlements’
      special features was that both males and females were equally active in the household as well
      as external affairs. We observed that both males and females shared duties and responsibilities
      equally.

      The children residing in the settlements were approximately an equal number of boys and girls
      (51.5 percent and 48.5 percent respectively; see Annex B, Table B1). The children were from
      diverse caste and ethnic groups, such as Brahmins, Chhetris, Rais, Tamangs, Limbus, Dalits and
      others (see Annex A, Table A2). This diversity shows that the settlements were multi-caste/ethnic,
      multicultural, multi-lingual, and multi-religious in nature. In terms of religion, the majority of the
      squatter community was Hindu (60 percent). However, there were also Buddhists (19 percent),
      and Christians (16 percent; see Annex B, Table B2). We found that the squatter community realized
      and internalized the meaning of ‘unity in diversity’ due to their strong sense of a communal ‘we’
      feeling. However, as squatter settlement residents they felt alienated from other local people.
      They did not want to be identified as squatters as some of them owned ancestral lands in their
      native place of origin, largely in the peripheral rural areas of Kathmandu Valley or further afield.
      They felt that local people treated them like low class citizens. To resist these views and behaviors,
      and construct a new identity, they gave their locality a new name such as Buddha Jyoti Tole.

      The squatter areas we selected as our research sites were on the banks of two polluted rivers.
      Hygiene was a problem because of the lack of proper infrastructure for sanitation, and the areas
      were further polluted by the foul smell of contaminated river water. The residents and municipality
      seemed unaware or insensitive to the issue.



 24   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Given that our focus is on educational resilience, we first list the more proximal risks related to
 educational access and learning. These risks, however, are related and compounded to other
 community-based risks, family risks and risks directly affecting the well-being of children. In
 general, the life of children in urban squatters affects not only their educational potential, but
 also their general socio-emotional and physical well-being.

 IV.II School level
 Squatter communies’ livelihoods and their children’s education
 The squatter community’s poor livelihood was a key hurdle when it came to maintaining a
 learning environment for their children. Most parents engaged in wage labor followed by grocery
 shop keeping, foreign wage labor, driving, government services and private offices (see Annex B,
 Table B3), or went abroad to Malaysia and the United Arab Emirates for employment. Most of
 the youth were unemployed and engaged in habits such as alcohol and marijuana consumption.
 However, the majority of mothers (58.7 percent) were housewives and a few were small grocery
 shopkeepers as well as wage laborers (see Annex B, Table B3).

 Despite the limited family income, most of the children (87.4 percent) were attending schools
 and only some (12.6 percent) were not going school (see Annex A, Table A4). Those who were
 not going to school had either dropped out or never attended. The majority of children who
 were not going school did not attend because of insufficient family income (59 percent) and
 one fourth (25.6 percent) were not interested in going to school, perhaps because they did not
 understand the value of education. Very few did not attend school due to early marriage or failing
 an examination. Despite their family’s limited earnings, approximately 60 percent of children
 were enrolled in fee-paying private/institutional schools (see Annex A, Table A4). Their parents’
 wages barely covered the standard fee and other expenses for private school. Only a quarter of
 children were studying in public/community schools and very few were enrolled in semi-public
 schools, in which communities raise funds to cover teachers’ salaries. Despite their poverty, most
 parents were sending their children to expensive private/institutional schools. This was because
 they believed private/institutional schools were of higher quality than community schools. One
 of the LAC members expressed the following:

        I have five grandchildren. The elder one is in Grade 7. He does not go to school
        regularly because I cannot send him to school without food. We cannot prepare
        food on time because we go to work in the morning so, these children do not go to
        school. If we have food, then we can send the children to school.

 It was evident from our observations and conversations with the residents that they experienced
 numerous hardships in life and were struggling for survival. The majority of children studied
 in private schools. However, despite the fact that families struggled financially, the majority of
 children (55 percent) believed their parents earn enough income to pay for their schooling. The
 study found that the majority of children (55 percent) have access to a school uniform and enough
 tiffin (lunch or light meal) (see Annex B, Table B8). However, one fourth (25 percent) sometimes
 do not have access and very few do not have access at all. Donors cover school expenditure and
 supply uniforms and books for many children, however, 53 percent of the children expressed that


		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    25
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      they lack school supplies at home. Donors do not fund children’s tiffin, and 45 percent of children
      mentioned they did not have enough. Despite the donors’ support, the children lacked these
      important learning inputs.

      School infrastructure
      In our observations and conversations with the children, we found that their schools’ infrastructure
      was not likely to fulfill their learning needs. Regarding this, one of the girls said:

             The toilet is always packed and is supposed to be for both boys and girls. I don’t like
             this. When rain falls, water leaks inside the rooms and the sound of the rain falling
             on the zinc sheet [walls and ceiling] disturbs the class.

      In some cases, schools with poor infrastructure also lacked sports equipment such as badminton
      rackets, skipping ropes, footballs and so on. Narrow rooms were separated by simple zinc sheets,
      which were also used for the roof and walls. We questioned these basic conditions and worried
      for the children under the tin roof on hot days, with the sun’s scorching heat, or rainy or windy
      days. The floor was muddy, uneven and looked as if it had not been swept for some time. A thick
      layer of dust covered the desks and benches. Poor physical infrastructure, lack of educational
      equipment and dilapidated conditions meant the school did not look as if it could support
      students’ learning. We also observed there was no playground. The government’s announcement
      promising a minimum enabling learning environment in particular squatter area schools was
      found to be more rhetoric than reality in certain schools we visited.

      We need to understand the above identified education related risks within a broader context
      of adversity for children in urban squatters. We turn to these next, including risks in the home,
      community and those that directly harm the emotional and physical well-being of children.

      IV.III Family level
      Home learning environment
      We visited the squatter settlements time and again with a view to making sense of the learning
      environment of children in their homes. Congested and disordered settlements with small dirty
      huts and a narrow road were immediately visible. The physical infrastructure of the settlements
      was in poor condition. The height inside the huts was hardly enough for a person with average
      height to stand. This, along with narrow rooms and the poor condition of furnishings vividly
      reflected the harsh realities of a settlement home. Most of the houses had small common rooms
      for sleeping and cooking. In some houses, old tin roofs allowed rainwater to leak in. The small and
      generally single roomed huts were unlikely to serve as favorable environments for the children
      to study. Some huts were in more severe condition than others. These consisted of simple fences
      made with stitched sacks or clothes that could not protect the residents from heat and cold. The
      poor living conditions clearly manifested an unfavorable home environment for learning. This
      scenario is in violation of the children’s right to a standard of living adequate for their physical,
      mental, spiritual, moral and social development as envisaged by the Convention on the Rights of
      the Child (Article 27.1).


 26   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Family cohesion
 During our fieldwork we observed that a few squatter families were more cohesive and harmonious
 than others. Some homes had no serious family conflicts. However, the majority of families were
 less cohesive and harmonious. In this regard, a girl in Grade 9 expressed:

        Sometimes, my parents quarrel with each other mostly about money matters.
        Sometimes my father drinks a lot. I feel sad but my mother comforts me. I cannot
        study in this situation.

 We observed that hardship due to low income was the major cause of family conflict. Poverty led
 to conflict between parents and made it difficult for children to study at home. There were also
 cases of broken families with similar difficulties. This type of family conflict had a multiplier effect
 on children in that the reading environment was not friendly, so they were unable to concentrate
 on their studies or finish home assignments, and feared punishment from teachers at school.
 The home environment did not reflect the conditions necessary for children’s well-being, such as
 financial security, parents’ emotional well-being, positive inter-parental relations, and consistent
 parental support (Demo and Cox 2000, 889, as cited in Boethel 2004).

 Parental literacy
 Most of the squatter population was illiterate. Parental illiteracy was an obstacle to their children’s
 learning. Parents were also unable to spend time with their children due to long working hours,
 which lasted from early in the morning to late evening. They were unable to fully care or look after
 their children because of physical or mental exhaustion. This level of engagement meant they
 could not offer quality time to help their children with their studies. One of the FGD participants
 said:

        Most of the parents are illiterate. Most of them depend on wage laboring. There is
        nobody who can help the children with their studies at home. Many children have
        dropped out of school. But this has decreased in recent years.

 Research shows that positive family-school relationships or the involvement of families in their
 children’s education enhances children’s academic achievement (Boethel 2004). However, most
 of the squatter families were illiterate and unfamiliar with the academic content, and hence could
 not help their children with their studies. This was one of the key adversities for children. As
 viewed by Henderson and Orozco (2003), the roles of parents for establishing an at-home learning
 environment for their children, encouraging learning, and providing opportunities for learning
 and development were not fulfilled in the squatter settlements (as cited in Boethel 2004).

 Care at home
 When we walked around the squatter settlements, we observed many children playing in the
 dust and mud. They were unclean and looked as if they had not been bathed in some time. We
 observed that the children seemed happy playing in groups, and were used to rough games.
 Children in these conditions were likely susceptible to illness and disease. Moreover, the children
 were free to wander anywhere they liked. We were worried about the high risk of children getting


		                                                               EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      27
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      into road accidents, ass it seemed that the parents were not able to keep close watch on them. This
      was because of their poverty and the need to work long hours, from early in the morning to late
      evening. These vulnerable conditions contributed to the weaker roles of families as nurturers and
      supporters. They were unable to provide love and nurturance, security, responsive interaction,
      and encouragement to their children (Boethel, 2004).

      Such lack of proper care in vulnerable conditions is also a violation of the children’s right to be
      cared for by his or her parents (Article 7) and the responsibility of parents for the upbringing and
      development of the child (Article 18), as stipulated by the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
      As discussed earlier, it is important to note that the deplorable conditions of living in squatter
      contexts, as well as the lack of opportunities, contribute to the inability of some parents to make
      arrangements to raise their children with education, health care, sports and recreational facilities
      as envisaged by the 1992 Children’s Act (Article 4.1).

      Child marriage
      Child marriage was a practice in most of the settlements, but not all. Some parents were aware of
      the negative consequences of early child marriage. Through the interviews, we understood that
      such parents were in favor of arranging their children’s marriage when they reached maturity. The
      practice of voluntary inter-caste love marriage was common among the children however. Many
      of them married before the age of eighteen. Related to this, one of the male FGD participants
      said:

             Parents are illiterate. They are wage laborers. They do not take care of their
             children, so they leave school and get married earlier. There is a small girl maybe
             14 or 15 years old. She is pregnant.

      	        Parental illiteracy and low earnings impeded parents from caring for their children, which
      led children to drop out of school. Girls’ dropout led to the early marriage. Therefore, parental
      illiteracy and low earnings were factors that contributed to child marriage. It seemed to us that
      the early marriages were not informed choices, and the children were not aware of the negative
      consequences of early marriages. The practice of early marriage is in violation of the right of girls
      to marry with their free and full consent as envisaged by Article 16 (1 a and b) of the Convention
      on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1991). Participants in our study
      sample claimed that the state was invisible when it came to reducing such illegal practices.

      Families make up communities, which also are affected by the risks at the family level. We discuss
      next the findings on community level risks uncovered during our research.

      IV.IV Community level
      Hygiene and health
      Early on in the research, in preparation for the RRA, we walked around the squatter settlements
      with the help of our LAC members. We observed the settlements closely. Many were lacking in
      hygiene and cleanliness. The foul smell of polluted water, which was the result of discharge from


 28   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 urban settlements, contributed to the pollution in the air. We observed that there were dumping
 sites very close to most of the squatter settlements. One of the participants in Kuleshwor Balkhu
 Jagaran Tole expressed, “The children often fall sick in the summer season as there is a dumping
 site very close to this settlement. The people of this community do not manage their waste
 properly.” Residents have experienced frequent illnesses such as jaundice, heart disease, fever,
 diarrhea, and so on. The illnesses were more severe and frequent in children.

 The unhygienic living environment likely
 contributed to this. Two hundred out of
 240 children we surveyed (83.3 percent)
 reported they have fallen ill at home and
 56 children (23.3 percent) reported they
 have been injured at home (see Annex B,
 Table B6). Within this group, 38 percent of
 children had experienced very few injuries
 at home, 19 percent had experienced at
 least one injury, and one third had never
 been injured. Very few (5.4 percent) had
 been injured often at home (see Annex
 B, Table B8). This was probably because
 about one third (28 percent) of children
 received little medical attention and a few
 received none (see Annex B, Table B9).

 These living conditions created adversities
 for children and their learning. Using the earlier noted national and international policies as a
 backdrop to assess supports towards the rights of children, there seemed to be many gaps in the
 management of the vulnerable conditions found in our field visits. From a policy perspective, the
 children’s right to health was not being met in this context. There were also gaps in providing
 services to uphold the children’s right to protection from injury and neglect or negligent treatment
 as ensured by the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Article 19). Children were also deprived
 of their fundamental right to enjoy the highest attainable standard of health facilities for the
 treatment of illness as envisaged by the same Convention (Article 24). Their deprivation of basic
 health, nurturing, and security was also in violation of Nepal’s 2007 Interim Constitution.

 Threat of relocation
 Another community-level risk was the constant risk of relocation. We conversed with and
 interviewed many people residing in the settlement to form an understanding of the diverse
 factors that impeded their children’s learning. One of the key adversities they faced was the
 threat of being uprooted from their settlements. One of the old men was crying on the bank of
 the Dhobikhola river. We asked him, “Why are you crying?” He said, “I lost everything, I lost my
 hut, I lost a sack of rice. Where shall I live?” The Kathmandu Metropolitan City had uprooted his
 hut for road expansion. One of the FGD participants said, “There were many houses in the past.
 Nowadays, there are only a few houses. Many of them have been already displaced by the road
 expansion.” We also observed an expanding muddy road on one side of a squatter settlement,

		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     29
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      and drainage construction works on the opposite side. It looked as though the settlement would
      be uprooted soon by the road and drainage construction. It was a threatening environment where
      both housing and lives were uncertain—a hindering factor for children’s learning.

      Safety and security
      The majority of children (40 percent) were frightened by gamblers in the community (card players
      who bet money) as well as alcohol intoxicated members of the community (56 percent; see Annex
      B, Table B6). Twenty-six percent reported being a little frightened and 41 percent reported they
      were not frightened. Half the children reported they could walk in the community without fear
                                                               and did not feel unsafe. A few children
                                                               felt a little unsafe or scared to walk in
                                                               the community alone (see Annex B, Table
                                                               B10). About half reported that they knew
                                                               of a few thefts and robberies in their
                                                               localities, 15 percent reported that theft
                                                               and robbery took places “somewhat”,
                                                               and 18 percent reported that it took place
                                                               “quite a bit” or “a lot” (see Annex B, Table
                                                               B10). Half the children were unlikely to
                                                               feel scared by others in the community,
                                                               23 percent felt this a little and very few
                                                               felt this a lot.


      Sexual abuse
      From the interviews with squatter children and other members of the community, we understood
      that there had been claims of sexual abuse and violence in some of the squatter communities.
      These included comments of harassment, threats, and even cases of reported rape in the past.
      However, about half of the children (49 percent) reported that teasing by boys/girls was unlikely,
      but few of them reported being teased with sexual overtones (see Annex B, Table B9). The
      majority of children (73.6 percent) had not experienced touching or attempts of touching with
      sexual overtones and only a few experienced it a little or to some extent (see Annex B, Table B9).
      In this regard, one of the FGD participants said:

             We sometimes see the boys teasing the girls by throwing stones at them. A year
             ago, an old man raped a small girl in this community. I don’t remember the date
             but another rape case also happened in this community. The perpetrator is in jail
             these days.

      One of the girls said:

             Sometimes when I walk in the settlement boys who I don’t know tease me, but
             there are such practices in school.



 30   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                        		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 The majority of girls claimed not to have faced sexual abuse at the time of the study; however,
 given the sensitivity of these issues it was difficult to verify beyond the general comments of past
 events. Risks of rape are more sensitive and cruel and are clearly unlawful forms of violence that
 can be faced by children in the settlements. The cases of rape could be unreported as the rape
 survivor may find it very difficult to seek justice (WOREC, 2011). These forms of gender-based
 violence violate children’s right to protection from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual
 abuse, exploitation and coercion to engage in unlawful sexual activity (CRC 1999, Article 34).

 Domestic child labour
 Some participants also claimed that there were some children living in their relatives’ homes
 as child domestic workers. Further, we understood that the problems these children faced ran
 deeper as they were disproportionately affected compared to children who lived in their parent’s
 homes. Maltreatment, abuse, exploitation, and violence has been reported because of their
 status as live-in child domestic workers (ITUC 2010), who are extremely vulnerable to forms of
 forced labor and abuse. They were made responsible for a variety of tasks or household chores.
 However, they were also allowed to enroll in school. One of the female participants in our study,
 Shanti,1 was a child domestic worker. She said:

        This is not my house. I am from Kavre. I have been working in this house for four
        years. I have to do different tasks like washing clothes, cleaning utensils, sweeping
        etc. and only sometimes do I get a chance to talk, play and have fun with my
        friends. I do my homework, teach and go to school with my friends and sometimes
        play with them. I do not get money for the work I do.

 The experience of child domestic workers in our study pointed to the violations of the child labor
 rights as envisaged by the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Labor
 Organization (Conventions No. 29, 138 and 182). In one way or another, they were involved in
 domestic work for excessive hours without pay or breaks for recreational activities. It was a kind
 of bonded child labor. The government of Nepal has also identified and categorized children’s
 involvement in domestic work as the worst form of child labor (CWISH, n.d.), but immediate
 actions to eliminate it are weak. The voiceless children in our study were found deprived of their
 rights to protection from economic exploitation and from performing housework, which could
 interfere with their education, as envisaged by the Convention on the Rights of Child (Article 32).
 Further, their right to protection from all forms of physical or psychological violence, neglect or
 negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation (Article 19) was also being violated.

 As noted at the outset of this study, resilience starts in adversity. This chapter has noted that
 a resilience study must address the risks, exclusions, inequalities and abuses in contexts of
 adversity. A resilience approach is not only about individual coping with difficulties, but it is also
 about contributing to transforming and mitigating risks. These risks exist at all social levels, and
 include fragile social services, community deprivation, family threats and threats directed to the
 emotional and physical well-being of children. In order to change this extremely difficult situation,
 the risks, such as those enumerated in this chapter, must be mitigated and prevented. To do so,
 it is also important to identify the assets and strengths that communities living in urban squatter
 1	     All names have been changed in this report to protect the privacy of participants.


		                                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   31
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                  		


      settlements possess. Policy can be aligned to protective and promotive assets to make them
      more relevant and effective. These assets are the focus of the next chapter.




 32   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 V. Adaptive Strategies and Protective/Promotive
 Factors
 As the earlier chapter discussed, the children living in urban squatter settlements faced a number
 of adversities/risks at the school, family, and community levels. This section sheds light also on
 the coping strategies and the protective or promotive factors that facilitate the resistance to the
 adversities/risks faced by children and families living in urban squatter communities. Much like
 the adversities/risks, these assets are located in the social, psychological, economic, health and
 education areas. We begin this chapter with a discussion of the education sphere, as schools
 were found to be a key protective and promotive factor against the adversities children faced.

 V.I Schools as safe zones
 We found during our fieldwork and in frequent conversations with participants that children felt
 safer in school rather than at home. The majority of children (68 percent) reported they did not
 feel unsafe in school and only few felt unsafe in school to some extent (see Annex B, Table B10).
 Their home environment was less enjoyable for them than school. Supportive teachers and peers
 at school were also key factors that helped them cope with adversities.

 Supportive teachers and peers
 Teachers and peers regularly interact at school. The majority of children (53 percent) reported
 their teachers were supportive and few reported they had unsupportive teachers (see Annex B,
 Table B9). The majority of children (64.3 percent) responded that they were unlikely to be bullied
 and few were bullied a lot. Corporal punishment by teachers was a rare event, according to the
 questionnaire results. Forty-eight percent of children reported they were not beaten by their
 teacher at all, a third reported they were beaten “a little”, and less than two percent reported
 they were beaten a lot by their teacher. Fifty-three percent of children responded their friends
 did not use vulgar language, while one fifth responded they did. Overall, we found that teachers
 and peers were caring, loving, and responsive to children, and teachers created a helpful and
 cooperative learning environment at school. Most children reported overall positive experiences
 at school, without experiences of exclusion, discrimination, or being made of fun by friends or
 teachers at schools. In this regard, one of the students expressed:
        The teachers explain the questions in the exams. When I don’t have a pencil they
        give me one. When I suffer from a headache or get hurt they help me. They put a
        bandage on me and sometimes give me medicine, and they send me home.
 Another 14-year-old girl said:
        My friends support me a lot. They bring me water, tiffin, etc. when I am busy in a
        dance rehearsal. They give me pencils, paper, etc. when I don’t have any.
 Another girl expressed a similar experience, saying:
        My teachers say that I can tell them any problems over the phone, or during breaks.
        They give me medicine when I am sick and also take me home.


		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    33
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      Golee, a 14 year old girl said,

             My teachers give me medicine when I am sick. They even phone home to call my
             parents. They give me necessary school supplies when I forget to bring them. In
             fact they are really caring and loving.

      Children could count on the support of teachers and friends when they fell ill with fever, headaches
      and injuries at school. Teachers helped them any time and with whatever the children needed,
      including school supplies. Students claimed that the friendly relations between their peers
      led to strong emotional attachments. In addition, students claimed they developed amicable
      relationships and close affinity with their teachers, and were impressed by their teacher’s
      treatment of them. Overall, students were satisfied with the facilities, services and care they
      received from the school when they needed help.

      Cohesion and harmony among peers
      Students were interested in school and wanted to go regularly, which positively impacted their
      learning. School was enjoyable because they were able to be with friends and play different games
      like Chungi (a Nepali game in which bound rubber bands are bounced in the air). They were
      very interested in the opportunity to talk, play and enjoy with their peers. Almost all students
      reported they had fun with their friends during leisure time. They had a culture of encouraging
      one another. One of the girls in Grade 2 said:

             I play hide and seek with my friends during the breaks and sometimes I draw
             pictures. I do not feel isolated because I always stay with my friends and work with
             them.

      Another boy expressed a similar experience of joy and fun at school:

             We play with pots, skipping ropes, volleyballs, and talk with friends during the
             breaks. Sometimes friends quarrel and fight.

      Almost all the participants in the study reported that having fun with friends was one of the
      factors that attracted them towards school. They said they felt lonely and bored at home, and this
      monotony and boredom could be easily overcome by being among friends at school.

      The respondents also said that they did not experience bullying. The majority of children (61
      percent) reported that their friends were unlikely to laugh at them in class when they asked
      questions. Twenty-three percent reported their friends laughed a little. Sixty-three percent of
      children responded friends teasing them was “very unlikely”, twenty-three percent responded
      they were teased “a little”, and very few responded their friends often teased them (see Annex B,
      Table B9). The majority of children (55 percent) reported they did not feel a lack of self worth and
      about one third did so. Thus, the children had amicable relationships and cooperated with each
      other in a variety of ways. Because of this emotional tie the students were close to each another,
      and enjoyed spending time with each other, which were pulling forces for going to school and
      enabled the children to cope amidst the adversities.



 34   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                           		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Respectful relationships
 Children reported that they did not experience discrimination at school, as their teachers were
 supportive and did not treat them unfairly. They claimed that they were equally encouraged to
 take part in different kinds of curricular and co-curricular activities. A girl in Grade 6 said:

         All the teachers are good. They don’t discriminate against us. They treat us equally.
         They teach us equally. I have not experienced neglect by my teachers. My friends
         haven’t either.

 The children had a high level of respect for their teachers because of their teachers’ care and
 concern towards them. The majority of the children (69 percent) did not feel excluded by their
 friends, and just over 5 percent felt discriminated by their friends “quite a bit” or “a lot” (see Annex
 B, Table B9). Sixty-seven percent of children were almost never made fun of by their friends, a
 fifth were made fun of by their friends “a little”, and very few were made fun of by their friends
 “a lot”. Only a few children were made fun of and excluded by their teachers, but the majority
 was not.

 Motivation and encouragement
 Almost all the respondents reported a similar experience and attitude about their teachers’
 concern for them. They were confident that their teachers were like their second parents and
 their caretakers at school. They felt physically and emotionally secure at school. In addition, we
 found that the teachers encouraged and motivated students to work hard in school for a better
 future. All the respondents said that they were motivated and encouraged to stay in school. This,
 along with teachers’ care and concern for them, was a motivating force for them to stay in school
 and pursue their education. One of the girls expressed:

         The teachers most of time encourage us, but sometimes they scold us. I feel like
         their scolding is for our benefit. We don’t take this negatively. If we do the work as
         they say, they love us and care for us even more.

 Students felt their teachers’ lectures
 about the importance of education and
 their support in various ways played a
 vital role in their success and staying
 in school. However, sometimes the
 teachers upbraided students to discipline
 them and keep them on track in their
 lessons. Our findings show that many
 children were afraid of their teacher if
 they did not complete their homework.
 Participants claimed that the scolding
 was not a form of violence; rather, it
 was used occasionally as a corrective
 measure to discourage unacceptable
 behavior. Thirty-eight percent of children

		                                                               EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      35
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      were in favor of doing their homework rather than face upbraiding by their teacher. To cope with
      this, the majority of children (52 percent) did their homework regularly and some of them (21
      percent) tried not to make mistakes (see Annex B, Table B7).

      Praise and appreciation
      Participants claimed there was a culture of praise and appreciation among students and their
      peers, which helped children face adversities. Teachers praised and appreciated the children’s hard
      work or good behavior. This reinforced and fostered their learning. We found that the majority
      of students were confident, had high spirits and high morale. The culture of praise, appreciation
      and moral support helped students overcome adversities. One of the students in Grade 8 said:
             My friends compliment me when I answer questions, when I win sports competitions,
             etc. Last time when I won the carom board competition my friends complimented
             me and I felt really good.

      Another student in Grade 7said:
             Yes, my friends and my teachers compliment me when I show different skills and
             score goals while playing. Last time when they saw my magnificent Maruni dance
             everyone admired it a lot and I was really happy.

      Students claimed they rarely experienced neglect, hate, discouragement or demoralization
      from their teachers and the peers. Rather, they were appreciated and praised for good work
      and achievements, which was a motivating factor for them. This was why we found their morale
      was high, in spite of the adversities they faced. The support, mutual cooperation, praise and
      appreciation from teachers and peers were instrumental to coping with hardships and emerging
      problems at school, and to solving different problems associated with learning.

      School infrastructure and access to school resources
      The physical facilities of schools located outside the squatter settlements were in good condition
      and supported children’s learning. This was not the case with the schools located within the
      settlements, as described in the previous chapter. The majority of children attending school
      outside the settlement reported they had enough desks and benches in the classroom to sit on
      (62 percent), and only few did not (see Annex B, Table B11). Half the children reported a lack of
      teaching and learning materials was “very unlikely” and many other children reported this lack
      was “a little” or “somewhat” likely (see Annex B, Table B11). We observed that the schools outside
      the settlements were modern buildings with large, tidy compounds and nice basketball courts.
      Inside, the rooms were spacious and there was no question they met the minimum enabling
      conditions for learning. They had equipment such as computers and science laboratories; libraries
      with enough reference learning material and well-ordered seating arrangements for readers, and;
      adequate equipment for children to develop skills in games and sports. Further, the gated school
      premises with security guards protected the children from exposure to anti-social activities.

      When we asked the students about their access to school resources and what they would change,
      they expressed confusion. Without any hesitation, they stated that they had easy access to school


 36   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 resources. Some of them remarked that additional materials would make it easier for them. One
 of the girls said:
        I can use the things available here with a teacher’s permission. I like to play
        basketball, badminton etc. and I can easily get the ball from the office.
 Responding to the same query, another girl said:
        We have easy access to school resources. We can use anything with permission. I
        like typing, playing games and drawing on the computer.
 Responding to the same query, Asmita, a 15 year old girl, said:
        Yes, I have access but I need to ask permission first. I like playing Q Basic and
        playing games in the computer lab.
 The children had access to the available school resources without discrimination. The majority of
 children (63 percent) reported they had access to opportunities such as extra-curricular activities
 at school and a fifth (20 percent) reported they participated in them. Similarly, fifty-eight percent
 of children reported they had access to health counseling mechanisms and medicine for minor
 ailments at school, and twenty-two percent reported they lacked such counseling mechanisms “a
 little” (see Annex B, Table B11).
 As we have seen above, schools that played a protective role provided not only an appropriate
 physical environment but also encouraged supportive relations between students and their peers,
 and focused on the socio-emotional well-being of children including motivation, encouragement,
 praise and appreciation. Next we turn to the protective role of families.

 V.II Role of families
 As discussed in the previous chapter, poor living conditions within the settlement negatively
 impacted the ability of many families to support their children’s education. However, we found
 that in other cases the families were aware of the importance of education. These families were
 supportive and cared about their children’s education to the extent that was possible for them,
 and showed this care and support in several ways, to be discussed next.

 Parental corrective measures for socially acceptable behavior
 Supportive parents used discipline to instill good behavior and a sense of responsibility in their
 children. As per the group discussions among participants, these families did not use physical
 punishment, but simple verbal scolding and lecturing were the corrective measures used to teach
 discipline and good behavior. In this regard, one of the girls said:

        I get scolded by my parents when I don’t read at home, quarrel with my brothers
        and sisters, quarrel with my friends, make noise, and when I don’t do household
        chores at home.

 Fifty-three percent of children were disciplined in this way by their parents at home (see Annex
 B, Table B6). About half reported they were upbraided by their parents a little, a third reported

		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     37
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                      		


      this was very unlikely, and 18 percent reported it occurred to some extent (see Annex B, Table
      B8). Among the strategies used to cope with this, almost 40 percent of the children responded
      that they helped their parents with household chores. The others adopted a variety of strategies
      such as going to a friend’s house, focusing on their studies, watching less television, and talking
      with their parents (see Annex B, Table B7). To cope with their fear of punishment from their
      parents, about a third stated they made the sincere commitment to not repeat mistakes, a fourth
      helped their parents at home, a fifth redoubled their study efforts, and a small few were in favor
      of reducing their free play time (about 11 percent) and staying quiet (12.5 percent; see Annex B,
      Table B7). In light of this, we concluded that parental scolding was an effective corrective measure
      because the children developed positive behavior as a result. Parents’ attentiveness towards their
      children’s overall development was a key protective factor in mitigating the adversities children
      faced.

      Families supportive of education
      We found cases of committed parents dedicated to educating their children despite economic
      hardships. The parents understood the value of education and felt responsible for providing
      them with education. They provided a conducive learning environment for children at home,
      and provided them with school supplies. The children benefitted from their parents’ love and
      care. We sensed that because some of the parents were more aware of the value of education
      they encouraged and motivated their children to study at home. In this regard, we present the
      case of a school-going girl whose supportive family was a positive influence on her educational
      achievement.
                                                               Box 1
                                                            Golee’s Story2

           Golee is the youngest member of a family in an urban squatter settlement comprised of her parents,
           an elder sister, and an elder brother. Her father owns a sofa shop that helps meet the family’s financial
           needs and her mother is a housewife. Her elder brother lives in the United States and her unmarried
           elder sister studies in a university and works in a travel agency. Her parents meet all her needs, and
           her sister helps her study at home. Her mother walks her to school daily and prepares tiffin for her at
           home. Golee is computer literate and regularly keeps in touch with her elder brother and other friends.
           Aside from some remedial counseling she has not experienced any scolding, corporal punishment,
           discrimination or antagonistic behavior from her family. She attends a reputable English private
           school in the valley, and feels fully motivated to study. Her parents’ awareness of the importance of
           education, their sincere concern for her studies and their committed effort to provide a supportive
           learning environment are all the rays of hope guiding Golee to acquire better education.


      We found that family engagement in children’s learning likely strengthened family-school
      relationships. Research also shows this is a significant factor in children’s educational achievement
      (Grant 2009).

      Our study also found that strong parent-child relationships had a positive impact on children’s
      education, and children appreciated the support. When children felt depressed or anxious, the
      2	         Names in almost all case studies have been changed for privacy issues.


 38   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                               		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 majority (43 percent) talked it over with their parents, a fifth (22 percent) preferred to be alone,
 and few talked with friends (17 percent) or did their work (11 percent) (see Annex B, Table B7).
 The majority of children (62 percent) reported that it was unlikely that their parents would not
 support their studying, and about a fifth (19 percent) expressed that it was slightly more likely
 (see Annex B, Table B8). Regarding school supplies, when they lack supplies at home most of
 the children (83 percent) reported they ask their parents to buy them and a few (17 percent)
 responded they went over to their friends’ houses (see Annex B, Table B7).

 The behavior of other family members could be an indicator of their support for the children.
 We found that the majority of children (76 percent) were not made fun of by their brothers and
 sisters, and only very few experienced this (see Annex B, Table B8). An overwhelming majority of
 children (69 percent) reported their family did not discriminate against them for their gender and
 few did so to some extent (see Annex B, Table B8). Sixty-three percent reported that they were
 very unlikely to hesitate speaking with their parents, and almost twenty percent reported they
 hesitated a little. A small number (6 percent) hesitated a lot (see Annex B, Table B8). The majority
 of children (45 percent) reported they were unlikely to fear punishment by their parents. A fifth
 reported they feared it to some extent (see Annex B, Table B8). These findings show cohesion
 between children and parents, which also protect children from adversities.

 Low income, family effort and dedication to children’s education
 The squatter community was aware of the value of education. Despite financial hardships, many
 families made an effort and prioritized their children’s education. The story below is an example
 of a boy raised by parents who try their best to make ends meet and support his education in
 spite of difficult economic conditions.
                                                   Box 2
                                                Sudan’s Story

     Sudan is the youngest member of a poverty-stricken family. He is introverted, shy and reserved.
     However, through hard work, intelligence and dedication he became first in his class. In spite of his
     family’s economic hardship, his mother regularly sends him to school in a clean and tidy uniform. He
     is not given money for tiffin but as his home is quite near the school he eats there every day during
     the tiffin break. He does not have a separate room at home to study but he manages to study in one
     of the two rooms of his hut. Though his parents struggle a lot to keep food on the table so far he has
     not faced any insurmountable obstacles in his educational journey. This is because his parents do not
     want him and future generations to be trapped in the same circle of illiteracy, poverty and low quality
     of life. When asked why they send him to school despite all the hardships they undertake, his father
     said, “Sir, we don’t want him to be like us. If he can read he will surely find a better job and have a
     happier life. We are prepared to eat just one meal a day but we will educate him”.


 His parents’ sensitivity, awareness of the value education, hard work and determination all
 supported Sudan in his learning. However, his family’s circumstances are not fixed. New risks
 could emerge over Sudan’s life span because of his family’s fragile economic conditions and the
 volatility of squatter life. The influence of his parents, an important asset for his education, may
 subside or have less influence because of new risks. Consistent with resilience theory, families

		                                                                   EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     39
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      should not be left to cope on their own. They require relevant institutional supports to foster and
      sustain their children’s education resilience, and protect them from risks. 	

      	        The intrinsic motivation to support the education of their children in many low-income
      families is an asset that needs to be supported by education policies and programs. The goal is not
      to let families fend for themselves but to recognize these assets to better align education services
      to these family efforts and desires to provide a better education to their children. Communities
      can also serve a role on this approach, to which we turn next.

      V.III Community’s role
      Like many families, the community within the settlements was also aware of the value of education
      and members were devoted to enhancing children’s learning opportunities. They were united in
      their efforts to ensure the right to education, and motivated the out-of-school children to go to
      school. They made an effort to increase access to quality education in their own locality in more
      sustainable way. We discuss some of these community level contributions next.

      Institutional support for sustainable schooling
      Both civil society organizations and, in some cases, government support, contributed in one way
      or another to the sustainability of children’s schooling. Participants in focus group discussions
      claimed that civil society organizations (International/Non Governmental Organizations, or I/
      NGOs) were actively working for children’s education and health rights by funding education-
      related expenses and health facilities. In this regard, one of the female participants of the group
      discussion said:

             A German project supported the school for about five years. At that time they used
             to provide the students with milk and tiffin every day. There were various facilities
             that the students and even community members used to benefit from… [including]
             treatment facilities at school, and some of the students even had surgery funded
             by the INGO.

      Catching the thread of the discussion another male participant added:

             Before the school was taken over by the government [from the INGO] the needy
             children and even the community used to receive support from the INGO. The INGO
             used to pay teachers’ salaries and bear the school’s entire operational expenditure.
             The community was affected as well, however, when the school was taken over by
             the government. The INGO stopped supporting [the school] and now there is no
             extra incentive for the children to carry on their education.

      Government policies and programs aim to increase access to quality basic education for all
      children of school-going age children through formal schooling, especially in marginalized and
      deprived communities. The government prioritized taking over the management of such schools.
      Because of this, the children had access to formal schooling in a sustainable way. One of the
      participants highlighted the community’s concern and commitment towards education. Pointing
      to a child, the participant said:


 40   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                       		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


        He is an orphan from a poor family in the settlement. He helps people in the
        community as a handy boy and people give him some pocket money, food and
        clothes. He is encouraged to continue his education and so he has not dropped out.

 Another female participant emphasized the school’s efforts to create a conducive and congenial
 environment for children’s learning and their overall development. She said:

        Every year we launch an enrollment campaign in the settlement and encourage all
        the parents to send their children to school. We also waive the admission fee for
        children from poor families.

 One of the child participants said:

        Last year I wanted to quit school and spend the whole day working. But uncle paid
        for my school uniform, the school waived the admission fee and all the teachers at
        school inspired me to continue studying.

 The children were encouraged by family members, teachers and the community to continue
 their education. We found that the squatter community had communal sense of solidarity and
 hence encouraged families who were less aware of the value of education to send their children
 to school. This self-guided, collective social effort of the community was a promotive factor for
 enhancing children’s access to education.

 Community’s collective commitment to children’s education
 Despite children’s claims that they did not feel treated differently by their peers and teachers
 at school for being residents of the settlement, tensions within the community were evident.
 So was their determination to collectively overcome their circumstances. During a focus group
 discussion, the chairperson of a settlement’s Community Development Committee raised the
 idea of exile. He alluded to the squatter population as exiles within their own nation as they are
 treated like refugees compared to others. He expressed his dissatisfaction over the “blind eyes
 and deaf ears” of the government which he claimed consistently ignored the issue of the squatter
 community’s identity, rights and dignity. He said:

        We want to break free from the cage and claim our rights as the rightful citizens of
        Nepal. We are neither refugees nor have we committed any crimes. The state has
        dominated us and is treating us in an unjust way. The purpose of educating our
        children is to enable them to set themselves free from this confinement and we are
        ready to bear every hardship for educating our children.

 A female participant had a similar reason for her commitment to the children’s education. She
 expressed her determination:

        We have been bearing the consequences of being uneducated and we don’t want
        our children to have the same pathetic plight. So we are ready to have one meal a
        day but are not ready to compromise the education of our children.

 Another female participant said:

		                                                           EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    41
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


             All the parents are very serious and responsible about their children’s education
             and their future. We are trying to convince the parents to be serious regarding
             the future of their children and ask them to learn from other members of the
             community.
      Community members not only cared about their own children but about all the settlement’s
      children. They raised awareness among the whole community to value education. This collective
      determination or commitment was helpful to promoting access to education for children from
      struggling families and created a supportive learning environment.

      Role of community structures
      Our findings show that community structures are key protective and promotive factors in the face
      of adversities or risks that children experience in their families, schools and communities. These
      structures and their roles are discussed below.

      Community Tuition Centers. Some squatter settlements had tuition centers run by college students
      or the church. They were set up as a complement to formal schooling in order to enhance the
      children’s learning achievement. Because most of the parents were illiterate they were unable
      to assist their children with their assignments. Long hours laboring at work also interfered with
      being able to care for them after school. Shiba, a Grade 9 student who participated in our study,
      said, “Tuition classes are also held in the community. Twenty to thirty students gather in the
      tuition center. When I go home [after school], I go to tuition class.”
      The community tuition centers aimed to meet the learning needs of children where parents could
      not. Most of the children completed their homework assignments in the centers with guidance
      from the teachers. The centers were also an opportunity for children to share ideas and discuss
      school assignments. The discursive and interactive learning among friends in centers likely
      promoted their learning in a positive direction. Therefore, we found that tuition centers were a
      promotive factor serving the children in their learning.
      I/NGOs and Religious Organizations. In the past, I/NGOs had been heavily engaged in the
      settlements in the areas of health, hygiene, and education. At the time this study was conducted,
      fewer NGOs were working in the health and education sectors. In some areas people used
      water tanks for drinking which had been set up by NGOs. They also used a groundwater system
      for drinking and cleaning, which had been constructed with the support of another NGO. The
      Kathmandu Metropolitan City Office was not running any programs, nor did the settlements
      receive support from any political parties or civil society organizations. A church had annually
      supported school-related expenditures in one school, such as uniforms, textbooks, other school
      supplies, and fees, including transportation. One of the students from this school, a girl in Grade
      9, expressed: “If we hadn’t had support, we would not be at this level.” Thus, these external
      interventions from I/NGOs and religious organizations contributed to fulfilling the drinking water
      and educational expenditure needs of children.
      Health Facilities. There were no health posts or hospitals in the settlements. Some areas had small
      clinics and pharmacies. These supported the treatment of diseases such as diarrhea, cholera,
      and others. We found that the children had adopted a number of coping strategies to protect


 42   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                         		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 themselves from such health-related
 adversities. Forty-five percent of children
 who responded to the question about
 how they coped with injuries reported
 that they would try hard not get sick or
 injured, 38 percent of children would
 visit medical centers or hospitals, and
 about 17 percent would use first aid (see
 Annex B, Table B7). Out of 208 responses
 to the question about how children cope
 with illness, 46 percent reported they
 would use first aid and 42 percent would
 visit the hospital, and a fifth reported
 they would eat healthy food (see Annex
 B, Table B7). Children visited public
 hospitals for serious cases. The clinics and pharmacies in the settlements played a protective role
 for those who needed immediate healthcare and support.
 Financial Cooperatives. There were a number of financial cooperatives in some of the squatter
 settlements. The residents themselves, who made regular deposits from their income, had
 established them collectively. Members took out loans and some had been using them to develop
 income-generating activities such as small grocery shops. We found that these types of financial
 networks contributed to enhancing peoples’ livelihoods to the extent that they could cover the
 basic school expenditures for their children. They were conscious of maintaining and nurturing
 social capital, as it was an asset for coping with financial hardship.
 Security Centers. We observed the presence of police stations near many of the squatter
 settlements. We suspected they were placed there because of the general perception among the
 Nepalese population that settlements are a breeding place for crime and insecurity. Because of
 its proximity to their homes, the residents could quickly report illegal or unlawful activities to the
 security posts. One of the FGD participants threw light on the issue of security:
        There is a police post nearby and a security committee has been formed in the
        settlement. We have not experienced any internal security disturbances but in
        the past some outsiders used to disturb us by throwing stones and physically
        attacking the young people in the settlement. It has been under control since the
        establishment of the police post and the formation of the security committee. It
        has helped our kids to live a peaceful life and focus on school.

 We discovered that squatter communities themselves had formed security committees to
 maintain security in the area. This, along with the security post managed by the government
 promoted a peaceful living environment. This type of community environment with fewer anti-
 social activities and conflict may positively contribute to children’s learning. However, in many
 cases, there were still anti-social activities such as gambling and alcoholism. To cope with their
 fear of people engaged in gambling, the majority of children (52 percent) noted they were in
 favor of suggesting to gamblers that they stop drinking, a fourth (24 percent) preferred to walk
 in groups and few (14 percent) were in favor of avoiding them altogether (see Annex B, Table

		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     43
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                         		


      B7). To cope with their fears of alcohol intoxicated community members, 41 percent of children
      noted they did not go near them, a fifth (22.4 percent) do not pay attention to them, and few
      walked in groups or with their parents (see Annex B, Table B7). Thus no matter what the security
      arrangements were in the locality, the children themselves used a number of strategies to reduce
      their risk and lessen their fears.
      Community Clubs. We found there were well-functioning youth clubs, and games and sports
      clubs, in the community. They managed small playgrounds for the children and youth and were
      well equipped in terms of playing materials. The clubs held training programs for activities such
      as football, Tae Kwando, physical fitness and others, and organized games and sports frequently
      in the community. We found certain children participated actively in such activities. Therefore,
      the community clubs supported the development of game and sports skills. Further, the clubs
      contributed to the emotional and mental development of children through these activities, as
      well as their physical development. In this way the clubs were key promotive assets for squatter
      children.
      Community Development Committees. Community development committees exist in almost
      all the squatter settlements. These committees function well in some settlements and organize
      a number of social activities such as sanitation management, road construction and drainage,
      and drinking water management, among others. In other settlements they do not function as
      well because of a lack of resources. However, the squatter community was in favor of working
      together for the overall development of their settlements. They wanted to create unified forces
      through these committees to put pressure on the municipality for their development. These
      committees also engaged in managing the community schools and were involved in school
      enrollment campaigns for the children.
      Several community factors have contributed to the creation of fertile ground for the children’s
      educational development, in spite of adversities. These include: (i) the family’s commitment to
      the children’s education; (ii) the community’s efforts to ensure everyone had the opportunity
      to go to school; (iii) the non-discriminatory and conducive environment to learning in the
      settlement; (iv) the personal consequences of illiteracy felt by parents and their determination to
      keep their children from the same plight; and, above all, (v) parent’s strong willpower to enable
      the coming generation to escape from the narrow confinement of the settlement. Community
      structures also played a vital role in supporting this pursuit and mitigating adversities at different
      levels. The harmonious relationships among the residents and their collective concern towards
      their children’s future have had an immense impact on the educational journey of the children.
      Community structures—supported by national and international policies and programs—can
      provide the mechanisms to enhance community cohesion and to channel services that are
      aligned to community assets and that can better serve the educational needs of children in urban
      squatter settlements.
      In this and the previous chapters, we have presented both the risks and the assets that co-exist in
      urban squatter settlements. The risks negatively influence not only the educational outcomes of
      children, but also their emotional and physical well-being. The assets are existing factors, behaviors
      and opportunities that contribute to the desirable outcomes in children at risk, including their
      education. We discuss some of our findings related to education outcomes and life skills in the
      next chapter.

 44   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                          		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Chapter VI. Life Skills
 In this chapter, we explore children’s perceptions and practices in terms of their life skills in urban
 squatter settlements. These are the consequences of their adaptation to the adversities they face
 in their socio-cultural context. We present the life skills, experiences, behaviors and knowledge
 that are having a positive impact on their education.

 VI.I Education-related skills
 Positive school experiences
 Most of the children in the study enjoyed school. Their attitude towards school was positive and
 they were excited to go to school. They enjoyed playing games and sports, and going to school
 was part of every day life. They felt that being at school was better than being at home. Most
 reported they did not experience exclusion or discrimination, and had not been made fun of by
 friends or teachers at school. Shanti expressed:

        I enjoy being at school because I can learn many things and can play and talk with
        my friends. I get bored at home because there is no one to play with.

 Almost all the students were attracted to school because of the fun they had there. They liked
 their teachers and friends, and school was an enjoyable place. Children also expressed that the
 teachers were friendly and understanding. One of the students in Class 8 excitedly shared her
 experience:

        I feel bored at home. Here in school I can play and have fun with my friends.
        Teachers are also entertaining.

 Other comments from students were:

        I like to go to school because we learn something and play with friends.

        I like to read, play with friends and talk with them. It makes me happy. So I like to
        go to school every day.

 We found that a major contributing factor for the development of positive attitudes and feeling
 towards schools was the affectionate relationships among students, and among students with
 their teachers. This close affinity led to strong emotional attachments. Students were satisfied
 with the facilities, services and care they received from the school during sickness, injuries and
 any emergencies. Similarly, their morale was also high and they were motivated to work and
 pursue their dreams, probably because of the school’s encouraging environment. Through fair
 treatment and non-discriminatory practices with all the students, irrespective of caste, creed,
 language, religion and social class, schools were able to create a just and fair environment. This
 type of environment was conducive to students’ positive attitudes towards education—a critical,
 life-affirming outcome.




		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      45
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      Motivation towards study
      We visited many children at their homes and schools. They were excited by their studies and
      wanted to learn new things. Many of the children were full of enthusiasm, zeal, and excitement
      towards learning. We found that overall they were confident and outspoken, speaking with little
      anxiety or hesitation. Arjun said:

             There is a library at school. I often take out books from the library and read at
             home. Usually I read stories and poems. I ask questions to the teachers if I don’t
             understand in the class. We discuss the lessons among friends. We share what we
             know with each other. My friends teach me what I don’t know and I also teach
             them if they ask me anything they don’t understand.

      The children wanted to learn new things from their teachers and from any other sources. Some of
      the children were also exploratory. They used library resources to discover new ideas or knowledge,
      and had developed reading habits to some extent at home. We found they were discursive and
      interactive, and shared the ideas or knowledge with each other. Moreover, they had a habit of
      helping each other with their studies. It seemed to us that the children had developed habits that
      fostered quality independent learning in their socio-cultural setting. Thus, certain children who
      were more exploratory and independent were on track to developing a culture of study.

      Courage to aspire for professional work
      The children’s perceptions about the benefits of education were not very clear. We found they
      had non-specific life ambitions that they thought would be fulfilled through education. After some
      years of schooling they had developed the perception that education is necessary for a brighter
      future through earnings from professional work. Students when asked about the benefits of
      education commonly expressed this. However, they could not clarify well the meaning of ‘bright
      future’. The majority were from the lower strata of society, and had nursed a hope of acquiring a
      higher status through education and supporting their parents, even though they did not have a
      specific vision or roadmap designed for their future life. Moti, a Grade 9 student who had recently
      enrolled at school, expressed:

             My aim is to be a doctor. My parents encourage me to be a good person and
             to live an important life for other people. Our parents and the community have
             taught us that we are the children of real citizens of the country, and every door of
             opportunity is equally open for us. We only need to prepare ourselves to knock at
             those doors.

      We found the children had a common goal to educate themselves in hopes of better living standards
      and to escape from the confinement of the settlement and become professionals. This was a
      motivating factor for going to school. The children did not believe they were incapable of getting
      professional jobs because they were from economically and socially marginalized communities.
      They challenged this stereotypical thinking, which has led them to be more hardworking and
      devoted to studying.



 46   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 VI.II Family-related skills
 Developing self-reliance through household chores
 Children undertook important social and household roles, and had the sense that they were
 members of a family and community. The attempt of parents and teachers to foster self-reliance
 and prepare them for life was reflected in the views of a boy, Nitesh who said:

        I help my parents with the housework. I cook, help my mother wash clothes, buy
        things from the market and my mother teaches me how to do these things.

 Another boy, Mohan, also had a similar view. He said:

        When I have free time I help my parents with household chores. They teach me
        how to do things. They also teach me how I should behave around others and what
        I need to do in what situation. Before going to any social function my mother tells
        me how to behave.

 He went on, adding:

        Almost every day before going to bed I have to listen to my mother’s lectures on the
        different dos and don’ts of life. Because they give me responsibilities I have learned
        to do many things independently. My parents ask me to manage my things, wash
        my clothes, and to take care of my brother. Now it’s not difficult for me to do these
        things.

 In the same way, Muna, a girl age 13, expressed:

        I help my parents with household chores like washing clothes, cleaning dishes,
        fetching water, shopping, and so on. I do all the domestic chores when my mother
        gets sick. I bring her medicine and feed her. I cook Jauli for her.

 Arjun, a boy age 14, said:

        I wash my clothes by myself. I take baths by myself. I do my homework by myself. I
        help with household chores as well. I go to the club for football training. Sometimes
        I go buy my sports gear like footballs in the market by myself.

 The senior members of the family inculcated values, ethics, and cultural norms in the children.
 In spite of facing multifarious hardships the parents endeavored to keep their children’s spirits
 high and to make them self-reliant through continuously teaching them about the practical
 requirements of life and counseling them for a better future. Household chores, social
 involvements, keen awareness about the challenges of squatter life, hope for a better future, and
 sharing these hardships of life along with their families have mentally strengthened the children
 to pave their path for the future. Being acquainted with different facets of life has helped them
 develop their personal and social qualities.




		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   47
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      Changing gender roles within the family
      We observed that socially constructed gender roles, which place males in a superior position to
      females, are changing among the children. The boys participated equally in the household chores
      and assisted their sisters or mothers. In this regard, Arjun said:

             I help my sister with the household chores. In the morning and evening, I fetch
             drinking water. I wash my clothes by myself. When my sister goes to her college, I
             cook meals at home. Sometimes I go buy rice, vegetables, and other things. I teach
             my sisters. My parents and teachers teach us to do household chores. In school our
             teachers also divide the responsibilities of tidying and arranging the classrooms
             [between boys and girls].

      We observed that the children’s cultural context was one of gender equality. Traditional,
      socio-culturally constructed notions of females and girls as housekeepers and unequal gender
      relationships had changed. According to Welsh (2010, 15), “changing perceptions, beliefs, attitudes
      and behavior can be an important contribution to building equitable gender relations within the
      community”. Parents and teachers educated their children to perform tasks and responsibilities
      irrespective of socially constructed gender specific roles. Thus, the children had developed
      attitudes and behaviors inconsistent with traditional gender roles in terms of household chores.

      VI.III Community-related skills
      Developing positive social behaviour
      During our field visit and interviews with the children, we sensed the children had developed
      positive social behavior. They were aware of the negative effects and illegality of anti-social
      behavior. A boy aged 14 said:

             We do not have to quarrel among friends. I don’t fight with my brothers and sisters.
             Theft and dacoit [banditry] is bad.

      The children had developed an awareness of positive social behaviors. They were against anti-
      social behaviors such as fighting, gambling, theft, dacoits (bandits), and robberies. They were
      aware that these behaviors were devastating to social cohesion and harmony. It seemed to us
      that this awareness could be life-affirming and served them for a better future life.

      Sense of non-discrimination
      In our visits, observations, conversations and interactions with the children in their own context,
      we found the children had strong bonds with their friends, family members, and members of
      their community. We knew that there were children from diverse backgrounds in terms of caste
      or ethnicity, economic and social status. However, we found they had maintained social cohesion
      and harmony among themselves. There was no sense of discrimination. Sumiki, a girl from a low
      caste family, claimed she did not feel discrimination. However, she was self conscious about the
      caste system, and spoke about the long existing and deeply rooted practice:



 48   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


        Higher caste people do not come inside our homes, and we don’t go inside theirs.
        We happily adhere to this belief and it doesn’t have any negative effect on our
        lives because apart from this understanding there is no sense of caste-based
        stratification, and we are equally involved in all social activities.

 Bandana, a girl in Grade 7, said:

        No one at school identifies us as squatter children. Our parents and the community
        members always boost our morale. We get lots of love and care in our families
        and the community. Our parents have fulfilled all our needs. Why should we feel
        humiliated? We think that we are not different from others and our peers also feel
        the same.

 Another girl named Muna said:

        I don’t believe in discrimination based on caste or ethnicity. All people are equal.
        People create lower castes and ethnicities. All human beings are equal as they all
        have the same red blood.

 In spite of residing in a settlement the children had highly competitive spirits and confidence,
 and no feelings of humiliation. They did not think of themselves as different from the children of
 higher class families. They had high spirits and almost all of them aspired to be well respected and
 prosperous in the future. They were aware that the caste/ethnicity-based hierarchies are social
 constructions and hence they were in the position of being able to contest stereotypical thinking
 and behavior at school. They had developed an awareness of non-discriminatory behavior in the
 community that promotes social cohesion and harmony among the members of society from
 diverse backgrounds.




		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     49
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                        		


      VII. Discussion
      The children in our research sites face multifaceted adversities such as disease, poverty, home
      environments unsuitable for studying, conflict at home, parental illiteracy, sexual abuse, child
      marriage practices, child labor, lack of school infrastructure, and lack of safety in the settlement.
      These risks likely affect the children cognitively, emotionally and behaviorally across all stages
      of their development (Clemens 2006, as cited in Reyes 2013). Poverty leads to limited access to
      health care and economic stresses on the family, which can lead to family conflict (Braverman
      2001) and child marriage.

      Schools are safer zones than homes. We found that in schools there were supportive teachers,
      cohesion among teachers and peers, a non-discriminatory environment, motivation for learning,
      child-friendly infrastructure and access to school resources. Caring teacher-student relationships
      were positive for children and played a particularly strong protective role for children facing
      multiple adversities (Baker 2006, as cited in Noltemeyer and Bush, 2013).

      Families and family environments are also key protective factors for children. We found that the
      families who provided study-friendly environments at home, gave their children love and care,
      and provided school supplies, were protective. We sensed that certain families disciplined their
      children in a positive way and engaged in meaningful communication with their children. This
      created a sense of family cohesion (Noltemeyer and Bush 2013). These families were more active
      and attentive in terms of providing quality time, support and interaction. Family cohesion and
      adaptability, effective parental communication skills, stable marital/couple relationships, and
      responsive, nurturing, consistent and firm parenting practices generally served as protective
      factors for children (Bush and Peterson 2012; Peterson and Bush 2012, as cited in Noltemeyer
      and Bush 2013).

      Squatter communities value education and were committed to ensuring children receive education.
      We found that communities served as protective factors for children to the extent that individuals
      and families were able to access the resources they needed to support themselves and/or their
      children and families (Ungar 2011). Thus, communities served a protective and promotive role
      for children by providing them with opportunities to develop human capital through community
      clubs (knowledge and skills of games and sports), and providing social capital (e.g. support
      networks, sense of community), natural capital (e.g. water, land), and physical capital (e.g. safety)
      (Noltemeyer and Bush 2013).

      VII.I Key findings
      The following summarizes the key findings we identified in terms of the adversities and risks,
      adaptive strategies, and life skills of children residing in squatter settlements.

      The adversities/risks faced by children in urban squatter settlements
          •	 The children reside in unhygienic settlements with poorly managed sanitation, and are
             frequently vulnerable to sickness and injury.
          •	 The government’s development activities such as road and drainage construction threaten


 50   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                          		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


          the stability of settlements that could be forced to relocate.
     •	 Most of the squatter population we came into contact with were caught in a vicious cycle
        of poverty. They had low family incomes and were unable to pay for school supplies for
        their children.
     •	 Low living conditions and inadequate home infrastructure were hindering factors for
        children’s learning.
     •	 Inside the settlements, the buildings, desks, benches, toys and instructional materials
        were in poor condition and inadequate, and were less student-friendly as compared to
        schools outside the settlement.
     •	 Many families were less cohesive because of conflicts caused by economic stresses. The
        children concentrated less on their studies in such family contexts.
     •	 Illiterate parents were unable to help their children with their studies in a meaningful way
        at home.
     •	 There were a few general claims of past cases of sexual abuse and some child marriage
        practices in the squatter settlements.
     •	 Not all children were equally cared for by their families. We found some child domestic
        workers who were vulnerable to unequal, unfair and often abusive treatment from their
        employers. The maltreatment, abuse, exploitation, and violence occurred because they
        were live-in child domestic workers.
     •	 The children were afraid of gamblers and alcohol intoxicated members of the community,
        and thefts and robberies in the community. They were in some cases laughed at, teased,
        and felt unsafe.

 Adaptive strategies and protective/promotive factors
     •	    Regarding health related risks such as injuries and illness, the majority of children were
          in favour of taking care not to get sick or injured, and visiting the hospital. Some children
          reported they used first aid services.
     •	 In some cases, school physical facilities, instructional materials, and other physical
        infrastructure were sufficient. These schools had computer and science laboratories,
        games and sports equipment. The children had access to these resources in those schools.
     •	 Friendly peers and teachers supported the children to cope with hardships, including
        problems emerging at school and their lack of school supplies.
     •	 The majority of children were not made fun of or discriminated against by their friends at
        school, parents or brothers/sisters in their families, or people in the community
     •	 The children were praised and appreciated by their teachers and friends for their positive
        behaviour towards school work and school activities. The culture of praise, appreciation
        and moral support helped children to overcome their adversities.
     •	 Tuition centres, I/NGOs and religious organizations, health facilities, cooperatives,
        community clubs, community development committees, users’ groups and security
        centres each played a specific role in enhancing the learning of children directly and
        indirectly.

		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     51
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


          •	 Despite the economic hardships, many squatter residents were committed and dedicated
             to educating their children and motivated them to study at home. They provided them
             with school supplies, love and care. The parents’ sensitivity, awareness of the value
             education, their effort and determination to prioritize the education of their children
             supported children’s learning.
          •	 The structures within the community, such as the church and financial cooperatives,
             helped the children by covering their school expenditure. This self-directed, collective
             social effort of the squatter community was a promotive factor that enhanced children’s
             educational access.

      Life skills
          •	 Most of the children were meaningfully engaged in learning at school. Their attitude
             towards school was positive and almost all children were excited and fascinated by school,
             perhaps because of the boredom they experienced at home.
          •	 The children aspired to professional work, which was a motivating factor for them to study.
          •	 They understood their social and household responsibilities and were developing self-
             reliance and skills in different household chores, social involvements, and awareness about
             squatter life. Traditional gender roles were challenged in the home as males participated
             equally in household chores.
          •	 The children were aware that anti-social behaviors were detrimental to social cohesion
             and harmony.
          •	 The children approached learning new things in an innovative, exploratory, discursive and
             interactive way.
          •	 The children maintained social cohesion and harmony among their friends from diverse
             economic and socio-cultural backgrounds without discriminating against each other.

      VII.II Conclusion
      Children in urban squatter settlements are facing a variety of adversities that impede their
      learning. These adversities are located mostly in their communities and home environments.
      They are also inter-related, as exposure to an unhygienic community environment combined with
      poorly managed sanitation causes disease and infections. Parental illiteracy impedes children
      from meaningful study at home. Poor families with low income and low living conditions are also
      barriers to children studying at home. Low income creates stress among family members and
      erodes the cohesion of the family, which also creates an unfavorable learning environment at
      home. Moreover, fear of sexual violence by strangers in the communities persists.

      Despite these adversities, the children in urban squatter settlements have adaptation strategies.
      In other words, they are achieving resilience because certain protective and promotive factors
      are present in schools, families, and communities. Friendly teachers and peers who praise and
      appreciate them motivate children to study. Attention from family members and their family’s


 52   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                          		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 determination to support their children’s education despite hardships also promote children’s
 learning. Likewise, community structures such as School Management Committees (SMCs),
 tuition centers, and clubs are social assets that create opportunities for promoting children’s
 learning. These assets have served as protective and promotive factors for them to develop
 positive life-skills. Thus, the “squatter families could be able to nurture their children’s resilience
 if the capacities for resilience of these families are strengthened” (Walsh 2012, 175).

 As a consequence of this educational resilience, many children have a positive attitude towards
 school and studying. They also have an optimistic outlook of one day being employed in professional
 work, which serves them as a motivational factor for staying in school. The children also take
 on household responsibilities, which helps them develop self-reliance. The children engage in
 non-discriminatory interaction with people from diverse cultural and economic backgrounds, and
 have communicative, interactive skills and socialization skills, which are positive factors in their
 lives. Through these protective and promotive assets children have developed positive learning
 habits, and become exploratory, self-reliant and independent learners.

 For education, systematically uncovering these risks and assets offers an understanding of how
 policies and programs can include explicit ways to mitigate and prevent risks, and what educational
 strategies can protect and use the resilience assets to achieve education and social outcomes in
 the face of these difficult living situations. We turn to some final policy recommendations next.

 VII.III Recommendations
 On the basis of the above findings and conclusions, we have attempted to make the following
 recommendations to the concerned policy and national programs’ authorities.

     1.	 The government should set up income generating programs in squatter communities to
         enhance livelihoods and permit families to financially contribute to the education of their
         children.
     2.	 There should be special loan provisions for squatter residents with low incomes. The loans
         should have minimum interest rates and no collateral, and could be linked with existing
         microfinance enterprises.
     3.	 The government should focus on raising awareness among children and communities in
         squatter settlements of the right to child participation. This could be developed through
         child clubs.
     4.	 The government should identify and mitigate the deeply rooted problems in squatter
         settlements for children and adolescents (such as child marriage, poverty, and
         disempowerment).
     5.	 Kathmandu Metro City should focus on child-friendly local governance as envisaged by
         the Child Friendly Local Governance Strategy developed by the government of Nepal.
     6.	 Government bodies should emphasize the development of healthy learning environments
         in all schools in squatter settlements.


		                                                              EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)      53
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                    		


          7.	 The government’s Vision 2015 non-formal education program should integrate parental
              literacy and empowerment programs to educate illiterate parents.
          8.	 Public awareness of anti-child marriage policies should be a focus, as early marriage
              practices still exist in squatter communities.




 54   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 References
 Axinn, W.G., and L.D. Pearce. 2006. Mixed Method Data Collection Strategies. New York: Cambridge
 	      University Press.
 ActionAid Nepal. 2008. Violence Against Girls in Educational Institutions. Kathmandu.
 Braverman, M.T. 2001. “Applying resilience theory to the prevention of adolescent substance 		
 	abuse.” FOCUS, The University of California.
 Boethel, M. 2004. Readiness: School, Family, and Community Connections. National Center for 		
 	     Family and Community Connections with Schools, Austin: SEDL.
 Brydon, L. 2006. “Ethical practices in doing development research.” In V. Desai, and R.B. Potter 	
 	(eds.), Doing Development Research, (pp. 25-33). London: Sage Publications.
 Children-Women in Social Service and Human Rights. n.d. Bal Samrakchhyan haate pustika. 	
 		          Kathmandu.
 Clauss-Ehlers, C.S. and C.R.Wibrowski. 2007. “Building educational resilience and social support: 	
 	      The effects of the educational opportunity fund program among first- and second-		
 	      generation college students.” Journal of College Student Development, 48:5: 574-584.
 Creswell, J.W. 2003. Research Design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches 	
 	     (2nd ed.). New Delhi: Sage Publications.
 CWISH (Children-Women In Social Service and Human Rights). n.d. Bal Samrakchhyan haate 	
 		            pustika. Kathmandu.
 Cabrera, N.L., and A.M. Padilla. 2004. “Entering and succeeding in the ‘Culture of College’: The 	
 	      story of two Mexican heritage students.” Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 26(2): 		
 	      152-170.
 Government of Nepal. 1990. Treaty Act. Kathmandu.
 Government of Nepal. 1992. Labor Act (2048). Kathmandu.
 Government of Nepal. 1999. Local Self-Governance Act (2055). Kathmandu.
 Government of Nepal. 2000. Child Labor (Prohibition and Regulation) Act (2056). Kathmandu.
 Government of Nepal. 2007. The Interim Constitution of Nepal. Kathmandu.
 Grant, L. 2009. “Children’s role in home-school relationships and the role of digital technologies: 	
 	       A literature review.” Futurelab Innovation in Education.
 Garmezy, N., and A.S. Masten. 1991. “The protective role of competence indicators in children 	
 	     at risk.” In E.M. Cummings, A.L. Greene, and K.H. Karraker (eds.), Life-span 			
 	     Developmental Psychology: Perspectives on Stress and Coping. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 		
 	Erlbaum.


		                                                             EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     55
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                       		


      Hammersley, M., and Atkinson, P. 2007. Ethnography: Principles in Practice (3rd ed.). New York: 		
      	Routledge.
      Harrison, M.E. 2006. “Collecting sensitive and contentious information.” In V. Desai, and R.B. 		
      	      Potter (eds.), Doing Development Research, (pp. 115-129), London: Sage Publications.
      International Labor Office. 1973. Minimum Age Convention 1973 (No. 138). Geneva.
      International Labor Office. 1999. Worst Forms of Child Labor Convention (No. 182). Geneva.
      International Labor Organization. 2010. “Moving towards descent work of domestic workers: An 	
      	      overview of ILO’s work.” Working Paper 2/2010.
      International Labor Office. 2012. Working Hours in Domestic Work. Policy Brief. Geneva.
      ITUC. 2010. Decent Work, Decent Life for Domestic Workers. http://ituc.com.np/content/15/23.
      InSites. 2007. “Tips for analyzing qualitative data.” http://www.insites.org/CLIP_v1_site/		
      	       downloads/PDFs/TipsAnalzQualData.5D.8-07.pdf
      Laxmi, M. (ed.). 2011. “Anbeshi”: Status and Dimension of Violence Against Women, Reality 	
      	      Revealed. Kathmandu: WOREC.
      Lloyd-Evans, S. 2006. “Focus groups.” In V. Desai, and R.B. Potter (eds.), Doing Development 	
      	      Research, (pp. 151-162). New Delhi: Sage Publications.
      Mertens, D.M. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The 	
      	     Guildford Press.
      Mertens, D.M. 2010. “Philosophy of mixed methods teaching: The transformative paradigm as 	
      	     illustration.” International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, 4: 9–18.
      Ministry of Land Reform and Management. 2011. Nepalese Journal of Geoinformatics. Kathmandu.
      National Centre for Educational Development. 2005. Secondary Teacher Training. Kathmandu.
      Nepal, DoE (Department of Education). 2009. Flash I REPORT 2066 (2009-10). Bhaktapur.
      Nepal, DoE (Department of Education). 2010. Flash I REPORT 2067 (2010-11). Bhaktapur.
      Nepal, DoE (Department of Education). 2010. A Study on Scholarship Management and its 	
      	      Effectiveness in terms of Enrolment and Retention. Bhaktapur.
      Nepal, DoE (Department of Education). 2011a. Flash I REPORT 2068 (2011-12) and 2069 (2012-	
      	      13). Bhaktapur.
      Nepal, DoE (Department of Education). 2011b. School Level Educational Statistics of Nepal: 	
      	      Consolidated Report. Bhaktapur.
      Nepal, DoE (Department of Education). 2012. A Study on Out of School Children and Verification 	
      	      of Data. Kathmandu.



 56   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                        		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014


 Nepal, Ministry Of Education. 2008. Education Act. Kathmandu.
 Nepal, Ministry Of Education. 2009. Education By-Laws. Kathmandu.
 Nepal, Ministry of Education. 2011. National Assessment of Student Achievement. Kathmandu.
 Nepal, Ministry of Local Development. 2011. Child Friendly Local Governance (CFLG): National 	
 	      Strategy and Operational Guideline. Kathmandu.
 Noltemeyer, A.L., and K.R. Bush. 2013. “Adversity and resilience: A synthesis of international 	
 	research.” School Psychology International, (34): 474-487.
 Reyes, J. 2013. What Matters Most for Education Resilience: A Framework Paper. Educational 		
 	       Resilience Approaches (ERA) Program; Systems Approach for Better Education Results 		
 	       (SABER). Washington, DC: World Bank.
 Robertson-Hickling, H., V. Paisley, J. Guzder, and F.W. Hickling. 2009. “Fostering resilience in 		
 	      children at risk through a cultural therapy intervention in Kingston, Jamaica.” Journal of 		
 	      Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 20: 31–35.
 Simon, D. 2006. “Your questions answered? Conducting questionnaire surveys.” In V. Desai, and 		
 	      R.B. Potter (eds.), Doing Development Research, (pp. 163-171), London: Sage Publications.
 Shrestha, B.K. 2013. “Squatter settlements in the Kathmandu valley: Looking through the prism 		
 	      of land rights and tenure security.” Urban Forum, 24(1): 119-35.
 Scheuermann, A.K. 2013. Barriers to equity in education: An exploratory case study of Nepal. 		
 	     Student Paper Series, Masters Thesis. Hertie School of Governance. Berlin. 			
 	     http://www.hertie-school.org/fileadmin/images/Downloads/Hertie_School_Student_
 	     Paper_Series/HSSPS201306_01.pdf
 Ungar, M. 2011. Social Ecology of Resilience: A Handbook of Theory and Practice. New York: 		
 	Springer.
 United Nations. 1948. Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Geneva.
 United Nations. 1966. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Geneva.
 United Nations. 1990. Convention on the Rights of the Child. Geneva.
 United Nations. 1991. Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against 		
 	      Women. Ratified by Nepal on 22nd April, 1991. www.lawcommission.gov.np
 United Nations. 2012. “Urban slum dwellers and squatters.” UN Nepal Information Platform. 		
 	      http://un.org.np/oneun/undaf/slum
 Werner, E.E., and R.S. Smith. 1992. Overcoming the Odds: High Risk Children from Birth to 		
 	     Adulthood. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
 Welsh, P. 2010. “Community development: A gendered activism? The masculinities question.” 		
 	      Community Development Journal, 45(3): 297-306.


		                                                            EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)     57
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                   		


      Annexes
      Annex A. Study population and sample distribution
                                                  Table A1
                          Squatter population and number of households by location

                                                                                                         Population of
                                   Number of                                          Total
            Location                                     Total population                               children in age
                                   settlements                                     households
                                                                                                       group 5-19 years
             Bagmati                      11                     3903                    863                    1473
            Bishnumati                    5                      1564                    306                     485
           Hanumante                      1                      2422                    589                     836
            Dhobikhola                    5                      1247                    271                     431
              Tukucha                     2                       843                    176                     268
          Non-River Side                  16                     2747                    530                     948
                Total                     40                    12726                   2735                    4441

      Source: Status of Squatter Communities along Bagmati River and its Tributaries in Kathmandu Valley, Lumanti, February 2008.
      See Urban Dabali, “Report on Squatter and Slum Settlements in Kathmandu”. http://www.ciud.org.np/urban-dabali/index.
      php?q=content/report-squatter-and-slum-settlements-kathmandu

                                                           Table A2
                                                Distribution and sample size

                Issue of inquiry                               Method                               Sample size
                                                                                         1 FGD in each of the settlements
       Challenges faced by the children
                                                Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA)              of Bishnumati and Dhobikhola =
       in urban squatter settlements
                                                                                         5 FGDs
       Demography and school                                                             Bishnumati - 306 Households
       enrolment and types of schools           Rapid Survey                             Dhobikhola - 271 Households
       attended                                                                          Total Children = 309
                                                                                         4 Children from each squatter
       Risk experienced in learning             Interviews
                                                                                         settlement = 20 Interviews
                                                                                         Bishnumati - 306 Households
       Level of risks                           Survey                                   Dhobikhola - 271 Households
                                                                                         Total Children = 220 Children
                                                                                         2 Children from each settlement
       Coping strategies                        Life history
                                                                                         = 10 Children
                                                                                         1 FGD in each settlement = 5
                                                                                         FGDs
       Protective and promotive factors         FGDs and in-depth interviews
                                                                                         2 Children from each settlement
                                                                                         = 10 In-depth interviews
       Coping strategies for the risks                                                   Bishnumati - 306 Households
                                                Survey
       identified                                                                        Dhobikhola - 271 Households
                                                                                         2 Children from each settlement
       Quality learning experiences             Phenomenological interviews
                                                                                         = 10



 58   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                		                     RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                                 Table A3
                              Data collection plan and mixed-methods cycle

                      Issues/questions                            Methods and nature of data
     Phase I:
                                                        Transect Walk, Observation, Social Mapping, FGDs
     Challenges faced by the children in urban squatter in each squatter settlement
     settlements                                        (Quantitative data: frequencies; Qualitative data:
                                                        memos and notes)

     Demography and school enrolment and types of         Rapid survey: household survey - Census
     schools attended                                     (Quantitative data: frequencies)
                                                          Phenomenology: Interviews with children in each
     Risk experienced in learning
                                                          site (Qualitative data: transcripts, field notes)
                                                          Survey: School children from each site
     Level of risks
                                                          (Quantitative data: rankings)
     Phase II
                                                          Narratives life histories: School children from each
     Coping strategies
                                                          site (Qualitative data: transcripts and field notes)
                                                          FGDs with teachers, students and community
                                                          persons and in-depth interviews with teachers and
     Protective and promotive factors
                                                          students in each site (Quantitative data: transcripts
                                                          and field notes)
                                                          Household Survey
     Coping strategies for identified risks
                                                          (Quantitative data: frequencies)
     Phase III
                                                          Phenomenological interviews with students from
     Meaningful, Life-Affirming, and Inclusive Learning   each site
     Experiences
                                                          (Qualitative data: transcripts and field notes)




		                                                                    EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)       59
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                               		


      Annex B. Demographic survey and resilience questionnaire
      results
                                                      Table B1
                                   Sex of Children in Urban Squatter Settlements

                            Sex of child                              Percentage of total sample population
                                 Male                                                 204 (51.5%)
                                Female                                                192 (48.5%)
                                 Total                                                396 (100%)
      Source: Rapid Demographic Survey 2014.

                                                     Table B2
                                Caste/ethnicity and religion of respondent children

          Caste/ethnicity                Responses (in %)                 Religion            Responses (in %)
                Brahmins                       35 (11.3)                   Hindu                      187 (60.3)
                Chhetris                       67 (21.6)                  Buddhist                      59 (19)
                  Dalits                       30 (9.7)                   Christian                    49 (15.8)
                Tamang                         48 (15.4)                   Others                       12 (3.8)
                 Others                        127 (41)

      Source: Rapid Demographic Survey 2014.

                                                         Table B3
                                                    Parent’s occupation

        Categories of occupation                    Fathers’ occupation                Mothers’ occupation
                 Wage Laboring                             68 (21.9)                            21 (6.8)
                 Grocery Shops                             49 (15.8)                           39 (12.6)
            Foreign Wage Laboring                          47 (15.2)                               6 (1.9)
                      Driving                              43 (13.9)                               1 (0.3)
              Government Service                           41 (13.2)                            10 (3.2)
                Household Work                                 -                               182 (58.7)
                      Others                               17 (5.5)                             20 (6.5)
                     No work                               13 (4.2)                                9 (2.9)

      Source: Rapid Demographic Survey 2014.




 60   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                   		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                           Table B4
               Type of schools attended by children in urban squatter settlements

                      School Type                                 Children
                           Public                                100 (25.3%)
                        Semi-public                               20 (5.1%)
                          Private                                236 (59.6%)
                            NA                                    40 (10.2%)
                            Total                                 396 (100%)
 Source: Rapid Demographic Survey 2014.

                                       Table B5
      School-going and non-school-going children and reasons for not going to school

                            Non-school-                  Reasons for not       Percentage of
     School-going                             Total
                              going                      going to school           total
                                                           Poor economic
                                                                                  23 (58.8)
                                                             conditions
                                                           Not interested         10 (25.6)
                                                         Failed examination        3 (7.8)
      270 (87.4 %)             39 (12.6%)   309 (100%)
                                                           Early marriage          2 (5.2)
                                                          School distance
                                                                                    (2.6)
                                                            from home
                                                               Total             39 (100%)

 Source: Rapid Demographic Survey 2014.




		                                                        EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   61
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                		

                                                   Table B6
                       Adversities/risks faced by children in urban squatter settlements

           Adversities/risks            Adversities/risks location
                                               Home        School      Community     No Risk       Total

        I have been injured                56 (23.3)      76 (31.7)     12 (5.0)     96 (40)     240 (100)

        I have fallen ill                  200 (83.3)      4 (1.7)       4 (1.7)    32 (13.3)    240 (100)

        I feel depressed or
                                           76 (31.7)       8 (3.3)       8 (3.3)    148 (61.7)   240 (100)
        anxious

        I get scared of the
                                               0 (00.0)    4 (1.7)      96 (40.0)   140 (58.3)   240 (100)
        gamblers

        I am afraid of the drunk
                                               4 (1.7)     12 (5.0)    136 (56.7)   88 (36.6)    240 (100)
        people

        My teachers do not
                                               0 (0.0)    64 (27.0)      0 (0.0)    176 (73.0)   240 (100)
        encourage me

        I am afraid of my
                                               0 (0.0)    104 (43.4)     0(0.0)     136 (56.6)   240 (100)
        teachers

        I am afraid of my
                                           72 (30.0)       8 (3.3)       0 (0.0)    160 (66.7)   240 (100)
        parents

        I lack school supplies at
                                           44 (18.4)       0 (0.0)       4 (1.6)    192 (80.0)   240 (100)
        home

        My teachers upbraid
                                               0 (0.0)    87 (36.3)      0 (0.0)    153 (63.7)   240 (100)
        me

        My parents upbraid me              128 (53.3)      0 (0.0)       0 (0.0)    112 (46.6)   240 (100)

        There is a lack of health
                                               0 (0.0)     0 (0.0)      24 (10.0)   216 (90.0)   240 (100)
        counseling

        I think I have no value in
                                               0 (0.0)     0 (0.0)      24 (10.0)   216 (90.0)   240 (100)
        society

      Source: Resilience Questionnaire 2014.




 62   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                            Table B7
                Coping strategies adopted by children in urban squatter settlements

               Adversities/Risks                   Coping Strategies                    Frequency
                                           Be careful in the future to avoid              65 (45.2)
                                           injury

     I have been injured                   Use first aid                                  24 (16.6)
                                           Go to medical clinic/hospital                  55 (38.2)
                                           Total                                          144 (100)
                                           Eat healthy food                               24 (22.5)
                                           Use first aid                                  96 (46.2)
     I have fallen ill
                                           Go to medical clinic/hospital                  88 (42.3)
                                           Total                                          208 (100)
                                           Prefer to be alone                             20 (21.7)
                                           Talk with my parents                           40 (43.4)
                                           Talk with my friends                           16 (17.4)
     I feel depressed or anxious
                                           Do my schoolwork/chores                        10 (10.9)
                                           Remain depressed or anxious                     6 (6.5)
                                           Total                                           92 (100)
                                           Suggest they stop drinking                     52 (52.0)
                                           Walk in groups                                 24 (24.0)
     I get scared of the gamblers in the
                                           Stay far away from them                        14 (14.0)
     community
                                           Walk quietly                                   10 (10.0)
                                           Total                                          100 (100)
                                           Don’t pay attention to them                    34 (22.4)
                                           Don’t go near them                             62 (40.9)
                                           Suggest they stop drinking                     16 (10.5)
     I am afraid of the drunk people
                                           Walk in groups                                 27 (17.8)
                                           Walk with my parents                            13 (8.5)
                                           Total                                          152 (100)
                                           Do homework regularly                          15 (23.4)
                                           Talk with my parents                           12 (18.8)
     My teachers do not encourage me
                                           Try to be more sensitive                       37 (57.8)
                                           Total                                           64 (100)
                                           Do all my homework                             40 (38.5)
                                           Share my fears with friends                    30 (28.8)
     I am afraid of my teachers            Keep quiet                                     20 (19.2)
                                           Try not to make mistakes                       14 (13.5)
                                           Total                                          104 (100)




		                                                                    EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   63
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                                     		


                                                        I do not make mistakes                                25 (31.2)
                                                        I do not go out to play                                9 (11.3)
                                                        I study properly                                      16 (20.0)
        I am afraid of my parents                       I stay quiet                                          10 (12.5)
                                                        I help my parents with household                      20 (25.0)
                                                        chores
                                                        Total                                                  80 (100)
                                                        Ask my parents to buy some                            40 (83.3)
        I lack school supplies at home                  Go to a friend’s house                                 8 (16.6)
                                                        Total                                                  48 (100)
                                                        I do my homework                                      45 (51.7)
                                                        I talk less in class                                  12 (13.8)
        My teachers scold me                            I try not to make mistakes                            18 (20.7)
                                                        I keep quiet                                          12 (13.8)
                                                        Total                                                  87 (100)
                                                        I help my parent at work                              49 (38.3)
                                                        I do not visit my friends                             23 (17.9)
                                                        I study hard                                          22 (17.2)
        My parents scold me
                                                        I watch less TV                                       23 (17.9)
                                                        I talk with my parents                                 11 (8.6)
                                                        Total                                                 128 (100)
                                                        I ask the community members to                         4 (16.7)
        There is lack of health counseling              establish a health center
        [services in health posts that target
                                                        I go to the hospital                                  20 (83.3)
        youth] in the community
                                                        Total                                                  24 (100)
                                                        I feel alone                                          16 (66.6)
                                                        I try to stay calm and have self-                      8 (33.4)
        I think I have no value in society
                                                        control when harassed
                                                        Total                                                  24 (100)
      Source: Resilience Questionnaire 2014.
      Note: In Tables 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, the total number of responses in the right-hand column varies due to the number of skipped
      questions by respondents.




 64   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                   		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                                    Table B8
                                             Risks faced at home

                                            Responses
     No. Questions                                     Quite a                               Very         Total
                                             A lot                Somewhat       A little
                                                         bit                                unlikely    Responses

     1    I have been injured                7 (5.4)    2 (1.6)   24 (18.6)      49 (38)    43 (33.3)     125

     2    I fall ill                         5 (3.9)    6 (4.7)   36 (27.9)   63 (48.8)     18 (14)       128

     3    I feel depressed/anxious           5 (3.9)    7 (5.4)   43 (33.3)   36 (27.9)     35 (27.1)     126

     4    I feel parents/brothers/sisters
          discriminate against me for        4 (3.1)    2 (1.6)   11 (8.5)    15 (11.6)     89 (69)       121
          my gender
     5    My parents do not support
                                             4 (3.1)    4 (3.1)     9 (7)     24 (18.6)     79 (61.2)     120
          my studies
     6    I hesitate to speak with my
                                             8 (6.2)       -       7 (5.4)    24 (18.6)     81 (62.8)     120
          parents
     7    I fear punishment by my
                                             8 (6.2)    7 (5.4)   27 (20.9)   24 (18.6)     58 (45)       124
          parents
     8    Not enough money is spent
                                             7 (5.4)       -       18 (14)    27 (20.9)     71 (55)       123
          on my education
     9    There is a lack of school
                                             5 (3.9)    7 (5.4)   17 (13.2)   36 (27.9)     61 (47.3)     129
          supplies at home
     10   I do not have a uniform or
                                             4 (3.1)    5 (3.9)   14 (10.9)   32 (24.8)     71 (55)       126
          enough tiffin
     11   I have to do all the household
                                             3 (2.3)   12 (9.3)   19 (14.7)   51 (39.5)     43 (33.3)     128
          chores
     12   I have to look after my
                                             9 (7)     11 (8.5)   17 (13.2)   33 (25.6)     56 (43.4)     126
          siblings
     13   My parents scold me                4 (3.1)    1 (0.8)   23 (17.8)   61 (47.3)     38 (29.5)     127

     14   My brothers and sisters make
                                             1 (0.8)    1 (0.8)    6 (4.7)    16 (12.4)     98 (76)       122
          fun of me

 Source: Resilience Questionnaire 2014.




		                                                                   EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)          65
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                              		

                                                         Table B9
                                         Risks faced at school (teachers/peers)

       No. Questions                            Responses
                                                A lot       Quite a    Somewhat    A little    Very        Total
                                                            bit                                unlikely    Responses

              I am not encouraged by my         17 (13.2)    6 (4.7)    12 (9.3)   30 (23.3)    58 (45)      123
         1
              teachers
              I am not motivated well by        17 (13.2)    7 (5.4)   20 (15.5)   17 (13.2)   63 (48.8)     124
         2
              my teachers
              I am not supported by my           11 (8.5)    5 (3.9)   14 (10.9)   24 (18.6)   68 (52.7)     122
         3
              teachers
              I am made fun of by my             3 (2.3)     2 (1.6)   14 (10.9)   23 (17.8)   83 (64.3)     125
         4
              peers

         5    My teachers beat me                   -        2 (1.6)   22 (17.1)   41 (31.8)   62 (48.1)     127

         6    My friends use vulgar words        3 (2.3)     4 (3.1)   23 (17.8)   27 (20.9)   68 (52.7)     125

              My friends touch/try to touch      1 (0.8)     1 (0.8)    6 (4.7)    17 (13.2)   95 (73.6)     120
         7
              me with sexual overtones
              My friends laugh at me when        3 (2.3)     2 (1.6)    10 (7.8)   30 (23.3)   79 (61.2)     124
         8
              I ask questions in class

         9    My friends tease me                1 (0.8)     2 (1.6)    10 (7.8)   30 (23.3)   81 (62.8)     124

        10    I feel excluded by my friends      4 (3.1)     3 (2.3)    11 (8.5)   16 (12.4)    89 (69)      123

              My friends make fun of me at          -        3 (2.3)    7 (5.4)    30 (23.3)   87 (67.4)     127
        11
              school

      Source: Resilience Questionnaire 2014.




 66   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                                     		                   RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                                   \Table B10
                                          Risks faced in the community

                                            Responses
     No.   Questions                                     Quite a                               Very         Total
                                               A lot                Somewhat       A little
                                                           bit                                unlikely    Responses

           There are thefts and robberies
      1                                       6 (4.7)    2 (1.6)    19 (14.7)   63 (48.8)     38 (29.5)     128
           in my community

      2    I am scared by others              7 (5.4)    3 (2.3)     18 (14)    30 (23.3)     64 (49.6)     122

           I get scared of the gamblers
      3                                      14 (10.9)   4 (3.1)    19 (14.7)   34 (26.4)     53 (41.1)     124
           in my community
           I am afraid of the drunk
      4                                      10 (7.8)     9 (7)     25 (19.4)   29 (22.2)     53 (41.1)     126
           people in my community

      5    The boys/girls tease me            3 (2.3)    5 (3.9)    12 (9.3)    22 (17.1)     74 (57.4)     116

           I can’t walk alone in my
      6                                      12 (9.3)    12 (9.3)   14 (10.9)   26 (20.2)     63 (48.8)     127
           community

      7    I always feel unsafe               4 (3.1)    8 (6.2)    10 (7.8)    34 (26.4)     67 (51.9)     123

           The people in my community
      8                                       2 (1.6)    3 (2.3)     8 (6.2)    23 (17.8)     89 (69)       125
           make fun of me
           We lack a health counseling
      9                                        9 (7)     6 (4.7)     8 (6.2)    36 (27.9)     65 (50.4)     124
           mechanism in the locality

 Source: Resilience Questionnaire 2014.
                                                Table B11
                             Risks faced at school (physical facilities/access)

           Questions                        Responses
     No.                                                 Quite a                               Very         Total
                                               A lot                Somewhat       A little
                                                           bit                                unlikely    Responses

           There are not enough
      1    desks and benches in the           6 (4.7)    7 (5.4)    12 (9.3)    16 (12.4)     80 (62)       121
           classroom
           There are not enough
      2    teaching and learning               9 (7)     7 (5.4)    17 (13.2)   24 (18.6)     65 (50.4)     122
           materials at school
           I do not get an opportunity to
      3    participate in extracurricular     1 (0.8)    1 (0.8)    15 (11.6)   26 (20.2)     81 (62.8)     124
           activities
           There is lack of health
      4                                       6 (4.7)    5 (3.9)      9 (7)     29 (22.5)     75 (58.1)     124
           counseling at school

      5    I feel unsafe at school            3 (2.3)    1 (0.8)    11 (8.5)    22 (17.1)     88 (68.2)     125

      6    I feel a lack of self-worth        3 (2.3)    2 (1.6)    10 (7.8)    38 (29.5)     71 (55)       124

 Source: Resilience Questionnaire 2014.




		                                                                     EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)          67
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                     		


      Annex C. Local Advisory Committees
                                               Table C1
                            Local Advisory Committee (LAC) 1: Buddhajyoti Tole

                                  Name                                  Affiliation
               Samjhana Lama                         Chairperson, Mothers Group

               Miki Dahal                            Teacher

               Akil Bahadur Tamang                   Parent

               Dilip Magarati                        Social Worker

               Ram Kumari Rai                        Social Worker

               Dhirendra Bikram Nembang              Political Leader

               Tikaram Dhakal                        Chairperson, Tole Users Group

               Champa Neupane                        Chairperson, Women’s Group


                                             Table C2
                  Local Advisory Committee (LAC) 2: Kuleshwor Balkhu Jagaran Tole

                                  Name                                  Affiliation
               Dil Kumar Rai                         Social Worker
               Kul Bahadur Rai                       Local Politician
                                                     Chairperson, Squatter Association
               Raj Kumar KC
                                                     Jagaran Tole
               Krishna Shrestha                      Parent
                                                     General Secretary, Squatter Association
               Saraswoti Tamang
                                                     Jagaran Tole


                                              Table C3
                         Local Advisory Committee (LAC) 3: Shanti Vinayak Tole

                                  Name                                  Affiliation
                                                     Chairperson of Santi Binayak Tole Sudhar
               Jit Bahadur Rai
                                                     Samiti
                                                     Treasury of Santi Binayak Tole Sudhar
               Bimala Khadka
                                                     Samiti
               Menuka Khatiwada                      Member, Girls’ Group
                                                     Joint Secretary, Santi Binayak Tole Sudhar
               Chanderswori K. C.
                                                     Samiti
               Krishna Pokharel                      Social Worker




 68   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									                                                    		                 RES-RESEARCH | 2014

                                       Table C4
                     Local Advisory Committee (LAC) 4: Pathivara Tole

                         Name                                  Affiliation
     Santosh Khatri                          Member of Youth Club

     Bijaya Lama                             Member of the Tole Sudhar Samiti
     Merina Rai                              Activist
     Pratap Gurung                           Member of Tole Sudhar Samiti
     Deepika Magar                           Children’s Club

                                      Table C5
                   Local Advisory Committee (LAC) 5: Devi Nagar Tole

                         Name                                  Affiliation

     Ram Hari Bohara                         Chairperson Devi Nagar Tole Sudhar Samiti
                                             Social Worker (Constructed Rudramati
     Harimaya Pradhan
                                             Primary School)
     Goma Parajuli                           Member of Tole Sudhar Samiti

     Purusottam Sedahi                       Social Worker




		                                                      EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)    69
NEPAL | EDUCATION RESILIENCE			                		




 70   	EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)
									     		                  RES-RESEARCH | 2014




		          EDUCATION RESILIENCE APPROACHES (ERA)   71
                     The World Bank
                    1818 H Street, NW
           Washington DC 20433 USA
www.worldbank.org/education/resilience
   educationresilience@worldbank.org
