Solar Resource Mapping in Pakistan

SITE EVALUATION REPORT
July 2015
This report was prepared by the consultants listed on the following pages, under contract to The World
Bank.

It is one of several outputs from the solar
Resource Mapping and Geospatial Planning Pakistan [Project ID: P146140]. This activity is funded and
supported by the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), a multi-donor trust fund
administered by The World Bank, under a global initiative on Renewable Energy Resource Mapping. Further
details on the initiative can be obtained from the ESMAP website.

This document is an interim output from the above-mentioned project. Users are strongly advised to
exercise caution when utilizing the information and data contained, as this has not been subject to full peer
review. The final, validated, peer reviewed output from this project will be the Pakistan Solar Atlas, which
will be published once the project is completed.




Copyright © 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE WORLD BANK
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: +1-202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the consultants listed, and not of World Bank staff. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work and accept no
responsibility for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433,
USA; fax: +1-202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org. Furthermore, the ESMAP Program Manager
would appreciate receiving a copy of the publication that uses this publication for its source sent in care of
the address above, or to esmap@worldbank.org.
  ESMAP – Renewable Energy Resource
          Mapping Initiative

 - Solar Resource Mapping for Pakistan –

         Site evaluation report:
Hyderabad Airport, Pakistan Meteorological
               Department




                 Responsible Authors

              Birk Kraas (CSP Services)
              Christoph Schillings (DLR)
                  Qazi Sabir (PITCO)

       DOC: SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08

                                          Author Contact Information:
                                                    CSP Services GmbH
                                                Friedrich-Ebert-Ufer 30
                                        51143 Köln/Cologne, Germany
                                       e-mail: b.kraas@cspservices.de
                                                        19 August 2014
CSP Services GmbH
Birk Kraas
Friedrich-Ebert-Ufer 30
51143 Cologne, Germany
Phone: +49 2203 959003 6
Mob.: +49 162 9373484
b.kraas@cspservices.de



DLR

Dr. Christoph Schillings
Pfaffenwaldring 38-40
70563 Stuttgart, Germany
Phone: +49 711 6862 784
christoph.schillings@dlr.de


PITCO:

Qazi Sabir
Phone: +92 (42) 36363751
qazi.sabir@pitcopk.com




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -   2   SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Contents
1    Executive Summary.............................................................................. 4

2    Procedure and tasks of the site visit .................................................... 4

3    Site visit results ................................................................................... 5
    3.1   Overview, description of the site and surroundings ................................. 5
    3.2   Local support, maintenance staff and future hardware use ....................... 6
    3.3   Site 1 (roof top) ................................................................................. 7
               Coordinates ................................................................................. 7
               Checklist for evaluation of the situation of and at the site ................... 8
               Shadings and Reflections ............................................................. 10
    3.4   Site 2 (ground station) ..................................................................... 13
               Coordinates ............................................................................... 13
               Checklist for evaluation of the situation of and at the site ................. 14
               Shadings and Reflections ............................................................. 14

4    Conclusion ......................................................................................... 18




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -                     3          SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
1   Executive Summary
A team of the solar vendor consortium for the ESMAP Pakistan Solar Resource
Mapping Project visited the Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD) office at
Hyderabad airport on August 08, 2014. The goal was to evaluate if the location is
suitable for the installation of a solar ground measurement station in the framework
of the project.
Two different sites have been examined on the campus, on on the roof of a building
of the PMD location and one on the ground. Due to the airport and especially due to
industrial facilities in close proximity, the site is not recommended for installation of
an ESMAP ground measurement station.



2   Procedure and tasks of the site visit
The following tasks have been performed for the site visit, following the procedure
from the site visit manual:

1. Recording of exact geographic coordinates of the site(s) and orientations
2. Photographic documentation of the site
    - Overview of site and location,
    - panoramic 360 degrees round view from the site for identification of potential
      obstacles blocking the sun path
3. Check of availability, strength and potential providers of GSM network at the site

4. Audit of local staff to clarify all relevant information (see checklist)
5. Information of local staff at the site about the project, its aim and required tasks
   for realization and clarification of availability and prospected quality of the
   required support from their side

6. In-office evaluation of results and compilation of this report




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -           4        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
3   Site visit results
The results of the site visit and its evaluation is presented in the following section.

3.1 Overview, description of the site and surroundings




                   Figure 1: Location overview (Google Maps View)




                      Figure 2: Aerial View (Google Earth View)

The PMD office on Hyderabad airport is located directly west of the airfield. The town
of Hyderabad with dense population and settlement is located to the north. To the




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -          5        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
west, the Indus river is in close distance of about 500 m. To the south, there is barren
land which apparently is being prepared for construction of new city districts and to
the east there is a three-branched canal as well as a cement factory.

Hyderabad is located on the Indus river directly north of the junction of the Indus
with Baran river which comes from the west, from the Khirtar mountain range which
commence about 30 km west of the city. To the east lies the vast Indus valley with
its large irrigated agricultural areas.



3.2 Local support, maintenance staff and future hardware use
The availability of qualified staff for the regular local maintenance (cleaning of
sensors and other parts, visual inspection, surveillance of equipment) and the
institutional support of the involved stakeholder are directly relevant for the success
of the ESMAP project measurement campaign.

Future use of the equipment after the ESMAP project termination is another issue to
be considered in order to provide maximum sustainability of the project.

Local support and maintenance staff
Local staff is available and confirmed to be willing to perform maintenance tasks
throughout the 24 months of the measurement campaign. A short briefing about the
required tasks and their frequency of occurrence has been given to PMD
representatives. Qualification of local staff for the task is assumed to be given, since
PMD is the official department of meteorology with corresponding staff and there is
already meteorological equipment present and operating under their control. The
data from this instrumentation could potentially be an extra input for cross-check of
the ground measurement data within the ESMAP campaign.

Future hardware use (sustainability)
The meteorological station from the ESMAP project would be a good complementary
station to the existing PMD meteorological station. The station would likely be used
actively in future for the national measurement network of PMD and the value added
therefore be increased.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -          6        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Contact Information
The local contact for the site is

      Khalid Kazi
       Meteorologist – Pakistan Meteorological Department
       +92 321 3093860



      Abid Laghari
       Meteorological Assistant – Pakistan Meteorological Department
       +92 332 0303263



3.3 Site 1 (roof top)

       Coordinates
N 25.3176° E 68.3627°, altitude 45 m above mean sea level

Site 1 is located on the roof of a building which is used for the existing PMD weather
station.




 Figure 3: View from Site 1 to the North       Figure 4: View from Site 1 to the South




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -          7         SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
       Checklist for evaluation of the situation of and at the site
The following checklist has been filled at the site visit and is completed by
interviewing stakeholders on site.
                            Table 1: Site checklist for site 1

                Criteria/Measure                       Yes / No          Notes

 Dimensionsi         Minimum area 10 × 10 m²           No           Rooftop.

                     Firm natural groundii                          No

                     Ground typeiii                                 Concrete

                     Horizontally levellediv           Yes

                                                       Yes          Casting Blocks
                     Excavation for foundations                     are preferred on
 Surface
                     possiblev                                      rooftop.

                     Fencing of the site possiblevi    Yes

                     No drifting sand/snowvii          No

                     No flooding possibleviii          No

                     Obstructions                      No           See Panoramic
                                                                    Pictures
                     If yes, note direction,
                     distance and approx. heightix

                     Reflections or light sourcesx     -

                     Industrial areas or power         Yes          Cement Factory
                     plantsxi
                                                       Yes          Reduced visibility
                                                                    in months of
                                                                    December/Jan
                     Sources of smoke or vaporxii                   due to smoke
 Surroundings
                                                                    from nearby
                                                                    industry.

                     Quarry or minexiii                No

                     Main road, dirt road, trackxiv                 Paved Roads

                                                       Yes          On Airport
                     Airportsxv                                     Premises

                                                       Yes          Airport housing
                     Settlements, towns, cityxvi                    colony nearby

                     Agricultural areaxvii             No           3km from site




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -              8      SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
                     Swamp, lake, river, oceanxviii    No           3km from site

                     Sand dunesxix                     No

                     Animal populationsxx              No

                     Occurrence of snowfallxxi         No

                     Temperatures below freezing       No
                     pointxxii

                     Otherxxiii

 Accessibility       Accessible by carxxiv             Yes

 GSM coverage        2G network availablexxv           Yes          All 5 providers

 Grid power          Electricity availablexxvi         Yes          No Power Outage

                                                       Yes          Will need to be
                                                                    approved by CAA
 Land use rights     Permit availablexxvii                          (Civil Aviation
                                                                    Authority)

                                                       Yes          Will need to be
                                                                    approved by CAA
 Operation permit    Permit availablexxviii                         (Civil Aviation
                                                                    Authority)

                     No underground or overhead        No
                     electrical lines, pipelines or
 Security            similar xxix

                     Measures against theft or         No
                     vandalism required?xxx

                     Take 360° photographs or          Yes          Tripod bag
 360°                                                               denotes the
                     panoramic photo, indicate
 photographs                                                        north direction
                     North directionxxxi


Regarding the aspects covered by the checklist, site 1 is barely suited for the
installation of a ground measurement station. The installation on a roof-top is a good
option since it elevates the station above many obstacles; In the direct surroundings
there are industrial facilities (cement factory) which pointedly have a negative impact
on visibility and presumably irradiation. The airport air traffic will also be emitting a
certain amount of pollutants, although not very much since the airport is not very
frequented. All roads in the surroundings are paved and therefore not heavily dust-
emitting; the site is encased by water bodies (Indus river and canals), and permits
to install and operate the station from the civil aviation authorities are required
additionally to the permission to use the site which can be given by the PMD.



– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -             9       SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
       Shadings and Reflections

Panoramic View
The picture in Figure 5 shows a panoramic view with a centered south view, North is
on the left and right edge of the picture. Blue markers show the North, South, East
and West direction as well as horizon height. The sun paths throughout the year are
displayed in the picture, revealing if any objects on the horizon are imposing an
obstruction to the direct solar irradiance.




 Figure 5: Panoramic View with North, South, horizon line and monthly sun paths
              with the corresponding position at full hours marked

From the panoramic view, it is visible that a few obstacles on the horizon are blocking
the sun especially at sunset. The impact is further analyzed in the following
paragraphs.

Shading Table for Sun Elevations >0°




                   Figure 6: Shading Table for Sun Elevations >0°




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -         10       SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Figure 6 shows the shading table throughout the year. The obstacles in the west
which have already been mentioned above show some impact especially in February
and October.



Shading Table for Sun Elevations >5°




                   Figure 7: Shading Table for Sun Elevations >5°

Figure 7 shows the shading table after excluding Sun Elevations smaller than 5°
above horizon. At these low angles, measurement uncertainty of satellite and ground
measurement is elevated due to the large cosine error, and the data from these
periods is therefore excluded from the satellite data adjustment and validation. Also
from the view of any solar power installation (PV or CSP), sun elevation smaller than
5° is usually not contributing to electricity or heat generation due to shading,
unfavorable incidence angles and low irradiance intensity. Subsequently, all further
graphs and evaluations refer to sun elevations larger than 5°, as the main aim of the
measurements on ground is the adjustment of the long-term satellite data.

From the graph, it is visible that shading still occurs in the evenings in March and
October, but only in minimal temporal extension.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -        11       SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Direct Shading Impact
Figure 8 shows the impact of shading on direct normal irradiation (DNI). DNI is
modeled according to Bird (Bird et al., 1991) as a theoretical clear-sky DNI
throughout the year and can be interpreted as the maximum solar resource. The
impact of shading on this figure is therefore the maximum quantitative impact
shading could have on solar resource.




            Figure 8: Shading Impact on BirdDNI for Sun Elevations >5°

From Figure 8, it is clearly visible that shadings have almost no impact.




                  Figure 9: Shading Impact for Sun Elevations >5°

Figure 9 shows the impact of direct shading due to the reported obstructions. The
left figure shows the percentage of time for all calendar months which is affected by
direct shading. In total, 0 % of the time is affected by direct shading, with up to 0.3%




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -         12        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
in the months of March and October. The right figure shows the quantitative impact
of shading on the Bird-DNI summarized for each month. For the whole year, the
reduction of the annual Bird-DNI sum due to direct shading is about 0.1 % only.



Diffuse Shading and Reflections
Diffuse shading and reflections of any mentionable quantity are not to be expected
since no large obstacles close to the site and no highly reflective surface above sensor
height can be identified.

Artificial lighting from the airport during the night could potentially have some
influence on the irradiation measurement, but could be filtered from the data.



3.4 Site 2 (ground station)

       Coordinates
N 25.3170° E 68.3631°, altitude 40 m above mean sea level
Site 2 is located on the ground west of the airfield at an existing PMD station.




    Figure 10: View from Site 2 to the          Figure 11: View from Site 2 to the
                  North                                       South




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -         13        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
       Checklist for evaluation of the situation of and at the site
The checklist is only displayed for the lines which differ from the checklist for site 1.

                Criteria/Measure                       Yes / No           Notes
                                                      No            10x10m will not
 Dimensionsxxxii     Minimum area 10 × 10 m²                        be available in
                                                                    the enclosure

                     Firm natural groundxxxiii                      Yes

                     Ground typexxxiv                 Soil          Natural Ground

                     Excavation for foundations       Yes
 Surface
                     possiblexxxv

                     Fencing of the site              Yes
                     possiblexxxvi


Regarding the aspects covered by the checklist, site 2 is barely suited for the
installation of a ground measurement station. The installation on natural ground is
recommended by WMO and there is sufficient free area around the station; installing
the station would be possible even though the full 10x10 m area is not available. All
other aspects are identical to site 1.



       Shadings and Reflections

Panoramic View




Figure 12: Panoramic View with North, South, horizon line and monthly sun paths
              with the corresponding position at full hours marked

From the panoramic view, it is visible that only few obstacles are blocking the sun
and the horizon is almost clear.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -          14       SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Shading Table for Sun Elevations >0°




                   Figure 13: Shading Table for Sun Elevations >0°

Figure 13 shows the shading table throughout the year. It becomes clear that
throughout the year, brief shadings especially at sunset are present.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -        15      SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Shading Table for Sun Elevations >5°




                   Figure 14: Shading Table for Sun Elevations >5°

Figure 14 shows the shading table after excluding Sun Elevations smaller than 5°
above horizon. Subsequently, all further graphs and evaluations refer to sun
elevations larger than 5°, as the main aim of the measurements on ground is the
adjustment of the long-term satellite data.
From the graph, it is visible that shading above 5° sun elevation is practically not
existent.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -        16      SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Direct Shading Impact




           Figure 15: Shading Impact on BirdDNI for Sun Elevations >5°

From Figure 15, it is clearly visible that shadings have no mentionable impact.




                  Figure 16: Shading Impact for Sun Elevations >5°

Figure 16 shows the impact of direct shading due to the reported obstructions. The
left figure shows the percentage of time for all calendar months which is affected by
direct shading. In total, about 0 % of the time is affected by direct shading with a
maximum in March and October of 0.2 %, the other months show no impact at all.
The right figure shows the quantitative impact of shading on the Bird-DNI
summarized for each month. For the whole year, the reduction of the annual Bird-
DNI sum due to direct shading is 0 % with the same characteristics as for the
temporal influence.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -        17       SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Diffuse Shading and Reflections
Artificial lighting from the airport during the night could potentially have some
influence on the irradiation measurement, but could be filtered from the data.



4   Conclusion
Although the site itself, especially site 2, are technically suitable for the installation
of a measurement station, the surroundings of the location are not favourable. The
airport and mostly the cement factory are likely to be strong emitters of pollutants
that may influence the solar radiation (absorbtion, scattering of sun rays) and
increase the sensor soiling. Also, obtaining permission from the civil aviation
authorities is an additional task that could possibly involve a lengthy process.

Therefore, it is recommended to not install any measurement station at the airport
office of PMD in Hyderabad.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -          18        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
Detailed description of checklist criteria:
i
       A site with a minimum extension of 10 × 10 m² is required for the collocation of the
       meteorological measurement equipment, complying with the characteristics and criteria
       listed in the following.
ii
       The site suitable for collocation of a meteorological station needs to have a firm ground in
       order to enable a secure fixation of the equipment on the ground, e.g. by ground anchors
       and guying ropes.
iii
       Annotate here if the ground consists of firm and naturally grown soil or artificially (by man)
       filled soil, if it consists of bedrock, firm soil, loose soil or sand.
iv
       Annotate here if the site is approximately horizontally levelled and flat.
v
       Annotate here if it is possible and permitted to lay small foundations (4-5 foundations each
       approximately 1 × 1 m² and ~0.3 m deep).
vi
       Annotate here if it is possible and permitted to fence the compound.
vii
       Annotate here the terrain consists of drifting sand or snow.
viii
       Annotate here if the terrain may run the risk to be flooded at heavy rain falls.
ix
       Describe any object which exceeds 2 m height in the closer environment of the site and
       which might shade the measurement equipment on the site from direct sun at any time of
       the year or which obstructs parts of the sky dome. Describe in detail at least all such
       objects within 30 m distance as well as bigger objects up to at least 200 m distance from
       the site. As the sun at sun rise and sun set approaches the horizon in East and West
       direction (~±30 degrees depending on season), obstructions in these directions are of
       particular importance. Add sketches of the site environments where possible.
       Possible obstructing objects are: mountains, hills, buildings, skyscrapers, houses,
       industrial or commercial buildings, warehouses, churches/mosques or similar buildings (for
       religious or cultural activities), walls, bridges, towers, chimneys, wind energy plants,
       transmission masts, power poles, other poles or rods, cranes, street lights, greenhouses,
       trees, bushes, shrubberies, any other higher vegetation, or similar.
       Moreover, the view from the site towards the horizon should be documented by 360°
       photographs (see corresponding description) or a short movie taken from the site, starting
       in direction to the North over East, South, and West to North direction again.
x
      Annotate if any reflecting surfaces like mirrors, glazing, shiny metal surfaces, PV panels,
       etc., or artificial light sources are in the environments and might cause reflections or
       radiation on the measurement equipment, influencing irradiation measurements.
xi
      Annotate if any industrial production site or power plant is located in the environments of a
       few kilometers, which may cause emissions of smoke, vapor, dust or other aerosols.
xii
       Annotate any source of smoke or water vapor columns located in the environments.
xiii
       Annotate quarries or mines in the environments causing pollution by elevated dust.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -                  19        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
xiv
       Annotate close by roads as they frequently cause increased sensor soiling by elevated dust
       settling down on the sensors, or increase the risk for theft or vandalism due to increased
       visibility.
xv
       Annotate the presence of airports in the environments as exhaust gases of planes may
       influence the measurements.
xvi
        Annotate the presence and size of settlements in the environments in order to judge
        potential influences on the measurements (personally or as secondary effects like smoke
        or dust) by man.
xvii
        Annotate type and frequency (if possible) of agricultural activities in the environments in
        order to judge potential impacts on the measurements (e.g. elevated dust, etc.).
xviii
         Annotate their potential presence in the environments in order to judge impacts on the
        measurements due to increased humidity, oxidation of the equipment, instability of the
        ground, etc.
xix
        Annotate the presence of sand dunes in the proximities of some kilometers in order to
        judge potential deposition of sand on the equipment.
xx
       Annotate if any animal population frequents the area which might have any impact on the
       measurements. Also take into account birds, termites, insects (bees, wasps, etc.), etc.
xxi
        Annotate the occurrence and the frequency (if possible, may be estimated) of days with
        snowfall or remaining snow cover in order to design the power supply and version of the
        irradiation sensor(s).
xxii
        Annotate the occurrence and the frequency (if possible, may be estimated) of days with
        temperatures below freezing point temperature (zero degrees Celsius) in order to design
        the equipment and judge potential impacts on the measurements.
xxiii
        Annotate any other observations, occurrences or presences which you may estimate them
        causing potential impacts on the measurements. In the case of doubt about an influence,
        please annotate the observation.
xxiv
         Annotate if the site is easily reachable by car in order to facilitate the transport of the
        equipment to the site.
xxv
        Verify with your mobile phone or contacting a reliable local mobile phone network provider
        the availability of 2G network from different providers. If only 3G network (or higher) is
        available, verify with the network provider if GPRS connection in 2G mode is enabled.
        Check with your mobile phone by switching it manually to 2G connection only and test data
        connectivity via GPRS or EDGE.
xxvi
         Annotate if electricity grid is available at the site for power supply. If information is
        available, annotate the voltage level and if grid stability issues are known for the site.
xxvii
         Verify and annotate if the land use permits are conceded or given from the land owner.
xxviii
         Verify and annotate if the permits to use the compound for operation of a meteorological
        station are conceded or given by law and local authorities.
xxix
        Verify and annotate if no high voltage lines (exceeding 20 V) are crossing the compound
        neither as overhead line nor in the ground. Verify and annotate if no gas, water, remote
        heat or other pipeline are crossing the compound above or in the ground.


– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -                  20        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
xxx
       Estimate the risk of theft or vandalism on the measurement equipment. Give an estimation
       of a safety guard or similar is required to watch the equipment.
xxxi
        See section „Fehler! Verweisquelle konnte nicht gefunden werden.“ above.

Detailed description of checklist criteria:
xxxii
            A site with a minimum extension of 10 × 10 m² is required for the collocation of the
       meteorological measurement equipment, complying with the characteristics and criteria
       listed in the following.
xxxiii
            The site suitable for collocation of a meteorological station needs to have a firm ground
       in order to enable a secure fixation of the equipment on the ground, e.g. by ground anchors
       and guying ropes.
xxxiv
          Annotate here if the ground consists of firm and naturally grown soil or artificially (by
       man) filled soil, if it consists of bedrock, firm soil, loose soil or sand.
xxxv
           Annotate here if it is possible and permitted to lay small foundations (4-5 foundations
       each approximately 1 × 1 m² and ~0.3 m deep).
xxxvi
           Annotate here if it is possible and permitted to fence the compound.




– ESMAP Pakistan – confidential -                  21        SiteEvalReport_HydAirpPMD_2014-08
