                                                                    94459
                                               KOREA KNOWLEDGE
     GOVERNANCE GLOBAL PRACTICE             PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM
     GOVERNANCE AND PUBLIC SECTOR                    THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA




BUDGETING
FOR GREEN GROWTH IN
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
USING PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS TO IMPLEMENT
MAJOR INITIATIVES WHILE MAINTAINING FISCAL BALANCE

YOUNG KYU KANG
›   TABLE OF
    CONTENTS
    1	   Executive Summary

    2	
     The Green Growth Plan: Policy Direction and Governance
    	Structure

    4	   Integrating the Green Growth Plan into Annual and
    	    Medium-Term Budeting

    6	   Budget Reconstructuring

    7	   Financial Management and Performance Measurement

    8	   Conclusion

    8	   Acknowledgment
›   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
    Young Kyu Kang




    K
          orea’s bold initiative, the Green Growth Plan (GGP), spanning 2009 to 2013 with
          fiscal outlay of US$84 billion, posed a significant challenge to sustainable public
          finance management in Korea. This paper reviews how Korea accommodated the
    huge cross-cutting expenditure plan in its annual and medium term budgets. Notably
    Korea’s medium term expenditure framework, the National Fiscal Management Plan,
    enabled the Ministry of Strategy and Finance’s Budget Office to integrate the GGP into
    the budget and maintain fiscal balance. However, the paper also notes that Korea’s
    experience suggests international standards on budget classification to be updated to
    accommodate government-wide initiative.




    Young Kyu Kang is the Director of the Tax Office of the Korean Ministry of Strategy and
    Finance. During 2011–2013, he was a Senior Public Sector Specialist with the Governance
    & Public Sector Management anchor in the Poverty Reduction and Economic
    Management Network (now the Governance Global Practice), focusing on budget
    reform. Prior to that, he worked extensively in the Budget Office of the Korean Ministry of
    Strategy and Finance.




                    Using Public Financial Management Systems to Implement Major initiatives while Maintaining Fiscal Balance   | 1
      ›   BUDGETING FOR GREEN GROWTH
          IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA

          USING PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS TO
          IMPLEMENT MAJOR INITIATIVES WHILE MAINTAINING
          FISCAL BALANCE
          The Republic of Korea initiated its Green Growth Plan (GGP) in 2009 as a strategic
          response to the global economic downturn. The GGP was hugely ambitious, providing a
          short-term fiscal stimulus while laying the foundation for a new long-term growth engine.
          Valued at ₩107.4 trillion, or approximately US$84 billion, over five years, it represented
          7–8 percent of the country’s total annual expenditures and nearly a quarter of the national
          government’s discretionary spending.
          Fiscal reforms implemented earlier in the decade enabled policymakers to integrate the GGP
          into Korea’s annual and medium-term budgets without a serious deterioration in the country’s
          fiscal balance. Korea’s medium term expenditure framework (MTEF)—known officially as
          the National Fiscal Management Plan and produced annually by the Ministry of Strategy
          and Finance’s Budget Office—played a particularly important role in accommodating
          GGP. It provided five-year projections of government revenues and expenditures, as well
          as annual sectoral budget ceilings. Korea’s performance-based budgeting (PBB) system
          and other financial management tools also helped government agencies restructure their
          budgets. Finally, Korea’s financial management systems facilitated integration of the GGP,
          but weaknesses in tracking cross-cutting programs suggest that international standards
          should be updated to accommodate government-wide initiatives.

          ›	The Green Growth Plan: Policy Direction and Governance Structure
          President Lee Myoung-Bak entered office in 2008 on the promise of restoring strong
          economic growth. Earlier work by national commissions on climate change, sustainable
          development, and energy unanimously agreed that Korea needed to reduce its reliance
          on fossil fuel–intensive industry and establish a new, environmentally-friendly growth
          engine. The GGP thus served multiple purposes: mitigating climate change, fulfilling
          campaign pledges, providing countercyclical fiscal stimulus, and resetting Korea’s
          development model.




2 |       BUDGETING FOR GREEN GROWTH IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
The Presidential Committee on Green Growth was founded in February 2009 and
consisted of 18 relevant ministers and heads of government research institutes and 30
private sector experts. It was supported by professional staff and representatives from
the Budget Office, and green-growth officers were appointed in each line ministry and
local government to coordinate policy and promote information sharing. This broad-
based governance structure ensured a whole-of-government approach and private sector
support. It also facilitated tradeoffs in expenditure restructuring and integration of the
GGP into the MTEF process.
The Presidential Committee on Green Growth established a vision and accompanying
policy direction to help Korea become a global leader in green growth by 2020. To
achieve this goal, the committee defined three strategies and 10 policy directions, as
outlined in Table 1. Guidelines were then circulated to relevant line ministries so that they
could propose projects for inclusion in the MTEF and the annual budget.


Table 1—Green Growth Plan: Strategy and Policy Direction

  STRATEGY                              POLICY DIRECTION
  Mitigate climate change               Mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
  and improve energy
  independence
                                        Reduce the use of fossil fuels and enhance energy independence
                                        Adapt to climate change
  Create new growth engines             Develop green technologies and create a new growth engine
                                        Green existing industries and nurture emerging green industries
                                        Advance industrial structure
                                        Lay the institutional foundation for a green economy
  Improve quality of life               Create green land and water, and build green transportation
  and enhance international             infrastructure
  standing

                                        Bring the green revolution into daily life
                                        Become a green-growth role model for the international community

Source: National Strategy for the Green Growth, the Committee on Green Growth, 2009.




                     Using Public Financial Management Systems to Implement Major initiatives while Maintaining Fiscal Balance   | 3
      ›	Integrating the Green Growth Plan into Annual and
      	 Medium-Term Budgeting
      Project planning and budgeting were conducted in March–July 2009, but broad fiscal
      requirements were estimated as early as April to correspond with Korea’s annual budget
      cycle. Doing so ensured that the GGP could be incorporated into the MTEF and receive
      funding in its first year without serious deterioration of Korea’s fiscal balance. Based on the
      GGP policy guidance issued in March, the line ministries developed project proposals that
      included detailed milestones and cost estimates for the next five fiscal years. The GGP was
      finalized in July 2009 after review by the Committee on Green Growth and the president. By
      that time, expenditure restructuring and budget formulation were well underway.
      The GGP included 678 projects to be implemented by 26 line ministries, administrative
      committees, or other government agencies, with many cross-cutting projects spanning
      institutional boundaries. The projects were diverse, including research and development,
      social overhead capital investments, infrastructure, subsidies, and more. The five-year
      cost of the GGP was estimated to be ₩107.4 trillion; annual estimates are shown in Table
      2. Of the total, ₩57.5 trillion was allocated to mitigating climate change and improving
      energy independence; ₩29.0 trillion to creating new growth engines; and the remaining
      ₩27.2 trillion to improving quality of life and enhancing Korea’s international standing1.
      In some cases, ongoing projects and their associated funding could be reclassified to
      the GGP. However, the Budget Office estimated that new expenditure demand resulting
      from the GGP would reach approximately ₩100 trillion over the plan’s five-year life
      cycle. Importantly, discretionary spending in Korea is limited to roughly one-third of the
      national budget, with transfers to local governments and statutory entitlement spending
      comprising the remainder. By any measure, the GGP represented a huge fiscal burden.




      1.	 Note: Few projects have been double counted in each category.




4 |   BUDGETING FOR GREEN GROWTH IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Table 2—Fiscal Impact of the GGP

                                                              2009         2010         2011          2012         2013
  Green Growth Plan            Budget (trillions of ₩)           17.4         24.2         25.7         20.6          19.4

                               Percentage of GDP                  1.6           2.1          2.1          1.7          1.5

  Total expenditures, as       2008–12 MTEF                     273.8        290.9        308.7        326.7
  projected in annual
  MTEFs (trillions of ₩)       2009–13 MTEF                     301.8        291.8        306.6        322.0        335.3

                               2010–14 MTEF                                  292.8        309.6        324.8        337.7

                               2011–15 MTEF                                               309.1        326.1        341.9

                               2012–16 MTEF                                                            325.4        342.5

                               2013–17 MTEF                                                                         342.0

  Consolidated fiscal          Percentage of GDP                 -2.1          -0.2          0.4          1.4          0.9
  balance
  National debt                Percentage of GDP                 35.6         36.1         35.1         34.0          36.2

Source: Author, compiled from each year’s National Fiscal Management Plan.


To maintain fiscal sustainability, it was necessary to incorporate the GGP’s estimated cost
into Korea’s annual and medium-term budgets. Korea’s MTEF formulation process—
notably the Fiscal Strategy Cabinet Meeting (FSCM), which is chaired by the president in
April of each year—played a critical role in establishing budget ceilings and coordinating
budget restructuring. The MTEF features an (almost) binding framework, in which
budget ceilings and sectoral allocations established at the FSCM are respected and
maintained until the MTEF is updated the following year. The GGP was a core issue
at the 2009 FSCM meeting, given its huge cost, but was ultimately endorsed with no
major adjustments. Moreover, the FSCM reaffirmed the aggregate and sectoral budget
ceilings from the 2008–12 MTEF to maintain fiscal sustainability. The president’s strong
commitment to both the GGP and fiscal integrity thus resulted in strict enforcement of
the MTEF and a clear mandate to relevant ministers to integrate the GGP through drastic
restructuring of ministerial budgets under existing budget ceilings.




                     Using Public Financial Management Systems to Implement Major initiatives while Maintaining Fiscal Balance   | 5
      The Korean government’s success in launching a major new initiative while maintaining
      fiscal balance is evident when comparing five-year expenditure projections from the 2009
      MTEF to subsequent MTEF estimates over the life of the program. As shown in Table 2,
      total government expenditures in 2009–13 were not significantly greater than the Budget
      Office’s 2008 projections. The partial exception was 2009, when the government pursued
      deficit spending to counteract the global recession. Furthermore, a double gate-keeping
      mechanism guaranteed full funding for the GGP in each annual budget: not only did
      line ministries have to inform the green-growth committee of annual allocations to the
      GGP in their budget requests, but the Budget Office was charged with ensuring it was
      fully supported in annual appropriations. With leadership from the president and senior
      political support from the prime minister, who co-chaired the green-growth committee,
      these protections resulted in annual GGP budgets that actually exceeded the initial plan.

      ›	Budget Restructuring
      Other Korean PFM practices were also helpful, though to a lesser extent than the
      MTEF, in enabling the Budget Office and affected government agencies to accommodate
      implement the GGP without a serious deterioration in the fiscal balance. For example, Korea’s
      PBB, which consists of the program assessment rating tool (PART) and in-depth study, has
      been used to address low performing projects. Projects deemed low performing by PART are
      subject to automatic budget cuts of 10 percent or more. In-depth studies allow the Budget
      Office and line ministries to identify and cut redundant projects. Direct cuts as a result of
      PART have been relatively limited, historically yielding about ₩0.5 trillion annually, and in-
      depth study have produced somewhat smaller savings. PBB also has indirect benefits worth
      noting; for example, it encourages the line ministries to reprioritize existing programming
      and trim planned expansions.
      The Budget Office also reviewed projects identified as inappropriate or low priority by
      the Prime Minister’s Office that exhibited problems in formal reviews by the Board of
      Audit and Inspection, or for which prior year budget execution was low. In addition,
      the government’s administrative budget was cut by almost 10 percent and government
      wages were frozen for two consecutive years as part of the government’s fiscal
      containment efforts to cope with the financial crisis in 2009.




6 |   BUDGETING FOR GREEN GROWTH IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
The radical budget restructuring required for the GGP entailed significant political
controversies. The Four River Restoration Project (FRRP), which was GGP’s headline
project, is a prime example. The project’s intent was to improve flood management
capacity and water quality through dredging and construction of dams and reservoirs
on four major rivers. However, many environmental nongovernmental organizations
contended that diverting rivers and constructing stepped artificial lakes hurt the
environment. Moreover, the Ministry of Land, Transport, and Maritime Affairs had to cut
many proposed or ongoing projects to fund the FRRP, particularly roads, which became
a rallying point for the opposition. Against this backdrop, the 2009 budget was ultimately
passed on December 31, a full month behind schedule and without the support of
the opposition. The FRRP controversy underscored the need for sound participatory
processes when introducing and vetting major new policies.

›	Financial Management and Performance Measurement
Under normal circumstances, Korea’s financial management and performance
measurement systems, which are believed to be in line with international standards,
enable the Budget Office to effectively plan, budget, execute, and assess more than
8,000 projects across the government. However, the extraordinary demands of the GGP
raised questions regarding the ability of Korea’s financial management systems, and
hence international standards, to handle such a large and complex initiative. The notable
weakness was in the financial management information system (FMIS) and the associated
budget classification system. In Korea, budgets are classified on economic and functional
bases, in accordance with international standards provided by the IMF’s Government
Finance Statistics Manual and the United Nation’s Classification of the Functions of
Government. Under the economic classification system, the GGP projects ranged from
the use of goods and services to subsidies and grants, while the functional classification
system was associated with 15 of the 16 sectors.
Such complex GGP projects, which in some cases cut across sectors and ministries,
should be classified as sub-activities in non-GGP projects, but these are not recognized
and tracked under the FMIS, as the FMIS tracks sector, subsector, program, and activity
classifications only. This complexity prevented the Budget Office from systematically
monitoring program execution and led to deep inefficiencies in generating accurate
statistics on GGP projects, the number of completed projects, and total cost of the
GGP. Consequently, the GGP was managed manually through cooperation between the
Budget Office, the Committee on Green Growth, and the line ministries. Generating
information was painstaking, labor-intensive work, and limited capacity led to relatively
weak program management.




                Using Public Financial Management Systems to Implement Major initiatives while Maintaining Fiscal Balance   | 7
      Under normal circumstances, functional budget classification facilitates performance
      measurement, because there is alignment between government agencies that implement
      projects and budget categories. That makes it possible to monitor and evaluate
      individual projects and adjust funding levels according to performance. However, given
      the complex, cross-cutting nature of GGP projects, the performance framework could
      not measure aggregate performance. Moreover, plan-wide indicators were too broad
      to effectively measure its impact. These challenges would likely impair any similarly
      ambitious government-wide initiative under a functional budget classification system,
      and suggest that international standards need to be updated to ensure proper budget
      classification and accurate assessment of complex initiatives such as the GGP. Korea’s
      approach to research and development projects (which use a separate economic
      classification) and gender-sensitive budgets (which are managed with a special code in
      the FMIS) indicates potentially useful reforms.
      Another challenge is the lack of consensus on how to value ecosystem services and
      measure green-growth benefits. These areas pose sector-specific challenges to feasibility
      studies and impact measurement, which can be resolved only through further study and
      practical experience.

      ›	Conclusion
      Korea’s experience with the GPP provides a powerful example of how modern budgetary
      systems can enable bold, far-reaching public initiatives, even as they help ensure fiscal
      sustainability. In particular, specific features of Korea’s MTEF—sectoral and ministerial
      ceilings and a binding framework—facilitated integration of the GGP into medium-term
      budgeting while helping maintain fiscal balance. Alignment with the annual budget
      cycle, committed leadership, and inclusive governance structures ensured the plan was
      fully funded each year. Korea’s PBB system also contributed to creating fiscal space
      using objective criteria such as cutting low-performing projects and constraining budget
      increases for lower-priority projects.
      The GGP suggests several reforms that can help other countries successfully execute and
      measure similarly ambitious programs. In particular, international budget classification
      standards need to evolve so that they can ensure effective monitoring of large, complex,
      cross-cutting initiatives. Korea’s approach to research and development and gender-
      sensitive budgets shows that special economic classifications or project codes can
      facilitate monitoring and evaluation of cross-cutting programs and the cumulative impact
      of major initiatives.

      ›	Acknowledgment
      Special thanks to Bradley Larson for his substantive and valuable work on editing.




8 |   BUDGETING FOR GREEN GROWTH IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Useful Resources
Internal Sources:
   ■	 Featured Story: Korea’s Global Commitment to Green Growth

External Sources:
   ■	 Korea’s Green Growth based on OECD Green Growth Indicators

   ■	   2013-17 National Fiscal Management Plan
Green Growth related websites:
   ■	 Global Green Growth Institute: http://gggi.org/

   ■	   Ministry of Strategy and Finance:http://www.mosf.go.kr/main/main.jsp
   ■	   OECD: http://www.oecd.org/korea/greengrowthinactionkorea.htm




                                                             THE GREEN GROWTH PLAN   | 9
