                                                                        94482




Comparative study of the mining
tax regime for mineral exploitation
in Kazakhstan
Final Report




The Assignment was carried out in the framework of the Joint Economic
Research Program between the World Bank and the Government of
Kazakhstan. Authors: Olle Ostensson, Bob Parsons and Samantha Dodd


17 June 2014

Joint Economic Research Program
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral
exploitation in Kazakhstan




This assessment has been carried out by Oxford Policy Management in the framework of the Joint Economic
Research Program in Kazakhstan. The project manager is Samantha Dodd. The remaining team members
are Olle Ostensson and Bob Parsons. For further information contact Samantha Dodd
[Samantha.dodd@opml.co.uk]

The contact points for the client are Gary McMahon [gmcmahon@worldbank.org] and Yerlan Akishev
[yakishev@worldbank.org].


Oxford Policy Management Limited                6 St Aldates Courtyard                    Tel       +44 (0) 1865 207 300
                                                38 St Aldates                             Fax       +44 (0) 1865 207 301
                                                Oxford OX1 1BN                            Email     admin@opml.co.uk
Registered in England: 3122495                  United Kingdom                            Website   www.opml.co.uk

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                            i
                          Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Executive Summary

Introduction and background
Kazakhstan is rich in both minerals and hydrocarbons. While the hydrocarbons sector is relatively
successful, the minerals sector has failed to achieve its potential. Despite large mineral reserves,
very little investment has gone into the development of new mining projects and few foreign
investors have been willing to invest in the sector. Almost all mines currently operating in
Kazakhstan were already in operation in the 1990s, leaving a two decade gap in new mine
development. Mining policy in Kazakhstan does not prioritize only revenue generation but aims at
promoting employment, skills development and economic diversification. In order to achieve these
goals Kazakhstan will have to attract foreign investment into the sector.

There are several elements to the current mineral legislation and fiscal regime that are unusual in
an international context and act as a deterrent to foreign investment. This report carries out a
comparative analysis of Kazakhstan’s mineral regime and makes recommendations on changes
that could be made to the existing regime to bring it in line with international good practice.
Kazakhstan’s fiscal regime is compared to twelve other countries1 and to global trends in mineral
regimes.

Country context
Kazakhstan has been fairly successful for most of the post-Soviet period, experiencing rapid
economic growth, significant improvements in human development and improvements in the
business environment. The economy still remains fairly dependent on oil but the non-oil economy
has grown at rates similar to that of the oil economy.

Kazakhstan has large reserves of copper, uranium (of which Kazakhstan is the world’s largest
producer), iron ore, zinc and gold. Despite the existence of these reserves the mineral sector
remains small in comparison to the oil sector, although it accounts for significant shares of both
GDP and exports. Much of the sector was privatized following independence and is dominated by
domestic producers. Only a few foreign companies operate in Kazakhstan and almost no new
mines have been set up – most production comes from mines that have been in operation since
the 1990s or the Soviet era.


Nature of the mining industry and implications for mineral regimes
The mining sector has a number of unique characteristics that distinguish it from other sectors of
the economy. The life of mining projects is finite and it is a high risk, capital intensive industry faced
with long lead times to production. The sector is a price-taker faced with cyclical prices and
demand. Mines tend to operate in remote areas and the sector’s operations have an impact on the
environment and surrounding communities. These characteristics all have implications for mineral
regimes and internationally competitive regimes take these factors into account.

An important objective of the fiscal regime should be to balance the needs of the government with
the needs of investors. Investors have a need to generate a return on their investment.
Government’s objectives are broader. An important objective for most governments is that of
obtaining revenue from the sector. But governments are also interested in other areas too, such as
ensuring that the sector contributes to economic growth and diversification through employment,
backward and forward linkages, and skills development.
1
    Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Ontario (Canada), Chile, Ghana, Guinea, Laos, Peru, Sweden and Tanzania.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                       1
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


In terms of generating government revenue from the sector, it is helpful to understand how the
revenues generated by the sector are shared between beneficiaries and what the main forms of
taxes are.

There are four principal beneficiaries of revenue from mining projects: suppliers, government,
investors and employees. The proportion of the revenue that accrues to each of these groups is
relatively stable across mining projects. Based on our experience suppliers normally receive the
largest share (around 55 per cent). The second largest shares are those received by the
government (around 17 -18 per cent) and by investors (also roughly 17 -18 per cent). Employees
receive the final share (around 10 per cent). These shares tend to be quite stable over time and
across jurisdictions, although they may of course vary by a few percentage units from one
jurisdiction to another. The split between government and investors is determined by the level of
taxation that the industry is faced with – higher taxation increases governments’ and reduces
investors’ shares. Ensuring that the share of revenue received by government and by investors is
fair is an important consideration when designing mineral fiscal regimes.

                                  Suppliers       Employees        Government          Investors


                                               18%




                                     17%
                                                                                      55%




                                              10%



Mining projects are faced with a variety of taxes but the majority of direct revenue streams received
by government are generated from five main taxes. In order of magnitude, these include profits
taxes, royalties, employee income tax, customs duties, and withholding taxes. These taxes vary in
importance over time. Governments initially receive revenue in the form of customs duty and
employee tax during pre-production development. Once production starts, tax revenue largely
consists of royalties and employee tax until the project starts to make a profit. When projects
become profitable, royalties and employee tax remain the same but make up a smaller proportion
of total government revenue as corporate income tax increases to become the largest proportion of
government revenue. This remains the case for most of the project’s life, assuming that the mine
remains profitable.

In terms of contribution to economic growth and diversification, it is helpful to understand what
benefits the industry can generate outside of government revenue as these influence governments’
decision-making when designing mining sector policies.

An important contribution is that of employment. Although the industry is capital-intensive and
generates relatively few direct jobs, it generates much larger levels of indirect and induced
employment which together can have a substantial impact on the economy, partly through
backward linkages or local content. This refers to the extent to which goods and services used in
the mining industry are sourced in the host country. For goods in particular, the level of local

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             2
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


content in the supply chain depends on the competitiveness of local suppliers but even in countries
with low skills levels, services tend to make up a large part of local content which has an important
impact on how the benefits from the industry are spread in the economy. Further processing of
mineral resources (forward linkages) can bring further benefits to the economy. This is a more
contentious area, however, as further processing generally does not generate much employment,
often has low profit margins and therefore low tax generation potential. Skills building is also an
important consideration. A significant long term benefit generated by a modern and internationally
competitive mining industry is that it raises general skills levels of those directly and indirectly
connected to the industry.


Best practices in mineral regimes
Internationally competitive mineral regimes recognise the unique characteristics of mining (see
Table 1). These regimes are stable over time, transparent, create a level playing field, are easy to
understand and easy to administer. They also appropriately balance the needs of investors to
generate a fair return with the needs of government to generate revenue and ensure that the
sector contributes to growth and diversification. Competitive fiscal regimes apply taxes in a way
that recognise the large initial upfront capital investments and long production lead times that
characterise the sector.

Table 1 – Mining sector characteristics’ implications for mineral fiscal regimes
    Characteristic                   Implications for mineral fiscal regime
                                     Returns to compensate for risk
    High risk                        Tax stability
                                     Transparency
    Capital intensive                Minimisation of upfront tax costs
    Long lead time to production     Tax stability
                                     Loss carryover periods in profit tax system
    Price-taker with cyclical prices
                                     Excess profits taxes are problematic
    Finite life                      Tax stability
    Remote areas                     Tax relief for infrastructure investments & employee incentives
    Environmental and social impact Tax incentives for environmental and social investments


Institutional, legislative and administrative considerations

Most countries include mining-specific tax rules (such as royalties and excess profit taxes) in the
mining law. Rules concerning corporate income tax, VAT and other taxes that apply to all
economic activities and not only to mining, are almost always included in the general tax
legislation.

Countries have differed in terms of where conditions for the industry are specified. Some outline
these in mining law and others through individual contracts negotiated with investors (referred to as
Mineral Development Agreements or ‘MDAs’). Negotiated agreements can be more flexible but
come at the cost of reduced transparency. The transparency and predictability of general
conditions defined in mining law allows investors to evaluate future taxation effects with a high
degree of confidence and are viewed as being more effective in attracting investors. Consequently
most countries have preferred to establish general conditions in the mining law.

In most countries that have both petroleum and mining industries, the two industries are subject to
different tax policy, rules and administration. Although the two industries have several
characteristics in common (e.g. finite lives, and price takes faced with cyclicality in profits), they

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             3
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


also differ in important ways. In the oil sector, production costs vary significantly, capital costs and
operating profits are higher, and resource rents are more important. The mining sector is
characterised by higher levels of risk at all stages of mining projects. These differences mean that
effective tax policy formulation and administration, especially in more mature economies, tend to
require specialist knowledge of each of the sectors within government. They also impact the way in
which extraction rights are allocated as bidding procedures are difficult to apply in mining
industries, particularly during exploration; and the way in which revenue is shared with government
as production sharing agreements are difficult to apply in the mining industry.

Where tax regimes are internationally competitive they are comprehensive, clearly translated, easy
to understand and easy to administer. This reduces risk and makes the tax system more
transparent. It also ensures that effective administration is easier to achieve. The importance of
sound administrative practices cannot be overemphasized. One of the most common reasons why
revenue streams fall short of government expectations relates to inefficient or ineffective tax
administration, often coupled with a complex fiscal system. Effective tax administration requires
cooperation among different departments, and adequate and industry-specific skills among tax
officials.

Fiscal considerations

Possibly the most important fiscal consideration is that of stability in the fiscal framework. Mining
projects are entered into on the basis of a feasibility study carried out before production
commences and the fiscal framework is an important determinant of the financial viability of a
project. Instability in the system represents a significant risk for an investor. Consequently many
countries include fiscal stability provisions in their fiscal regimes. However, in principle a tax regime
does not need explicit fiscal stability clauses to provide stability - if there is a tradition of not
changing the rules under which existing ventures operate, this may be sufficient. Explicit stability
clauses also become less important where there is a consultative process for introducing new tax
rules.

A well-designed mineral fiscal regime allows for a fair return for government while also allowing
investors to generate a fair return on their investment. Over recent years, a ‘rule of thumb’ has
evolved in the field of fiscal policy that the ‘government share’ (the amount that government
receives from the sector in terms of taxes) should be in the range of 50 per cent of pre-tax cash
flow generated by the project – i.e. government and investors should share pre-tax cash flow
roughly on a 50:50 basis. This does, however, vary across countries – from percentages as low as
28 per cent in Sweden to around 64 per cent in Ghana. Most of the 12 countries in the sample had
government shares in the 40 – 50 per cent range.

These returns correspond with varying Internal Rates of Return (IRR) for investors (i.e. the return
investors receive from investment which differs from the ‘share of the pie’ of around 50 per cent
received by the industry). Today a new project in a country with relatively low country risk would
need a minimum of 17 per cent IRR to attract financing. Rates below this mean that little or no
investment will take place and the resources may remain unexploited, generating no revenue for
government. In the sample of countries that we looked at, these rates varied from 12.9 per cent in
Ghana to 18.5 per cent in Sweden, suggesting that in the current price climate several of these
countries are going to find it difficult to attract new investment despite their mostly good practice
fiscal regimes and mining laws.

Although most countries generate revenues from the industry only in the form of taxes, some
regulatory regimes mandate that the government owns a specified percentage share of a mining
project in the form of a ‘carried’ (or free) interest. This has some advantages as it provides

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             4
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


government with access to information and the option to participate in decision-making. However, it
can generate conflicts of interest, be a source of friction (both within government and with
investors) and deter investment. It is also a high risk way for government to participate in the
industry and is unlikely to generate increased earnings for government as earnings from
participation tend to be cancelled out by losses in taxes (as corporate profits are lower and/or
companies may require lower taxation rates to invest). Where carried interest is mandated, the
international norm is 10 per cent equity participation.

The overall ‘tax package’ of a country is more important than individual taxes as together these
determine the IRR faced by investors. In designing a fiscal regime for mining, it is important that
the principal taxes and royalty not be considered in isolation of one another. The government
needs to run models to determine what combination of taxes and royalties results in a ‘win -win’ for
both the government and the investor. However, it is important to understand common features
and trends for each of the major tax categories that apply to the mining sector.

Corporate income tax (CIT) is usually the largest contributor to government revenue. Tax
exemptions used to be common but have been replaced by lower CIT and accelerated
amortization and depreciation of capital costs. CIT is now generally in the region of 20 to 35 per
cent. ‘Thin capitalisation’ rules preventing high interest rates on related party loans are common.

Mineral royalties are common but vary in terms of the basis for calculation (focusing on value,
volume or profits). There are four main types - gross production, gross revenue, net smelter return
and net profits royalty. There is a rule of thumb that a 2 per cent to 3 per cent gross revenue
royalty, a 3 per cent to 4 per cent NSR royalty, and a 10 per cent NPI royalty have roughly the
same impact on project IRR and government royalty receipts. Typically, royalty rates are in the 3
per cent to 5 per cent range for gross revenue royalties, 4 per cent to 5 per cent for NSR royalties,
and 8 per cent to 10 per cent for NPI royalties. Some countries recently considered introducing
‘progressive royalties’ but few have actually applied this.

As a result of strong commodity prices in recent years, some governments have considered
introducing a special tax (“windfall profit tax”) on ‘excess profits’. The theory is that these taxes are
levied only on the resource rent part of taxable income by allowing the investor to recover the
original capital outlay, including normal return on capital, before any windfall profit tax is paid.
Where windfall taxes do not follow this rule, they can be a major obstacle to attracting investment
because they may not allow investors to recover their capital, which can be a powerful deterrent to
investment. Moreover, they are complicated to administer. For these reasons, few countries have
introduced windfall profit taxes and several who had them have since abolished them.

Other important taxes include those that are borne by investors before the start of production when
there is no positive cash flow – these include VAT and customs duties. These can represent a
significant cost, especially during the construction phase of a project, although many countries
allow for VAT reimbursement, particularly during construction. VAT rates and rules should be
internationally competitive, and should be clear especially with respect to VAT restitution
entitlements and procedures. Customs duty rules and rates should be internationally competitive.

Fiscal incentives play an important part in determining investment in the industry. Two forms of
incentives are common – accelerated depreciation and amortisation; and duty free treatment of
inputs. Accelerated depreciation and amortisation allows companies to write off capital costs
against profits in early years of production. This reduces profit tax liability in early years of
production and helps companies recover their initial capital investments more quickly. This is
attractive to investors and also has no long term impact on the amount of tax that government
receives. In several countries, however, the failure of governments or investors to explain the
reasoning behind these incentives in terms that are understood by the general public has led to a

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             5
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


perception that companies pay too little taxes. This underlines the importance of taking into
account long term developments when describing and analysing mining taxes. Duty free treatment
of inputs is intended to lower the cost of investment, thus increasing the likelihood that projects will
be developed and is usually justified on the grounds that duties on the items concerned have been
established as part of broader trade policy considerations without taking into account the particular
needs of the mining industry. Where items needed by the mining industry are also used in other
industries there is a risk of misallocation of resources. This argues for a relatively restrictive
application of duty free treatment. Most developed countries do not exclude imports of mining
equipment from duty.



Non-tax benefit creation

The benefits generated by the industry extend beyond revenue generation to include employment,
backward and forward linkages and skills generation. Encouraging and enhancing these impacts
often forms part of government’s considerations when designing mineral regimes.

Governments are interested in ensuring that nationals and those from local areas are employed in
the sector. Some developed countries create attractive environments for mining when deposits are
located in disadvantaged areas to enhance employment. This is less common in developing
countries where a higher priority is placed on revenue generation. Some countries have strict
requirements on the percentage of nationals who have to be employed. Where skills are not
available though, this can lead to adverse consequences. More effective examples include those
where local employment is enhanced through a process of consultation between mining
companies, local government and local communities.

A number of countries have introduced legislation intended to encourage the strengthening of
backward linkages from mining. Local content legislation exists on a spectrum from setting out
broad policy priorities to industry-wide ‘blunt instruments’. Mandated local content is a ‘new’ area
and there is limited evidence of its impact on business decisions. In some cases, aggressive
government policy on local content has generated perverse effects. Many local content regulations
require significant monitoring and reporting that is unlikely to be consistently enforced by weak
government administrations. Kazakhstan has particularly demanding requirements when it comes
to local content and although investors are able to meet the targets for local sourcing, the real cost
of detailed monitoring and reporting is likely to be high. There are good examples of government
initiatives that have had positive results by working together with industry to increase local content
without the use of blunt instruments. Many countries are restricted from implementing local content
regulations due to WTO rules though. Kazakhstan is at the final stage of negotiations for acceding
to the WTO, and, therefore, local content requirements could be subject to change, in order to
comply with the WTO requirements.

Some countries try to encourage downstream processing to improve trade performance and speed
up structural transformation. Various methods are used, from relatively vague commitments made
by investors to export taxes on unprocessed products to outright bans on exports. Generally if such
activities are not taking place already, it is likely because they are unprofitable. However, it is
possible that the cost to the mining company may be offset by benefits accruing to the rest of
society. Analyses of these benefits and costs should be undertaken before taxes or export bans
are introduced. One particular aspect is the substantial energy needs of most smelting and refining
processes, which may become a constraint on the development of other economic activities in
countries that lack easy access to cheap energy.



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             6
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Countries differ in their treatment of social investment with some mandating certain levels of
investment and others leaving this up to investors. Social investment has changed over time – until
the second half of the 20th century, mining companies tended to provide a wide variety of services.
With increased competition this decreased but since the 1990s social investments have been
increasing again. Companies invest in infrastructure, education, health care and local business
development but avoid replacing government functions.

It is highly unusual for requirements concerning Research and Development (R&D) to be included
in mining legislation or Mineral Development Agreements (MDAs). Although where local research
institutions exist, mining companies would be both expected to and interested in supporting them.


Comparative review of Kazakhstan’s mineral regime
Institutional, legislative and administrative framework

Kazakhstan’s mineral legislation retains characteristics from the country’s central planning heritage
and is strongly influenced by its experience of oil and gas exploitation. Law No. 291 on Sub-Soil
and Sub-Soil Use (introduced in July 2010) combines legislation for solid minerals and
hydrocarbons under one law. This differs from the international norm where the two sectors are
generally separated. The law contains most of the mining sector regulations apart from those
pertaining to taxation which are instead included in the Tax Code. Mining-specific taxation is
included in the tax code, which deviates from international practice. The subsoil law itself is very
detailed, unclear and contradictory in places, and the only available translation in English is
extremely poor. This makes it very difficult for foreign investors to interpret whether or not
Kazakhstan is a good investment destination. The Tax Code prescribes contemporary rules for tax
administration, including tax audit, assessment, and appeals. The Code appears to be applied in a
competent manner but the complexity of parts of the Code and the lack of a clear track record of its
application is a larger problem.

Although hydrocarbon and minerals are regulated under the same law, separate Ministries deal
with each of the sectors: the Ministry of Oil and Gas deals with hydrocarbons and the Ministry of
Investment and Development (MID, formerly the Ministry of Industry and New Technologies),
specifically the Department for Sub-Soil Use, deals with mining. This is in line with international
best practice. However, it is difficult to make conclusions based on practical experience of the
overall legislation as a moratorium was placed on exploration and mining licenses from 2007 to
2013, and as far as we know, no new mining licences have been granted after the moratorium.
Presumably, exploration companies are waiting for the new legislation, presumably more adapted
to exploration companies’ needs, to come into effect.

The granting of mineral rights in Kazakhstan is in the process of transitioning from a system based
on auctions of mineral rights to a more standard system based on licensing on a first-come first-
served basis. Previously, rights were auctioned unless potential investors who had a national
mining company as a partner negotiated contracts outlining their obligations for social investment,
training, local content and R&D with the Ministry of Industry and New Technologies. Although an
auction system is appropriate for the hydrocarbon sector, it is not well-suited to the mining sector in
the exploration stage. The system of negotiation before exploration was also inappropriate as
exploration companies are generally not the same companies that set up the actual mining
projects. The planned changes to the legislation appear to go part of the way towards aligning laws
in Kazakhstan with international practice. However, it still leaves a number of areas to be
determined by negotiation.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             7
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Under the present system access to geological information is restricted. Companies applying for
exploration licences are only given full geological information after a contract has been signed and
large payments have been made to government. The information provided is generally outdated
and uses Soviet Union classification systems and methods. This differs significantly from best
practice where access to such information is free and of high quality. Reforms are being made to
the system which should significantly increase Kazakhstan’s attractiveness for exploration.

Subject to a few exemptions, the state has a pre-emptive right where a subsurface user transfers
its rights or ownership interest in a mining company to a third party. The state is entitled to acquire
such rights/interests on terms no worse than those offered to other buyers. This right has yet to be
exercised by government.

Fiscal regime

All taxes in Kazakhstan are governed by ‘The Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Taxes and
Other Obligatory Payments to the Budget, December 10, 2008, No. 99-IV Law RK’ (the Tax Code).
Mining companies are subject to a variety of general taxes including corporate income tax, VAT,
import and export duty, withholding taxes, and social tax. In addition to these, taxes specific to
subsurface users are applied. These include excess profits tax (EPT), mineral production tax (or
royalty), signature bonuses and commercial discovery bonuses.

VAT provisions, import duty, export duty, withholding tax and social taxes are all in line with
international norms but some aspects of the CIT, as well as the EPT, royalties, signature bonuses
and commercial discovery bonuses are not.

Corporate Income Tax (CIT) provisions are mostly modern and comprehensive. The CIT rate is 20
per cent of taxable income and allows for amortization of exploration and development costs at a
rate of 25 per cent per annum on a straight line basis. Additional capital investments can also be
depreciated. Problematic areas include complex ‘thin capitalisation rules’ and transfer pricing rules
that apply to third party transactions (i.e. not only a related party) which introduces an element of
risk for investors.

The Excess Profits Tax (EPT) is not in line with mineral taxation elsewhere and has a negative
impact on rates of return for investors. Companies are required to pay EPT if their after-tax net
income exceeds 25 per cent of costs claimed in that year for CIT purposes. The rate of EPT
increases progressively from 10 per cent to 60 per cent as after-tax income increases. The impacts
of the EPT are somewhat moderated though by accelerated tax depreciation provisions. The
negative impacts on the rate of return for investors could be dealt with either through a repeal of
the EPT or through eliminating the higher rates in the progressive rate schedule..

Royalty (or MPT) rates are relatively high and this contributes to the relatively poor return faced by
potential investors in Kazakhstan. Royalties are based on gross revenue from mineral sales and
the rates differ by mineral, ranging from 5 per cent to 8 per cent. Rates for uranium are particularly
high at 24 per cent but coal is exempt from royalties (but subject to an export tax). Apart from coal,
these rates are high relative to other countries and the number of different rates is higher than in
most other countries.

Signature bonuses and commercial discovery bonuses are unusual for the mining sector but are
included in the Tax Code for Kazakhstan. Signature bonuses have typically been low in the past
but the law merely specifies a minimum payment amount which makes the actual future payments
uncertain. Commercial discovery bonuses can amount to large sums. According to the Tax Code
this should be calculated as 0.1 per cent of the in-situ value of the discovery which can amount to
tens of millions of dollars for an average sized reserve. Although past payments have in practice

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             8
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


been low, investors have no guarantee that this will remain the case and this uncertainty increases
the risk faced by potential investors and acts as a deterrent to investment.

The overall tax package in Kazakhstan generates an IRR of 16.2 per cent in the estimates in this
study, which is too low for a typical, medium cost mining project to consider investment in the
sector. This is largely due to the relatively high royalty rates in Kazakhstan and the imposition of an
Excess Profits Tax. As noted earlier, an investor would look for an IRR of at least 17 per cent in a
low risk setting. This rate can be reached in Kazakhstan by reducing the royalty rates and EPT.
Several combinations of alternative rates would generate this return.

Although provisions for fiscal stability were included in earlier versions of the Tax Code, these were
abolished in 2009. This represents a significant deterrent to investment as it raises the expected
IRR needed for investment. In addition to this, no fiscal incentives are offered in the Tax Code for
mining companies apart from accelerated amortization and depreciation.

Non-tax benefit creation

Investors have to make commitments regarding the employment and training of Kazak nationals in
the contract that they sign with government. While the commitments themselves are not overly
burdensome, legislated commitments are uncommon in an international context. Relatively high
penalties are applied for breaches which has a deterrent effect on investment.

Kazakhstan has a highly demanding system for regulating local content. Regulations fall under the
Law on Subsoil and Subsoil Use and the National Agency for Development of Local Content
(NADLoC) is responsible for implementation and monitoring. All subsoil users are expected to
procure all goods and services under the government’s Procurement Rules, all procurement
information has to be downloaded onto an online registry and all advertisements have to be placed
in periodicals that are disseminated throughout Kazakhstan. Subsoil users are required to provide
a 20 per cent discount to Kazakh manufacturers and need to obtain a certificate that states the
percentage of local goods used in production. The government also sets targets for local content.
For 2010 – 2014 this was set at 16 per cent for goods and 85 per cent for services. While the
actual percentages for local content are probably not overly burdensome in themselves, the fact
that mining companies have to apply a discount when evaluating the bids of local suppliers may
have an undesirable impact on their costs. Moreover, the complexity of the rules and regulations
makes compliance burdensome for both investors and government and are uncommon in an
international context.

No legislation exists outlining specific requirements for further processing but some incentives are
offered for further processing - the most important being that mining companies become
manufacturing companies if they process minerals which make them eligible for other forms of
government support that is available to manufacturing companies.

Contribution to local economic development and infrastructure through social investment is an
important consideration in competitive bids for exploration contracts under current legislation.
Legally binding commitments have to be negotiated with government which is unusual in an
international context. Large mining companies in Kazakhstan provide a wider range of social
services than is typical in other countries and this can also act as a deterrent to investment. The
transition to a system that will be less demanding on investors is likely to be both inevitable and
complicated.

As with employment, local content and social investment, investors also have to make
commitments regarding support to R&D carried out by Kazak institutions of around 1 per cent of
turnover. The percentage is relatively high in an international context but this is unlikely to have a

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             9
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


major deterrent effect on investment as long as the requirement is known upfront and the does not
change.


Conclusions and recommendations
The stated objectives of Kazakhstan’s mining policy are to promote employment and economic
diversification, build skills and maintain existing regions and towns that depend on mineral
production. Maximisation of government revenues is not a priority due to the large revenues
generated in the hydrocarbons sector. Kazakhstan can realistically aspire to building a world class
mining industry. In order to do so, it needs to attract foreign investment, which it has so far failed to
do. Changes to the way in which exploration rights are granted mark a significant improvement in
Kazakhstan’s attractiveness to investors. However, for discoveries to result in investment in large
scale mines, the political and regulatory framework governing mineral investment will need to be
adjusted in a variety of ways to attract investment. Recommendations on the key areas in which
changes could be made are outlined below.

Institutional, administrative and legislative framework

The regulatory framework in Kazakhstan has been heavily influenced by the oil and gas sector
experience and by the legacy of the planned Soviet economy. This is problematic as mining
companies have a different perception of risks to oil and gas companies and prefer regulatory
regimes that leave as little as possible to government discretion. They consider detailed
regulations as constraints, preferring regulation by result to regulation by methods.

Transparent, foreseeable, consistent and stable application of clear and unambiguous laws will
attract companies that are willing to take on geological and technical risks while being reassured
about other risks. The government should consider reducing the discretionary agreements that
currently form part of mining contracts.

In terms of the overall legislation, separate legislation for the mining sector is preferable to
maintaining the current ‘dual purpose’ legislation. The introduction of mining-specific regulations
placed in a separate law should be considered.

The current English translation of mineral legislation in Kazakhstan is of poor quality and this
should be addressed as a priority. The poor quality of the translation reduces the accessibility of
the law, increases the likelihood of misunderstandings and deters investment. A clear translation of
the legislation should be commissioned and field tested on mining industry professionals that are
native English speakers.

Fiscal regime

The mining tax system has three characteristics that reduce its competitiveness and these should
be addressed:

First, it is uncertain how large some of the levies applied in Kazakhstan are likely to be. This
applies to the signature bonuses and the commercial discovery bonuses. The uncertainty that this
introduces for investors makes project planning difficult and deters investment. The uncertainty is
exacerbated by a lack of stability clauses. Government can address this by making the rules
regarding these payments simple and clear. Fiscal stability could be addressed through the
introduction of legislation or, at a minimum, by ensuring that any changes to tax law allow for multi-
stakeholder input before changes are made.



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             10
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Second, some of the taxes have to be paid upfront which is problematic for an industry with long
lead times to production and has a strong preference for a ‘backloaded’ tax system versus a
‘frontloaded’ one. Again this refers mostly to the signature bonus and the commercial discovery
bonuses. These taxes should be reconsidered.

Finally, the overall marginal tax rate is high relative to other countries. This will tend to push the
IRR below what investors need as a minimum to justify investment. The government should
consider reviewing tax rates on the basis of the total tax package. This could be done through the
use of a tax model that takes into account the dynamic relationship between various taxes. Two
taxes have a particularly negative impact on the IRR – the EPT and royalties. Government could
consider either repealing the EPT or reducing the top marginal tax rate from the present 60 per
cent. The Government could also consider reducing its royalty rates to more competitive levels and
reducing the number of royalty rates to two – one rate for gold and other precious metals, and
another rate for other metals. When assessing the total tax package, the impact on costs of
mandatory expenditures such as training, R&D and higher costs of local suppliers should also be
taken into account.

The present tax legislation is unnecessarily complicated and simplifications would raise the
competitiveness of the tax package. Government should consider revising the thin capitalization
rules to make them easier to understand and administer, and to make them applicable only to
related party financing. Government should also consider revising the transfer pricing rules to
make it clear that these rules apply only to related party transactions.

Non-tax benefit creation

The policy of setting targets for local content in binding agreements with monitoring and reporting
based on a detailed accounting are not suited to Kazakhstan’s needs. A shift to a more flexible
policy that would reduce the perceived up front risks to investors while still contributing to
industrialization and growth of skills should be considered. Making the agreements on local content
between government and mining companies voluntary instead of mandated by law while at the
same time broadening their scope to encompass more general issues would probably not yield
significantly lower results in terms of overall local content but would reduce costs to both
government and mining companies.

The situation regarding social investment in Kazakhstan is unusual as companies in Kazakhstan
provide a broader range of services than is typical internationally. In existing state-owned mines, it
may be possible for foreign investors to take over some of these responsibilities if no viable
alternative exists but investors are unlikely to assume the same level of responsibilities for green
field projects. Government will need to make their expectations with regards to social investment
clear and possibly distinguish between existing and green field projects.

The one per cent spending requirement for spending on R&D should be reviewed as part of a
general review of the Kazakhstan mining tax package. The mining industry as a whole spends less
than this and this requirement runs the risk of being perceived as a tax under another name.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             11
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Table of Contents

Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan                            i
Executive Summary                                                                                            1
List of Tables and Figures                                                                                  14
1       Introduction and background                                                                         15
    1.1     Background to the report                                                                        15
2       Country context                                                                                     17
    2.1    Recent economic and social developments in Kazakhstan                                            17
    2.2    Kazakhstan’s mineral sector                                                                      18
3       Nature of the Mining Industry and Implications for Mineral Regimes                                  21
    3.1     Introduction to mining taxation                                                                 21
        3.1.1 Uniqueness of the mining sector and implications for the fiscal regime                        21
        3.1.2 Typical tax collections over time                                                             25
    3.2     Balancing the needs of government and investors                                                 27
        3.2.1 Sharing a mining project’s revenue stream                                                     27
        3.2.2 Interpreting government revenue streams                                                       29
    3.3     Non-tax considerations                                                                          30
        3.3.1 Employment                                                                                    31
        3.3.2 Local content                                                                                 32
        3.3.3 Further processing                                                                            33
        3.3.4 Skills building                                                                               34
4       Best Practices in Mineral Regimes                                                                   35
    4.1     Institutional, legislative and administrative considerations                                    35
        4.1.1 Mining taxation – mining law versus tax codes                                                 35
        4.1.2 Conditions - mining law versus agreements with investors                                      36
        4.1.3 Mining taxation and petroleum taxation                                                        37
        4.1.4 Effective tax administration                                                                  39
    4.2     Fiscal considerations                                                                           40
        4.2.1 Fiscal stability                                                                              40
        4.2.2 Fair returns for government and for investors                                                 41
        4.2.3 Government ‘free equity’ or ‘carried interest’ in mining projects                             43
        4.2.4 The ‘tax package concept’                                                                     44
        4.2.5 Individual mining taxes                                                                       45
        4.2.6 Fiscal incentives                                                                             53
    4.3     Non-tax benefit creation                                                                        55
        4.3.1 Employment                                                                                    55
        4.3.2 Local content                                                                                 57
        4.3.3 Further processing                                                                            59
        4.3.4 Social investment                                                                             60
        4.3.5 Research and Development (R&D)                                                                60
5       Comparative Review of Kazakhstan’s Mineral Regime                                                   61
    5.1     Institutional, legislative and administrative framework                                         61
        5.1.1 Legislative and administrative framework                                                      61
        5.1.2 Granting of mineral rights                                                                    61
        5.1.3 Access to geological information                                                              62
        5.1.4 State ownership                                                                               62
    5.2     Fiscal regime                                                                                   62

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             12
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


        5.2.1 Corporate income tax (CIT)                                                                    63
        5.2.2 Excess profits tax (EPT)                                                                      65
        5.2.3 Mineral royalty (MPT)                                                                         66
        5.2.4 Signature bonus and commercial discovery bonus                                                66
        5.2.5 Value added tax (VAT)                                                                         67
        5.2.6 Import duty                                                                                   67
        5.2.7 Export duty                                                                                   68
        5.2.8 Withholding taxes                                                                             68
        5.2.9 Social tax                                                                                    68
        5.2.10 Tax administration                                                                           68
        5.2.11 The ‘tax package’ in Kazakhstan                                                              68
    5.3     Non-tax benefit creation                                                                        69
        5.3.1 Employment and training                                                                       69
        5.3.2 Local content                                                                                 70
        5.3.3 Further processing                                                                            71
        5.3.4 Social investment                                                                             71
        5.3.5 Research & Development                                                                        71
6       Conclusions and recommendations                                                                     72
    6.1     Institutional, administrative and legislative framework                                         72
        6.1.1 Different legislation for oil and gas and solid minerals                                      73
        6.1.2 Agreements or laws                                                                            73
        6.1.3 English translation of the mining law                                                         73
    6.2     Fiscal regime                                                                                   73
        6.2.1 Local content                                                                                 75
        6.2.2 Social investment                                                                             76
        6.2.3 Research and Development and training                                                         76
References / Bibliography                                                                                   77
Annex A         Terms of reference                                                                          79
Annex B         Example of fiscal stability provisions in mineral development agreement                     82
Annex C         Example of fiscal stability provisions in legislation                                       91
Annex D         Thin-capitalization legislation                                                             94
Annex E         Transfer pricing legislation                                                                98
Annex F         Profile of Canada’s mining industry                                                         100




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                              13
                           Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



List of Tables and Figures
Figure 1 - Change in GDP 2000-2019, per cent ............................................................................ 17
Figure 2 - Kazakhstan’s ranking on ease of doing business topics, 2014 ...................................... 18
Figure 3 - Main non-hydrocarbon mineral exports from Kazakhstan, 2000-2012, MUSD .............. 19
Figure 4 – Timing of tax collections over project life ...................................................................... 26
Figure 5 – Share of project revenues ............................................................................................ 28
Figure 6 – The mining sector’s contribution to macro-economic indicators .................................... 31
Figure 7 – The distorting effect of royalties.................................................................................... 49

Table 1 – Mining sector characteristics’ implications for mineral fiscal regimes ............................... 3
Table 2 - Kazakhstan’s HDI trends ................................................................................................ 18
Table 3 – Sources of financing ...................................................................................................... 25
Table 4 – Profitability of selected commodities ............................................................................. 38
Table 5 – Common allocation of government responsibilities ........................................................ 39
Table 6 – Comparison of ‘Government Share’ and ‘Effective Tax Rate’ ........................................ 42
Table 7 – International Comparison of Government Share and Project IRR .................................. 42
Table 8 – The ‘Package Concept’ Illustrated ................................................................................. 45
Table 9 – International Comparison of Profit Tax and Capital Allowance Rates ........................... 46
Table 10 – International Comparison of Royalty Rates ................................................................. 49
Table 11 – Accounting and Tax Treatment of Capital Costs .......................................................... 54
Table 12 – Simplified Illustration of EPT ........................................................................................ 65
Table 13 – Royalty rates ............................................................................................................... 66
Table 14 – Withholding taxes ........................................................................................................ 68
Table 15 – Royalty and EPT rate combinations to maintain a competitive tax package................. 69




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                         14
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



1         Introduction and background

1.1       Background to the report
Kazakhstan is a mineral and hydrocarbon rich country. The oil sector currently dominates the
economy but Kazakhstan also has rich nonfuel mineral reserves - particularly of uranium, chromite,
zinc, copper, gold and manganese. However the extraction of mineral reserves is well below what
would be expected given the size of the reserves. Kazakhstan ranks near the bottom of the ‘Policy
Potential Index’ of the Fraser Institute’s 2013 Global Mining Survey indicating that the country is
viewed as an unattractive investment destination. By contrast, the same survey indicates that given
its mineral reserves (and assuming a hypothetical application of ‘best practices’ in mineral policy in
the country), Kazakhstan would rank in the top third of possible investment destinations.

Since 2009 Kazakhstan has undergone a series of policy changes which have had implications for
the mineral sector. Two recent legislative changes are important for the mineral sector – the new
Tax Code introduced in 2009 and the Subsurface Use Act introduced in 2010. The introduction of
these two acts did a number of things: they altered the taxes faced by the sector which increased
the tax burden (thereby decreasing returns for investors); and they removed the stability clauses
that were previously allowed in mineral production contracts and introduced uncertainties
concerning the administration, interpretation and enforcement of existing regulations (thereby
increasing risk for investors). The result is that Kazakhstan is both a high cost destination for
production and also has a high effective tax rate. In addition to this, a number of characteristics of
the mineral legislation are unusual in an international context and act as a deterrent to foreign
investment.

As a result of the high levels of revenue generated from the oil sector, mining policy in Kazakhstan
does not prioritize maximising government revenue. Instead it focuses on promoting employment
and economic diversification, building skills and maintaining existing regions and towns that
depend on mineral production. In order to achieve these objectives, however, Kazakhstan will have
to attract the foreign investment which is has so far failed to attract. FDI in the mining sector has
been relatively low as a percentage of total FDI (equivalent to less than 7 per cent of total FDI) and
very little investment has gone into the development of new mining projects. Almost no new mining
projects have been set up for the last two decades - all the mines currently operating in
Kazakhstan were already in existence in the 1990s.

Given this context, this report aims to carry out a comparative analysis of Kazakhstan’s mineral
regime and makes recommendations on changes that could be made to the existing regime to
bring it in line with international best practice. The report carries out a quantitative comparison
modelling Kazakhstan’s fiscal regime in comparison to twelve other countries (Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, Ghana, Guinea, Laos, Peru, Sweden and Tanzania). These
countries were chosen for the diversity they bring to the analysis – representing least developed to
most developed countries, countries with mining sectors that are well-established and those with
newer mining sectors, and countries with large fiscal revenues from mining. A qualitative analysis
is also undertaken of the non-taxation aspects of the mineral regime in Kazakhstan, comparing
these to global trends in mineral regimes. A field visit was undertaken to Astana in April to
interview Government, the Chamber of Mines and other relevant stakeholders.

The rest of the report is structured as follows:

        Section 2 outlines the country context, giving an overview of recent economic and social
         developments and briefly outlining the mineral sector in Kazakhstan.


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             15
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


        Section 3 gives a general introduction to the mining industry. It provides an introduction to
         mining taxation - outlining the unique characteristics of the mining sector and the
         implications that these have for fiscal regimes; and outlining typical tax collections from the
         sector. It provides an introduction to the way in which revenues generated from mining
         projects are shared between different stakeholders, outlining the importance of balancing
         the needs of government and investors and some of the problems commonly encountered
         in interpreting government revenues streams. It also gives an overview of some of the non-
         tax benefits that the sector generates.

        Section 4 outlines best practices in mineral regimes. Firstly, it outlines institutional,
         legislative and administrative considerations – including where mining taxation and
         conditions should be specified, whether or not petroleum and mining sectors should be
         governed through different systems, and how effective tax administration can be achieved.
         Secondly, it outlines fiscal considerations – it outlines the importance of fiscal stability, of
         generating fair returns for both government and investors, the ‘tax package’ concept,
         individual mining taxes, and fiscal incentives. Finally, it outlines what governments have
         done to enhance non-tax benefits from mining in terms of employment, local content,
         further processing and social investment.

        Section 5 provides a review of Kazakhstan’s mineral regime in comparison to best
         practices. Firstly, it compares the institutional, legislative and administrative framework to
         international best practice – outlining the legal and administrative framework in Kazakhstan,
         the way in which mineral rights are granted, how access to geological information is
         granted and state ownership rules. Secondly, it compares the fiscal regime to best practice
         elsewhere, outlining the overall framework, individual taxes and the overall tax package.
         Finally, it outlines the ways in which Kazakhstan tries to enhance non-tax benefit creation in
         employment, local content, further processing, social investment and research and
         development, highlighting problem areas.

        Section 6 outlines the key recommendations that emerge from the comparison of
         Kazakhstan’s mineral regime to best practice internationally. It highlights key problems in
         the institutional, legislative and administrative framework; the fiscal regime; and non-tax
         benefit creation.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             16
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



2         Country context

2.1       Recent economic and social developments in Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan has grown fast during most of the post-Soviet period, with growth fueled by oil and gas
exports. Figure 1 shows GDP growth since the year 2000 with IMF projections until 2019. Non-oil
GDP has grown at roughly the same rate as total GDP, indicating that oil revenue is spreading
through the economy.

Figure 1 - Change in GDP 2000-2019, per cent

                                              GDP per cent change           forecast
         16

         14

         12

         10

          8

          6

          4

          2

          0
              2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

                                                    Source: IMF, 2014a

The dependence on oil is strong, however, with oil and gas accounting for about 60 per cent of
total exports in recent years and between 43 and 55 per cent of tax revenues.

The current account has been in surplus most years and is forecast to remain so in future. The
government runs a fiscal surplus and general government debt is around 13 per cent (IMF, 2013).
In view of the substantial deterioration in the (non-oil) current account balance, concerns about
competitiveness (given significant depreciation in the Russian ruble), and the fall in international
reserves, the National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK) devalued the tenge by 18 percent in February
2014. According to the IMF, risks to the near-term growth outlook are predominantly on the
downside. The loss of confidence in macroeconomic stability following the devaluation and
possible delays in structural reforms pose downside domestic risks to growth. Furthermore,
Kazakhstan’s economy is vulnerable to additional unfavorable developments in Russia and
Ukraine, given the strong trade and financial linkages with Russia (IMF, 2014b). Kazakhstan is
negotiating WTO membership and is in a Customs Union with Belarus and Russia. The Customs
Union enters into force in 2015.

The high rate of growth has made possible rapid improvements in development indicators. Table 2
shows trends in the elements of the Human Development Index (HDI) for Kazakhstan.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                     17
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan




Table 2 - Kazakhstan’s human development trends
                   Life                  Expected     Mean years                             GNI      per HDI value
                   expectancy            years     of of schooling                           capita (2000
                   at birth              schooling                                           PPP$)
1995               63.9                  11.9         8.8                                    4462         0.642
2000               63.5                  12.3         9.9                                    5039         0.663
2005               65.2                  14.9         10.2                                   7860         0.721
2010               66.7                  15           10.4                                   9569         0.744
2011               67                    15.3         10.4                                   9920         0.750
2012               67.4                  15.3         10.4                                   10451        0.754
                                                     Source: UNDP, 2013

The country’s economic environment has also changed rapidly over the past couple of decades.
Kazakhstan has implemented a programme of economic reform that has achieved considerable
simplification of procedures and liberalization. On the World Bank’s ease of doing business index
Kazakhstan is ranked 50th, well ahead of other countries in the region, including Belarus (63rd),
Kyrgyz Republic (68th), Russia (92nd), Ukraine (112th) and Tajikistan (143rd). Kazakhstan’s rankings
on the various topics are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 - Kazakhstan’s ranking on ease of doing business topics, 2014


                                                          Starting a business (30)
                                                                                      Dealing with Construction
                              Resolving Insolvency (54)
                                                                                            Permits (145)


                       Enforcing Contracts (27)                                               Getting Electricity (87)




                        Trading Across Borders
                                                                                              Registering Property (18)
                                 (186)


                                     Paying Taxes (18)                                Getting Credit (86)

                                                          Protecting Investors (22)




                                                  Source: World Bank, 2013



2.2       Kazakhstan’s mineral sector
Not surprisingly in view of its landmass - Kazakhstan is the world’s ninth largest country –
Kazakhstan is richly endowed with mineral resources, most importantly copper, uranium
(Kazakhstan is the world’s largest producer), iron ore, zinc and gold. Non-fuel mineral exports
account for about 14 per cent of total exports. Despite having increased sevenfold since 2000, their
share has declined from about 22 per cent of the total. Uranium exports account for a further 2-3
per cent, including processed products (international trade statistics include the various products
under one heading). Figure 3 shows the evolution of the main mineral exports. As in other
countries with large mineral sectors, mining accounts for a relatively small portion of employment,
at around 2.4 per cent according to a 2011 estimate (Engineering and Mining Journal, 2011), but

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                           18
                             Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


its overall importance to employment is likely to be significantly larger if linked economic activities
are included.

Figure 3 - Main non-hydrocarbon mineral exports from Kazakhstan, 2000-2012, MUSD

             14000

             12000

             10000
                                                                                                                                                    Gold
              8000                                                                                                                                  Aluminium
                                                                                                                                                    Zinc
              6000
                                                                                                                                                    Iron ore
                                                                                                                                                    Uranium
              4000
                                                                                                                                                    Copper
              2000

                  0
                                                                              2003
                      1995
                             1996
                                    1997
                                           1998
                                                  1999
                                                         2000
                                                                2001
                                                                       2002


                                                                                     2004
                                                                                            2005
                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                                             2012
                                                                       Source: UNCTADstat

Most of the mining and metals industry was privatized following independence and is dominated by
domestic producers. There are three main domestic producers:

        Eurasian Resources Group (ERG) is a Luxembourg-based natural resources company. It
         incorporates the assets of former ENRC PLC (Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation),
         which it acquired in November 2013.ENRC delisted from the London Stock Exchange in
         November 2013. It produces ferroalloys , chromium and manganese concentrate, coal,
         iron ore, copper, cobalt and aluminium. It operates in Kazakhstan, Russia, Brazil and
         several African countries (Democratic Republic of Congo;, Mozambique, South Africa and
         Zambia),
        Kazatomprom, a state owned uranium producer which operates several mines, some of
         which in partnerships with foreign investors. It also produces nuclear fuel for power plants
         and rare earth metals.
        KAZ Minerals PLC, name changed from Kazakhmys on 31 October 2014, a privately
         owned large integrated copper producer listed on the London and Hong Kong Stock
         Exchanges, dominates copper production in Kazakhstan. It also produces gold, silver and
         zinc and it owns a copper mine in Kyrgyzstan.

Relatively few foreign companies operate in Kazakhstan. Those that do include:
    Arcelor Mittal, which operates iron ore and coal mines and steel plants since 1995.
    Kazzinc, majority owned by Glencore after a partial privatization in 1997, produces zinc,
       copper, lead and gold.
    The French uranium miner and nuclear power plant producer Areva has a partnership with
       Kazatomprom, and
    Rio Tinto cooperates with Tau-Ken Samruk, a state owned holding company and is
       exploring for copper in northern Kazakhstan.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                                                 19
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


A number of smaller companies explore for gold and exploit a few gold deposits. Almost no new
mines have been set up in the last two decades – most production comes from mines that have
been in operation since the 1990s.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             20
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



3         Nature of the Mining Industry and Implications for Mineral
          Regimes

3.1       Introduction to mining taxation
Designing a mineral taxation regime is not a simple task. Ideally, a government should want the
mining tax regime to:

        Provide for a fair participation by the state in the fruits of the mining enterprise;
        Encourage investment;
        Contribute to employment creation and industrial development;
        Be stable over time;
        Be transparent and provide an even playing field for all players;
        Be easy to understand;
        Be easy to administer; and
        Be internationally competitive.

As a practical matter, though, other government policies often conflict with these ideal objectives,
so that the actual mining tax regime is less than optimal.

Box 1 – Mining project stages

Generally speaking, there are five basic stages in the life of a mining project as follows:




Exploration usually takes between 5 and 10 years; feasibility and financing take 2 to 3 years; and site
development and construction takes 2 to 3 years. After this, production commences and this can take place
over several years or several decades depending on economic viability. Once the project ends, mine closure
takes two or more years.


3.1.1     Uniqueness of the mining sector and implications for the fiscal regime

An internationally competitive mining tax regime should recognise the unique characteristics of the
mining industry that distinguish it from other sectors of the economy. This is why fiscal regimes
often consist of tax provisions that apply exclusively to the mining industry. Mining is:

High risk
Relative to most other industries, the mining industry is characterised by high risk. This risk is
present at all stages of the project’s life cycle, including the exploration, development, and
production stages.

A tax regime can recognise the relatively high risk that is faced by the typical mining enterprise by:



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             21
                          Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


     Permitting the mining enterprise to reap a reward that is commensurate with this risk. For
      example, most investors these days would require a mining project to generate a return on
      investment in the 17% range, depending on “country risk” and “technical risks”; and
     Provide for certainty of tax rules. Some governments that do not have a dependable track
      record of fiscal stability enter into fiscal stability agreements with mining enterprises, or
      legislate fiscal stability within the country’s tax or mining laws.

Capital intensive
The mining industry is capital intensive. Huge amounts must be spent annually on exploration to
discover sufficient ore to replace the ore that is currently consumed. In the mid-1990s, the
Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada engaged an independent mineral consulting
firm to study how much needs to be spent annually on exploration in Canada in order to sustain a
constant level of mineral reserves. The study estimated that approximately $800 million had to be
spent each year on exploration in Canada in order to replace reserves that are consumed in that
year. The cost of preparing an ore body for production also commands enormous capital
investment. Today, a world class base metal mine can typically cost several billion US dollars.

A country’s mining tax regime can recognise the capital-intensive nature of the industry by allowing
the enterprise to generate sufficient after-tax cash flow in the early years of production to service
project debt. The reason for this is that one of the important criteria considered by those who
finance mining investment is “payback”. A lender or other investor will want to minimise its
exposure to project risk by being repaid as quickly as possible. In addition, a regime can minimise
the imposition of customs duties, VAT, and similar up-front costs that are a function of capital
investment. The imposition of a 10 per cent VAT and a 10 per cent customs duty on the
importation of capital equipment can, in effect, add up to 20 per cent to the cost of a project. These
charges could add $200 million to the cost of a $1 billion project, and could render the project
uneconomic. This is why an internationally competitive fiscal regime ensures prompt VAT
restitution2 and minimizes import duties on mining machinery, equipment, and supplies.3

Long lead time to start of production
The first decision to invest in a mining project is made when exploration commences – a long time
before the start of production. For example, exploration on Indonesia’s world class Weda Bay
nickel project started in 1997, and the project has still not begun to produce4. When the investor
makes the decision to begin exploration, the investor is committing itself based on the fiscal regime
in place at the time of that decision. Changes to the fiscal regime part way through project life can
affect project economics. For example, a tax increase can result in low grade ore never being
mined, or can otherwise shorten project life.

As noted in connection with the discussion of risk, governments can offer stable conditions to
investors in order to take into account the very long lead times in mining. Such offers often only
apply to projects once a decision to invest has been taken, however.




2
  Virtually all tax regimes provide for VAT paid by an enterprise on its inputs to be restituted while the enterprise pays
VAT on its output. Thus, VAT is effectively levied only on the enterprise’s value added. VAT is commonly not paid on
goods and services that are exported.
3
  As will be discussed in the following, on the other hand, the application of special conditions with respect to conditions
for import runs the risk of creating uneven conditions of competition between domestic and foreign suppliers to the
industry.
4
    http://www.wedabaynickel.com/en/a-world-class-project/history/

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                            22
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Price-taker faced with cyclical prices and demand
The prices of mineral products are established by the interaction of supply and demand in the
global marketplace. The mining enterprise does not set the price for its product – the enterprise is
a “price taker”. Because the mining enterprise is a price taker, the cost of taxes cannot be passed
onto the mining enterprise’s customer. The enterprise has to bear the burden of these costs,
sometimes even though the enterprise may not currently be profitable.

Moreover, most metal prices show wide swings over the years, and the typical mining enterprise’s
profits will reflect these price cycles. It is common that even the largest mining companies record
losses for a number of consecutive years as a result of soft metal prices.

The mining tax regime can recognise the cyclicality of the industry and the fact that the mining
company cannot influence the prices of its products by providing adequate loss carryover periods
in the profits tax system, and possibly in the country’s mineral royalty system, too. Most countries
provide for loss carryover periods in the range of five to ten years.

One of the most serious flaws of some so-called excess profits taxes (see section 3.2.1.3) is that
such taxes skim off the cream in the good years, without providing for comparable relief in the lean
years. In simple terms, an excess profits tax is intended to impose a higher tax on profits that the
state believes, as a matter of policy, are exceptionally high. Such taxes may be intended to allow
the government to share the revenues from exceptionally valuable deposits. When they are
imposed in reaction to cyclically high metal prices they are borne by all mines and fail to recognise
the cyclical nature of the industry.

Operating in underdeveloped areas
Usually, ore bodies are found in remote locations. Consequently, in some instances the mining
enterprise is obliged to incur substantial infrastructure costs. The enterprise is often expected to
pay for access roads, electric power facilities, port facilities, and social infrastructure such as
medical clinics, school, and recreation facilities.

Also, the enterprise’s payroll costs can be relatively high in remote locations, as a result of the
need to offer incentives to attract workers to the site.

A mining tax regime can recognise these higher costs as follows:

        Provide generous tax depreciation rates for infrastructure costs; and

        Make employee incentives (for example, subsidized housing and travel allowances, and
         hardship bonuses) tax-free for the employee.

Finite life
Unlike a manufacturing plant or a service business, a mining project has a finite life, because its
reserves are finite. This means that the enterprise has a limited number of years over which to
realise a competitive rate of return on its investment.

The feasibility study, on which the project investment decision is made, takes into account the
entire life of the project, and must assume that the tax regime will not change significantly during
the project’s life. A change to the tax rules part way through the life of the project could jeopardise
the viability of the project and result in it being shut down.

Whether a country seeks to build fiscal stability into its mining tax regime through either legislation
or contract, the important consideration is that the country honours its commitment to stability.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             23
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Unless the country has a proven track record of stability, the mining enterprise will view promises
of stability with some suspicion. And, once the country has established a track record of stability, it
should be careful not to damage that record.

Environmental and social impacts
There is a trend in the regulatory climate to charge the mining enterprise with increasingly strict
responsibilities for site restoration and reclamation, and mine closure. Mining projects can have a
disruptive impact on local communities. Mining companies should accept that communities must
benefit from projects that affect them.

The modern mining tax regime recognises these increasing responsibilities by providing tax relief
when funds are set aside or otherwise reserved for reclamation, restoration, and mine closure.
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) costs incurred by the mining company can be significant and
should be deductible.

Sources of financing
So-called “junior” exploration companies are a major source of funding for exploration programmes
and account for the largest share of global exploration spending. These companies raise risk
capital by issuing shares on a stock exchange such as the TSX in Toronto or the AIME in London.
Mining companies that are already in production are also a source of funding for exploration
programmes on properties that they own. It is important to note that a country that strives to attract
maximum mining investment will have to take into account the interests and needs of the junior
exploration companies in its mining legislation since it will otherwise lose access to significant
exploration funds.

Generally speaking, it is not common for a junior exploration company to fund the development
and construction of a mineral property following the completion of a bankable feasibility study.
Normally, a proven economic property owned by a junior exploration company is purchased by an
existing mineral producer that finances the mine development and construction through a
combination of bank financing and existing company cash resources. Table 3 summarizes the
common sources of capital for a mining project.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             24
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Table 3 – Sources of financing
                                                Exploration Activities
                                                  Feasibility Study
                                    Company type                             Funding
                                                                 Raises funds on stock
                           Junior' exploration company
                                                                 exchange or through private
                           or entrepreneur
                                                                 investment
                                                                 Uses its own existing cash
                           Producing company
                                                                 resources
                                                  Mine Construction
                                                   Mine expansion
                                    Company type                             Funding
                                                                 Lends money to project
                           Bank or other lender                  company;
                                                                 Wants fast pay-back
                                                                 Raises funds on stock
                           Junior' exploration company
                                                                 exchange or through private
                           or entrepreneur
                                                                 investment.
                                                                 Uses its own existing cash
                           Producing company
                                                                 resources


3.1.2     Typical tax collections over time

Most mining enterprises typically face a myriad of taxes. Studies show that most of a government’s
direct revenue streams derived from the mining sector come from five main taxes, in this order of
magnitude:

    1.   Profits taxes;
    2.   Royalties;
    3.   Employees’ income taxes
    4.   Customs duties; and
    5.   VAT

Figure 4 illustrates the timing of the collection of these taxes over the life of a typical mining project.
The chart in Figure 4 is based on an actual feasibility study for a typical world class mine. This
particular project is characterized by three years of pre-production development, followed by twelve
years of production. As is customary, this feasibility study holds metal prices and operating
expenses constant over mine life, so that metal price fluctuations, for example, do not cause year-
to-year fluctuations in royalty or profits tax levels. The share accounted for by different types of
taxes may vary widely depending on the mining project and the individual country’s tax regime; the
incidence of the various taxes over time, particularly the order in which they make their
appearance, varies little, however, from one mine to another. In the case of this particular project,
VAT paid to suppliers of goods and services is promptly refunded to the mining enterprise, so that
the project does not bear any net VAT.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             25
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Figure 4 – Timing of tax collections over project life

                    Customs duty            Employee tax          Royalty         Income tax
 60,000


 50,000


 40,000


 30,000


 20,000


 10,000


       0
              1     2     3       4     5      6     7      8      9     10     11     12     13     14     15


As illustrated in the figure, the government receives revenue in the form of customs duty and
employee tax during pre-production development in the first few years. Once production starts, tax
revenue largely consists of royalties and employee tax for several years until the project starts to
make a profit. When the project starts to make a profit, payments in the form of royalties and
employee tax remain the same but these contributions make up a relatively smaller proportion of
total government revenue as income tax makes up the largest proportion of government revenue.
This remains the case for most of the project’s life, assuming that the mine remains profitable.


Profits tax
It is not unusual for a project to have no liability for profits tax during the early years of production,
because it is becoming increasingly common for countries to allow accelerated amortization and
depreciation of capital costs as investment incentives, the reason being that while tax holidays
result in the loss of tax revenue, accelerated capital allowances only changes the distribution of tax
revenue over time. Alternatively, some countries historically offered tax holidays as a form of
investment incentive, but there is a trend away from tax holidays towards the use of accelerated
capital allowances as investment incentive. Where profitability is affected by significant variables,
such as commodity price, the amount of profits tax collected tends to fluctuate from year-to-year
accordingly.

Section 3.1.3.1 explains how accelerated amortization and depreciation of capital costs works.

Royalties
Normally, mineral royalties will start to be paid as soon as the project begins production. Some
countries offer exemptions from royalty for specified periods of production (for example, the first
three years of production) as an investment incentive, but such royalty exemptions are rare. Where
the country’s mineral royalty is based on some measure of the volume of produ ction, royalty
collections tend to be relatively constant and predictable. However, where the royalty is based in
whole or in part on significant variables, such as commodity price, then annual royalty collections
can be highly variable and unpredictable. However, since they are never zero as long as the mine

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                  26
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


is producing, unlike profits based taxes, royalties are an attractive form of tax revenue to the
government. Another reason why most governments use them is that they are relatively easy to
apply and to monitor.

Employee tax
Figure 4 also shows employee income tax as a source of government revenue streams. Generally
speaking, these taxes are a function of the level of salaries and wages paid by the mining
enterprise, which tend to be high during the mine development and construction phase and then
fairly constant during the production phase of mine-life. These taxes can be an important part of
the government revenue generated by a mining enterprise, and since they vary little they constitute
a reliable source of earnings. In countries where only a small percentage of the population pays
income tax, employee income tax collections from the mining sector are particularly important.
Governments often overlook them in their fiscal planning, however.

Customs duties
Where the importation of mining machinery and equipment is subject to customs duty, most of
these duties are collected during the development and construction phase of mine-life prior to the
start of mineral production.

VAT
The chart in Figure 4 does not show VAT for this reason: If a typical VAT system is working
properly, the mining enterprise should never be out-of-pocket with respect to VAT payments for
longer than a matter of months, as a result of prompt government payments of VAT refunds.
However, in the case of some countries, these VAT refunds are not paid promptly, and VAT can
unintentionally become regarded as a source of tax revenue from the mining sector and a cash
flow cost to the mining enterprise.


3.2       Balancing the needs of government and investors

3.2.1     Sharing a mining project’s revenue stream

An important objective of the fiscal regime should be to balance the government’s needs and
investors’ needs.

The government’s needs include:

        Attract investment to the mining sector;
        Optimize government revenues from mining activities; and
        Optimize the mining sector’s contribution to economic growth and diversification.

The investor’s essential need is to realize an acceptable return on investment. The project’s
internal rate of return (IRR) is typically used by industry to measure the investor’s return on
investment. Both domestic and foreign investors use IRR to evaluate project economics. For a
country with average ‘country risk’, an investor in a mining project may require a minimum IRR in
the 17 per cent range. In balancing government’s needs and investor’s needs, this IRR benchmark
needs to be considered.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             27
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


In general terms, there are four principal beneficiaries of the revenues generated directly5 by a
mining project:

    1. Suppliers (the suppliers of goods and services to the mining enterprise – for example,
       machinery and equipment manufacturers and fuel suppliers);
    2. Employees of the mining enterprise;
    3. Investors in the project (for example, lenders and shareholders); and
    4. Government.

The chart in Figure 5 depicts each of these beneficiaries’ proportionate shares of the gross amount
of revenues generated by a typical mining project6 over the project’s life. The “pie chart” represents
the “size of the pie” to be shared by the project’s stakeholders, where the actual size of the pie is
determined by two factors – the number of units of minerals produced, and the sales price of each
unit. As seen in the figure, the largest proportion of revenue (at just over half of the total) goes to
suppliers. Government and investors receive roughly equal proportions (around 17 – 18 per cent)
and finally employees receive around 10 per cent of the total.

Parties who are interested in such matters are often surprised to observe that the government’s
share of a project’s revenue streams (“of the pie”) is typically not higher than it is. For example, in
Figure 5 the government’s share of the total “pie” is only 17 per cent. There are good reasons why
this is the case, and it is important to understand these reasons.

Figure 5 – Share of project revenues

                                  Suppliers       Employees        Government          Investors


                                               18%




                                     17%
                                                                                      55%




                                              10%



First of all, the “size of the pie” that can be generated by a mining project is finite although not
invariable. It is determined simply by the number of units (for example, ounces of gold) that are in
the ground, and the price at which these units can be sold. No stakeholder has any control over
either of these two factors: the size and grade of the mineral reserve is based solely on ‘mother
nature’, and metal prices are determined in a global market place by the interaction of supply and
demand. However, for practical purposes and over time, the size of the pie is influenced by factors
such as technological change and by legislation. For instance, an increase in royalties will, other


5
  For the purposes of this section, “indirect” beneficiaries of a mining project – such as employees and owners of a
supplier to the mining enterprise – are not considered. It is important to acknowledge, though, that a mining project is
generally thought to generate an “economic multiplier” effect which can vary from 2:1, that is, for each dollar of mining
output one dollar’s worth of production is generated elsewhere in th e economy, to 5:1 or even higher.
6
  Based on 2012 World Gold Council data .

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             28
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


things equal, reduce the size of the pie since it will make all or parts of a deposit uneconomic to
mine.

Second, the government’s ‘share of the pie’ is a function of the country’s tax laws. In today’s global
market place, most governments recognize that the country’s tax regime must be internat ionally
competitive. A country’s fiscal regime needs to be comparable to the regimes of other countries
that are competing for investment.

3.2.2     Interpreting government revenue streams

Experience in both developed and developing countries is that government revenue streams from
the mining sector often fall short of expectations. In some instances, these short-falls are real, and
sometimes they are a result of incorrect perceptions. The reasons for government revenue streams
not meeting expectations may be summarized as follows.

The nature of the mining sector is not well understood
The unique characteristics of the mining sector are not always well understood by government
policy makers, government administration, civil society, local communities, NGO’s, the media, and
some members of the business community. Consequently, misconceptions exist as to the capacity
of the mining sector to contribute to enhancing government revenue streams.

In designing a fiscal regime for application to the mining sector, government faces some important
constraints that are often misunderstood or unknown by parties who have high expectations about
government revenue collections. For example, the importance of having a fiscal regime that is
internationally competitive imposes relatively strict limitations on the size of the government’s
‘share of the pie’ generated by a successful mining project.

Misunderstandings about the bases for determining tax liabilities
It can be difficult to understand relevant tax laws and supporting regulations, financial statements
and underlying accounting principles, and standard mining sector commercial contracts that serve
as the bases for determining tax liabilities. For example, there are often misconceptions about the
timing of collecting the main taxes imposed on a mining project over project life. It is not unusual to
find that a typical world-class mining enterprise legitimately pays no profits tax until the sixth or
seventh year after the start of mine development. Generally, this is due to the capital intensive
nature of the sector and to particular tax deductions that are prescribed for calculating the profits
tax liability.

The legal nuances of applicable tax laws, the subtleties of financial statement reporting and
accounting practices, and the complexities of commercial contractual terms are generally not well
understood, except by highly experienced professionals. These misunderstandings can contribute
to a perceived gap between actual revenue collections and expectations. For example, one would
expect that the government should collect $2.5 million in profits tax from a mining enterprise that
reports $10 million in pre-tax profit and is subject to a 25% profits tax. However, the reality is often
significantly different. Similarly, the trade-offs between different kinds of taxes are not always
understood. For instance, royalties are normally deductible for the purpose of calculating profits
tax. For this reason, a rise in the rate of royalty will automatically lead to a decline in the tax on
profits.

Difficulties in administration
Common reasons for inefficient administration include: the tax laws are inadequately drafted and
are therefore difficult to interpret and to administer; there are not enough tax officials and/or they


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             29
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


receive below standard training; systems and procedures are not appropriately designed and/or
implemented; and, leadership at the political level and/or at the top level of government is not
effective in ensuring cooperation among different government departments that have different
responsibilities in administering revenue streams.

Tax avoidance and tax evasion
Some mining companies are less honest than others and while all of them can be expected to
attempt to reduce their exposure to tax through legal means, some of them may resort to methods
that are not legal. Often, public opinion is very suspicious of mining companies and they are
accused of many types of illegal behaviour, including some that appear fairly exotic and unlikely to
occur in listed companies with auditors.

Among the more common and more realistic allegations is transfer mispricing, which is claimed to
occur by mining exports being under-priced or imports by mining companies being over-priced.
The first type of transfer mispricing is usually simple to identify even for a tax administration with
very limited resources. Since most minerals have internationally recognized price quotations, either
as a result of their being traded at commodity exchanges or because benchmark prices are
published by the trade press, deviations from normal pricing practices are easily caught. It is more
difficult to establish mispricing of inputs, since often no recognized quotations exist and since
quality and sales conditions may vary significantly. Nevertheless, diligent tax auditors will usually
catch the more obvious abuses by scrutinizing transactions with related companies. A number of
studies have been carried out in order to attempt to establish the extent of transfer mispricing
through mirror trade statistics.7 Some of them raise serious doubts with respect to methodology
and very seldom do they allow the drawing of conclusions in any specific case. However, they may
serve to point tax auditors in promising directions.

Payments to related companies for management services, intellectual property rights (less
common in mining) or interest on loans can prove challenging for tax auditors. Many jurisdictions
apply thin capitalization rules, that is, they limit the amount of finance provided in the form of loans
in order to put a ceiling on transfers to related companies in the form of interest payments.

In principle, a government’s best defense against tax evasion by mining companies, in addition to
maintaining a high level of competence in tax audits, is to keep the legislation simple and clear.
Exceptions, leaving decisions to the discretion of governments, and overly detailed rules, all
constitute invitations to tax evasion, fraud and corruption.

Misuse of government funds
Finally, in some developing and transition economies, ‘leakage’ in revenue flows happens as a
result of corruption of government officials or poor understanding as to the best utilization of
government funds. Detailed consideration of this particular reason for the gap between
expectations and reality is beyond the scope of this review, except to mention the importance of
participation in powerful international programs such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and the Kimberly Process.


3.3       Non-tax considerations
While the revenue generated by the sector is an important part of the contribution made by the
sector, this is not the only way in which benefits are generated. Mining can contribute to economic


7
  Two of the best studies from the point of view of methodology are Boyce and Ndikuma, 2012, and Global Financial
Integrity, 2013.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                     30
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


growth and diversification through employment, backward and forward linkages and skills
development.

3.3.1     Employment

As seen from Figure 6, mining projects impact mainly on large macro-economic variables such as
foreign exchange inflows or tax revenues. Mining’s share of overall national employment is usually
counted in the low single digits. However, this does not mean that mining is without importance for
employment. It is true that mining in itself, except for artisanal small scale mining, is capital-
intensive and needs few employees in relation to the capital invested. However, employment
varies considerably from one mine to another, even when mines producing the same mineral are
compared. Copper production, for instance, varies from around 7 tonnes per employee in some
older underground mines in Zambia to close to 100 tonnes in modern Chilean mines (Chamber of
Mines of Zambia and ICMM, 2014).

Figure 6 – The mining sector’s contribution to macro-economic indicators




Moreover, the belief that mining has few linkages to the rest of the economy and can be thought of
as an ‘enclave’ has been challenged in recent years, as the linkages between mining and other
economic activities have become better understood and as it has been increasingly realized that
employment effects can be influenced by company actions and government policy. One of the first
attempts to document the broader employment effects across a wider geographical range was the
Resource Endowment Initiative of the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), which
studied such effects in four case study countries (Chile, Ghana, Peru and Tanzania), including the
effects of one large mine in each country. The report synthesising results of the case studies notes
‘One common characteristic of all four mines is that they employ large numbers of people. Despite
the highly mechanized nature of modern industrial mining, the absolute number of people
employed (either directly or indirectly) are substantial’ (ICMM, 2006, p. 34).




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             31
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


When analyzing the employment effect of a large mine, three types of employment are usually
distinguished: direct, indirect and induced employment.8

Direct employment refers to those that are employed by the company that owns and operates the
mine. Contractors’ staff are usually included if their regular work place is at the mine. As already
noted, direct employment relative to production can vary considerably between mines. An aspect
that often attracts the interest of governments is the share of expatriate employees. In most cases,
expatriate employees are more expensive than local ones, since they have to be compensated for
living away from their home countries, often from families. There are some exceptions, mainly
concerning Chinese companies that have employed Chinese workers because of cultural affinity or
other reasons. In the vast majority of cases, however, mining companies strive to keep the number
of expatriates low, with the main constraint on hiring nationals of the host country being skills
availability.9

Indirect employment concerns those working with other companies that supply goods and
services to the mine in question or that uses its outputs. These employees are part of the supply
chain. Indirect employment varies depending on company policies regarding outsourcing (a mining
company employee repairing a truck is counted as direct employment, while a mechanic employed
by another company who repairs the truck off the mine site is part of indirect employment), but also
on the industrial infrastructure in the area surrounding the mine, the competitiveness of local
suppliers and the regulatory framework (see below concerning local content). Usually, indirect
employment in countries with relatively undiversified economies, such as most developing
countries, is significantly less important than direct employment. It deserves to be noted that the
employees of contractors providing services can be very numerous, but they are usually included
in direct employment if their work is carried out on the mine site.

Induced employment includes those who are employed as a result of spending of wages by
employees of the operation in question concerned and, usually, also by employees of suppliers
and customers. In low income countries, where the difference between mine workers’ wages and
the average wage is often very large, induced employment effects can be very large, often a high
multiple of direct employment.


3.3.2     Local content

Local content is the term usually employed to describe the extent to which goods and services
used in mining are sourced in the host country. As already noted, local procurement depends on a
number of factors mainly having to do with the competitiveness of local suppliers and company
practices concerning outsourcing, which can vary considerably. Since much of mining equipment is
highly specialized and only produced by a handful of large international companies, not even
mining companies in highly industrialized countries10 can aspire to source all or even most of their




8
  There exists no universally recognized definition of the terms, but definitions differ only very slightly between users.
Here, the classification is based on the one used in the ICMM Toolkit (ICMM, 2012), which has been utilized in a number
of case studies.
9
  In the ICMM case studies mentioned earlier, the proportion of expatriates varied from 1-2 % in Chile and Zambia to 17
% in Tanzania (Chamber of Mines of Zambia and ICMM, 2014).
10
   Canada, for example, is a world leader in mineral production, but most of the necessary heavy machinery and
equipment is imported from Germany, Sweden, Japan, and the USA.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                         32
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


equipment locally, while items such as construction material of various kinds can almost always be
economically sourced locally.11

Services are another matter. Since it is cheaper to move goods than people, the majority of
services are usually procured locally, even in countries with relatively low skill levels. 12 The
boundary line between goods and services may be difficult to draw, pointing also to one of the
main ways by which local suppliers can achieve market penetration: a local agent for imported
equipment may diversify his offering by starting to carry out maintenance, proceeding to the
manufacturing of simple spare parts and eventually producing larger pieces of equipment.13

3.3.3     Further processing

Just as backward linkages to suppliers may magnify the mining sector’s impact on the national and
local economy by contributing to increased employment and economic diversification, forward
linkages in the form of further processing may also bring positive benefits to the economy. It should
be noted, however, that the importance in terms of employment and industrialization varies
considerably depending on the mineral and the stage of processing. For example, refining doré (an
alloy containing mainly gold and some silver that is commonly obtained as an output of gold mines)
to pure 24 carat gold has only a small impact on the value and employs little labour, while
producing gold jewellery from the pure gold may add considerable value and provide employment
for a substantial number of people. It is difficult to generalize, but the economic benefits of further
processing are often overestimated – such activities are not labour intensive, and typically low
profit margins generate relatively low tax revenues for government. Decisions about downstream
integration should of course be taken on the basis of the competitiveness of the products
constituting the output. Two factors are important in this respect:

        the presence of all necessary inputs – for instance, it is usually uneconomic to pursue
         aluminium smelting if cheap electric power is not locally available, regardless of the amount
         of bauxite that may be locally produced, but the bauxite may be profitably processed in
         another country with cheap electric power (see Box 2);

        closeness to the market – many downstream products such as semi-fabricates of steel and
         nonferrous metals are produced in a wide range of qualities and are used by a variety of
         industries; it is necessary to be able to supply the needed quality to the customer at short
         notice, which means that geographic closeness to the market gives a competitive edge. It is
         not a coincidence that semi-manufacturing of nonferrous products has migrated from
         Europe and North America to East Asia at the same rate as production of manufactured
         products, as illustrated by statistics over metals use.

Box 2 – The importance of cheap energy

Canada’s aluminium industry, which had its beginnings in the 1920s, started in the Province of
Quebec where there was an abundance of inexpensive hydro power. Canada has no bauxite: all
bauxite was imported from Africa and the Caribbean. The energy savings more than compensated
for the cost of shipping bauxite long distances. In countries where energy is less easily accessible
and/or more expensive, energy use in further processing, which is usually important, may push up

11
   It is important to distinguish between goods that are bought from local suppliers but which have been imported, with
the local company only acting as an agent, and goods that have been manufactured locally. Clearly, it is much easier to
achieve impressive shares of local content in the former case.
12
   In an OPM case study on Zambia (Chamber of Mines of Zambia and ICMM, 2014), it was estimated that while only 5
per cent of goods bought by the mining industry were produced in the country, 80 per cent of services were provided by
Zambian nationals.
13
   A study on local procurement in Zimbabwe (OPM ,2014) identified examples of this type of progress.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                       33
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


the price or reduce availability of energy for other sectors.




3.3.4     Skills building

One of the more significant long term benefits of a modern and internationally competitive mining
industry is that it raises general skill levels, among both those directly employed in the mines and
those working in sectors that are linked to mining. This improvement in skills facilitates further
industrial development and may be a crucial factor for growth. Some of the more successful
industrial countries owe at least part of their competiveness to the application of skills developed in
natural resource based industries to other sectors. A World Bank report notes:

         ‘The key elements were organizational structures, knowledge networks and aggressive
         human capital policies that, though developed to pursue resource processing, were
         transferable to high-tech industries.’ (World Bank, 2002)

Clearly, the situation and developments with respect to employment, local content and further
processing all influence the development of skills. This is therefore one of the areas that tend to
absorb government’s attention and it is often a focus for policies with regards to mining.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             34
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



4         Best Practices in Mineral Regimes
Experience shows that an internationally competitive fiscal regime will have the following
characteristics:

They are stable over time. The investor’s decision to proceed with a project is largely based on a
bankable feasibility study. The feasibility study is based on important assumptions regarding metal
prices, production levels and ore grade, operating costs, taxes, and other important variables.
Once the project is up and running, the continued viability of the project is a function of these
variables. If changes to tax rules over project life can be minimised - that is, if the tax regime is
stable – then there is one less variable or risk to threaten the enterprise. One risk factor is either
reduced or eliminated.

They are transparent and create a ‘level playing field’. A tax regime that is not transparent and
that does not provide a level playing field (i.e. the same basic tax rules for each taxpayer) can be
counterproductive: political detractors, NGOs, local communities, and competing investors, for
example, become suspicious of “special deals” where the process is not transparent, and can
become antagonistic to the mining enterprise and/or the government. Such antagonism can lead to
conflict that consumes both time and money, and that can give the host nation a tarnished
reputation. Most importantly, discretionary decisions on the part of government normally lead to
suboptimal solutions and real losses to the economy, unless the decision makers benefit from
perfect knowledge and foresight.

They are easy to understand and administer. The tax regime should be easy for taxpayers to
understand and for the government to administer. From the taxpayer’s perspe ctive, vagueness or
ambiguities in the law will add to the risk of the investment. From the government’s perspective,
ease of administration is important to avoiding long and costly disputes, to making staff training
simpler and less costly, and to building and maintaining good relations with taxpayers.
Unnecessarily complicated tax regulations may also raise suspicions among the general public that
something is being hidden.

They allow for fair participation by government. The ‘Government Share’ in Table 7 shows the
amount of taxes collected by the government as a percent of pre-tax cash flow generated by the
project. When formulating tax policy, a government needs to be careful not to stray far from
international norms with respect to ‘Government Share’.

They generate a fair return on investment for investors. In determining whether to bring a
mineral deposit into production, a mining enterprise will attach considerable importance to the
project’s IRR. The IRR indicates the rate of return generated by the project for the investors, and
thereby enables the investor to make choices among alternative investment options.


4.1       Institutional, legislative and administrative considerations

4.1.1     Mining taxation – mining law versus tax codes

Most countries tend to include mining tax rules in the mining law. If the mining sector is very small
or economically insignificant, such taxes will consist mainly of administrative fees. However, where
the mining sector is economically important, governments usually see a need for specific mining
taxes such as royalties and excess profit taxes. Since such taxes only apply to the mining sector,
they are usually included in the mining law rather than in the general tax law. Rules concerning
corporate income tax, VAT and other taxes that apply to all economic activities and not only to
mining, are almost always included in the general tax legislation.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             35
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Governments will normally want to ensure that tax matters that concern the mining industry are
implemented and enforced in a consistent manner and with due regard to both the specificities of
the industry and the need to avoid contradictions between different pieces of legislation. This is
easier guaranteed if all the relevant rules are in the same piece of legislation. On the other hand,
governments also want to maintain consistency in the treatment of different types of taxable
activities and to guard against deviations from overriding principles underlying taxation. This
argues in favour of keeping mining taxation in the tax code.

Possibly, the most practical way of solving the dilemma is to apply two rules:

        1. Any tax rule that only concerns mining and no other industries should be kept in the
           mining law so as to ensure consistency with other pieces of mining legislation (the tax
           treatment of mine reclamation and mine closure costs, for example), while tax rules that
           also concern other economic activities belong in the tax code in order to maintain
           consistent tax treatment across sectors.

        2. Special rules for taxation of the mining industry should be kept to a minimum so as not
           to complicate the tax situation of the industry and should only be introduced when it is
           clear that the provisions of the general tax code constitute an obstacle to the
           development of the industry or have adverse effects on tax revenue from mining.

4.1.2     Conditions - mining law versus agreements with investors

While the legislation in some countries provides for separately concluded agreements with
investors, most have preferred to establish general conditions in the mining law. It is sometimes
argued that specially negotiated agreements are more flexible and allow governments to adapt
conditions to specific circumstances. This is no doubt true and may be very important in the case
of a country with very few large mining projects that will have a substantial impact on the economy
of the country.14 In most cases, however, the transparency and predictability of general conditions
defined in the mining law that allow investors to evaluate future taxation effects with a high degree
of confidence are judged to be more effective in attracting investors. While governments may not
always get the best possible deal in every single case by relying on the mining law, it deserves to
be noted that most governments tend to overestimate their negotiating skills and the best
insurance against costly mistakes in negotiations is to not negotiate in the first place. Moreover, a
system using agreements raises the risk of corruption and undue influence over conditions.

Another reason to avoid negotiated agreements is that a system with such agreements runs the
risk of politicizing agreements, with every new government trying to undo the perceived mistakes of
its predecessor by reopening negotiations. Such a development will rapidly lead to loss of investor
confidence. A possible way out of this dilemma was provided by the Contracts of Work (CoWs) that
were earlier used in Indonesia. Each CoW provided for stable conditions over the life of the mine
and was approved by an Act of Parliament, thus making it relatively complicated to change them.
The CoWs were standardized, although every few years the standard conditions were amended in
a new “generation” of CoWs (UNCTAD, 1994). After the 1990s, however, the system was gradually
abandoned.

Notwithstanding the many arguments against them, it can be argued that agreements have a
useful role to play in an environment that is characterized by increasing needs of dialogue and
consultation between companies, government at different levels, local communities and civil

14
  Even in countries that normally apply general conditions in the mining code, a very large project may necessitate a
special agreement. A recent example is the agreement on the Simandou iron ore project between Rio Tinto and the
Government of Guinea (Most investments in Guinea are subject to special agreements with the state).

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                         36
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


society. It is true that agreements may be needed to define how a mining company will contribute
to the local economy, invest in social infrastructure and manage environmental impacts. Except
with respect to environmental management, however, where clear guidelines are needed in view of
the potential costs of environmental mitigation, there is usually no need for legislation that defines
which agreements should be concluded, although it may be useful for the purpose of clarity to have
the law state that companies are expected to conclude agreements, for instance with local
communities on local business development.

4.1.3      Mining taxation and petroleum taxation

The question often arises as to whether the mining and petroleum industries should be subject to
the same tax policy, rules, and administration. In most countries, these two industries are subject
to different tax policy, rules and administration. Although the mining and petroleum industries have
several unique characteristics in common – for example, operators in both industries are price-
takers and face highly cyclical prices and profits, and manage projects with finite lives (reserves) –
nevertheless, there are significant differences between the economics, risk characteristics, and
structures of each of these two industries.

The main difference between the two industries is in the structure of production costs. Table 4
shows typical costs in average operations producing oil, gold and copper. A striking difference is
that capital costs as a share of total costs are significantly higher in the typical oil operation than in
gold and copper mines. Accordingly, once capital costs have been recovered, the average oil well
has a higher operating profit than the typical gold or copper mine. The other difference, which is
not apparent from the table, is that production costs vary much more in oil production than in metal
mining. The cost of oil at the wellhead can vary from USD 5-10 per barrel in the Middle East to
about USD 80-100 in marginal Canadian tar sand operations. In metal mining, the range of costs is
much narrower, with iron ore mines the only type of mines even approaching the variations found
among oil wells – and the difference between iron ore mines is largely offset by differences in
transport costs so that the cost of ore delivered to the consumer varies by at most a factor of two.
This means that resource rents are much more important in the oil industry than in metal mining.15

Taxation in the oil industry has to accommodate these very large variations in cost and the
consequent importance of resource rents. A ‘one size fits all’ approach similar to that used for
metal mining taxation in most jurisdictions would mean that marginal oil wells would not be
developed or that the government would lose potential revenue from taxing rents – or, in a worst
case, both. The solution has been bidding procedures and the production sharing system, which
resembles a commercial arrangement rather than conventional taxation. The bidding procedures
allow the government to capture part of the rent up front while no operator is burdened with an
inequitable down payment. Under the production sharing system, the share of the host country
government increases dramatically once the investment has been recovered, allowing the
government to capture rents while safeguarding the operation’s commercial viability. Part of the
reason for this arrangement is that oil taxation has its origins in the deals that were made between
operators and landowners in the United States, where sub surface rights to mineral are held by the
landowner. These deals were made between more or less equal parties and their structure is the
result of bargaining processes that proved commercially viable. This is a structure well adapted to
the realities of today’s oil industry, where commonly several parties are involved on both sides:
members of a consortium on the operator side and governments and national oil corporations on
the owner’s side.

15
   The situation with respect to natural gas is more similar to that of iron ore than oil insofar as infrastructure investment
and transport costs usually account for a very large share of overall project costs. Producers in gas fields that are distant
from consumers have to invest in expensive liquefaction installations in order to produce LNG which can be transported,
with the cost of these installations eating into what would otherwise be resource rents. ,

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             37
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


 As indicated in Section 3.1.1, the mining industry is characterized by high risk at all stages of the
mine’s life cycle. With respect to exploration, the consensus is that only one out of every thousand
exploration programs results in a commercial discovery. Further, it can typically take five to ten
years of exploration in order to confirm the feasibility of mining a mineral deposit, or to decide to
abandon the project. In the case of development, the true nature of a mineral resource often
cannot be determined definitively until considerable expenditures have been incurred in building a
pilot plant, sinking a mine shaft, or preparing an opencast mine for production. Mineral deposits are
generally not homogenous, and often contain unforeseen contaminants or cause unexpected
metallurgical (recovery) problems. These risks are present in the petroleum industry, too, but to a
notably lesser degree. Therefore, bidding procedures work less well for solid minerals than for oil,
unless the deposits are very well known, as in the case of a sale of an operating mine. Production
sharing arrangements are also difficult to apply in the mining industry, mainly because it is less
clear when capital investment has been recovered (see the preceding discussion of resource rent
taxes).

For these reasons, tax policy formulation and tax administration of the petroleum and mining
industries are generally the responsibilities of different, specialized government departments.
There are other reasons: operating technology and terminology are different between the two
industries; private sector financings and structured business deals are different; the supply chain
from upstream to downstream to market is different. In essence, a specialist’s knowledge is
required to efficiently and effectively make policy and to administer tax audit, collection, and
enforcement.

Table 4 – Profitability of selected commodities for average cost operation
                                                                        Oil               Gold               Copper
                                                                     (per bbl)16        (per oz)17          (per lb)18

A    Selling price per unit ($)                                          $105             $1,393             $3.57


B    Cash operating cost per unit ($)                                     $11              $761              $2.34


C    Cash operating profit per unit ($)                                   $94              $632              $1.23


D    Capital cost per unit ($)                                            $16              $214              $0.54


E    Net profit per unit ($)                                              $78              $418              $0.69


F    Operating profit per unit (C/A) (%)                                 90%                45%               34%


G    Net profit per unit (E/A) (%)                                       74%                30%               19%




16
   Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration
17
   Source: Major multinational gold producer with mines in North America, South America, and Australasia.
18
   Source: Major multinational copper producer with mines in North America, South America, and Africa.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                          38
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


4.1.4     Effective tax administration

One of the most common reasons why revenue streams fall short of government expectations
relates to inefficient or ineffective tax administration. Common reasons for inefficient or ineffective
administration include: the tax laws and supporting regulations are poorly drafted and are therefore
difficult to interpret and to administer; tax officials receive inadequate training; and leadership at the
political level and/or at the top of the government bureaucracy is not effective in ensuring
cooperation among different departments in the administration.

The importance of sound administrative practices cannot be overemphasized. Governments
should:

    1. Make tax laws and regulations easy to understand and to administer;
    2. Ensure that different government departments with different responsibilities understand
       their responsibilities and the division of duties, and that they cooperate with each other.
       Table 5 outlines a typical division of responsibilities and duties between a country’s mines
       ministry and finance ministry;
    3. Implement appropriate revenue stream recording and reporting systems;
    4. Ensure that administrative officials receive appropriate training; and
    5. Implement and apply effective audit mechanisms.

The basics of an effective tax and royalty audit function include:

    1. Tax and royalty laws and regulations should be comprehensive and clearly translated in
       order to avoid disputes;
    2. The audit process should be fair and consultative in order to gain the taxpayer’s trust and
       encourage taxpayer compliance;
    3. The appeals or arbitration process should be fair and timely;
    4. Tax and royalty refunds should be prompt;
    5. The government auditors should draw on various disciplines, including geological/mining
       specialists, accounting/finance specialists, and legal experts; and
    6. Government officials should understand the nature of the mining industry and the tax and
       royalty audit and collection process.

Table 5 – Common allocation of government responsibilities

                                       Ministry of Mines                                  Ministry of Finance

                            1. Primary responsibility for tax                  1. Primary responsibility for tax policy
                               policy related to state ownership                  related to taxes applicable to all
                               of natural resources – viz.,                       taxpayers – viz., corporate profit
                               mineral royalties, land rent (dead                 tax,     VAT,    customs       duties,
                               rent), bonus payments, permitting                  employee income tax, withholding
                               fees, etc.                                         tax, etc.
Tax Policy                  2. Provide input to Ministry of                    2. Provide input to Ministry of Mines in
                               Finance in developing policy for                   developing tax policy related to
                               other taxes – viz., corporate profit               state     ownership     of    natural
                               tax,    VAT,    customs      duties,               resources – viz., mineral royalties,
                               employee income tax, withholding                   land rent (dead rent), bonus
                               tax, etc.                                          payments, permitting fees, etc.
                            1. Primary       responsibility     for            1. Primary       responsibility       for
                               administration (tax collection,                    administration (tax collection, audit,
Tax Administration             audit, advance rulings, and                        advance rulings, and enforcement)
                               enforcement) related to mineral                    related to taxes applicable to all
                               royalties, land rent (dead rent),                  taxpayers – viz., corporate profit

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                            39
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


                                bonus payments, permitting fees,                   tax,     VAT,   customs     duties,
                                etc.                                               employee income tax, withholding
                             2. Provide input to Ministry of                       tax, etc.
                                Finance for administration of other             2. Provide input to Ministry of Mines
                                taxes – viz., corporate profit tax,                for administration of mineral
                                VAT, customs duties, employee                      royalties, land rent (dead rent),
                                income tax, etc.                                   bonus payments, permitting fees,
                                                                                   etc.



4.2        Fiscal considerations

4.2.1      Fiscal stability

Possibly the most important fiscal consideration is that of stability in the fiscal framework. Mining is
a capital intensive business requiring huge up-front investment, and is a high risk business at all
phases of project life. Fiscal stability reduces country risk and project risk, and therefore improves
project economics for financing where the host country does not have a track record of fiscal
stability.

Many countries provide fiscal stability clauses in the tax law, in mineral development agreements,
or in separate legislation. Fiscal stability laws can support the government’s objective of attracting
investment where the country does not have a track record of fiscal stability.

Fiscal stability provisions can deliver fiscal stability to different degrees. For example, a fiscal
stability regime could:

        Freeze tax rates only;
        Freeze both tax rates and the basis for taxation;
        Protect the project from the introduction of new taxes; and/or
        Accommodate beneficial changes to existing laws.

Other considerations to be taken into account in designing a regime for fiscal stability include:

        Tax coverage
        Mechanism: in law or agreement?
        Optional or mandatory?
        Standardization across the industry
        Stand-alone or part of MDA?
        Transparency.

In principle, a tax regime does not need explicit fiscal stability clauses to provide fiscal stability. If
there is a tradition of not changing the rules under which existing ventures operate19, this may be
sufficient since it means that an existing mine will continue applying the regulations that were in
force when it obtained its license. Explicit stability clauses also become less important where there
is a “consultative” process for introducing new tax rules – for example, where all stakeholders have
the opportunity to provide input before proposed legislation becomes law. It should also be noted
that the objective of fiscal stability may be satisfied to some extent by provisions in bilateral
investment treaties. In particular, changes to fiscal regulations that in practice only concern foreign
investors may be challenged under such treaties.

19
  For example, where rule changes are subject to so-called ‘grandfathering’ rules, or are phased in over a period of
years in order to allow existing operators to adapt ot the new rules. ‘Grandfathering’ refers to the situation whereby the
new rule does not apply to existing operators.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                              40
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Where a fiscal regime includes fiscal stability provisions, the government needs to be careful to
honour those provisions, otherwise the purpose of the fiscal stability provisions is nullified. See Box
3.

Box 3 – Honouring fiscal stability provisions

Indonesia’s Contract of Work (CoW) regime successfully delivered fiscal stability from 1967
through 1997. The country attracted massive amounts of foreign investment, and the mining
industry blossomed into a world leader. In 1998, the Indonesian government started to renege on
the fiscal stability provisions, at first through spurious tax positions and assessments, and later
through direct heavy handed threats including mine closure. Since then, there has been relatively
little new foreign investment in Indonesia’s mining industry, and the industry is stagnating.


4.2.2     Fair returns for government and for investors

A well-designed mineral fiscal regime allows for a fair return for government while also allowing
investors to generate a fair return on their investment. Both the IRR and the government share are
therefore important considerations when designing a mining fiscal regime. As shown in Figure 5,
revenues generated by a mining project are, in essence, shared by:

    1.   Suppliers of goods and services to the project;
    2.   Employees of the mining enterprise;
    3.   Investors in the project; and
    4.   Government

It is the authors’ observation that, over recent years, a ‘rule of thumb’ has evolved in the f ield of
fiscal policy that the ‘government share’ tends to be in the range of 50 per cent of pre-tax cash
flow generated by the project – i.e. government and investors tend to share pre-tax cash flow
roughly on a 50:50 basis.

While this 50 per cent rate for Government Share might be an idealistic goal, the reality is that the
Government Share is often less than 50 per cent (see Table 7). The reasons why Government
Share is often less than 50 per cent vary from country to country – for example: a country with a
diversified economy such as Brazil does not rely heavily on revenue streams from the mining
sector; a country with a balanced budget such as Canada does not aggressively seek revenues
from the mining sector; and, a newly emerging country such as Laos PDR keeps taxes low in order
to attract new investment.

Table 6 illustrates a typical calculation of Government Share. This calculation of Government
Share is not the same as the term ‘effective tax rate’, which is an accounting term used in
corporate financial statements. The term ‘effective tax rate’ is not an appropriate measure of
Government Share for purposes of assessing the international competitiveness of a fiscal regime.
Effective Tax Rate is an accounting measure using generally accepted accounting principles
expressing taxes in corporate financial statements as a percent of pre-tax profits shown in the
corporate financial statements. Effective Tax Rate does not report the government’s share of pre-
tax cash flow. However, Government Share is the government’s share of pre -tax cash flow, as
indicated in Table 6.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             41
                             Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Table 6 – Comparison of ‘Government Share’ and ‘Effective Tax Rate’
                                                                                   “Government Share” of
                                                          Project Cash Flow ($)                                  “Effective Tax Rate” ($)
                                                                                    Project Cash Flow ($)
     A   Sales                                                   1000                                                     1000
     B   Operating costs and capital costs                       -650                                                     -650
     C   Operating profit (A-B)                                   350                                                      350
     D   Royalty (3% of A)                                        -30                        30                            -30
     E   Taxable profit                                           320                                                      320
     F   Profits tax (30% of E)                                   -96                        96                             96
     G   After-tax profit                                         224
     H   Dividend paid to investors                               224
     I   Dividend withholding tax (10% of H)                     -22.4                       22.4
     J   Net distribution to investors (H-I)                     201.6
     K   Personal tax on employee wages included in B                                        20
     L   Total direct government cash flow from project                                     168.4
     M   Government Share (L/C)                                                             48%
     N   Effective Tax Rate (F/E)                                                                                         30%


Mining is a capital-intensive industry. Significant amounts of capital are required to find an
economic resource and bring it into production. A typical exploration program can easily cost $50
million to $75 million to determine whether an economically viable resource exists, and the cost of
building a world class mine can easily run into several billions. Countries around the world are
competing to attract capital to their mining sector.The demand for capital exceeds the supply of
capital for mining projects. Only those projects that offer the investor a return on investment that is
commensurate with risk will obtain financing. In recent years, changes to banking regulations have
substantially reduced the availability of loan finance to mining projects, thus making investment
capital scarcer.

Table 9 shows the IRR on a hypothetical mine in a range of countries. This hypothetical mine is a
composite of project costs and metal recoveries of several actual mines in the authors’ confidential
databases. The hypothetical mine used in this model is typical of the kind of mine that could be
developed in any of these countries20. The model is intended to produce results that are indicative
of the impact of various fiscal regimes on project economics so that a government can assess in
broad terms the international competitiveness of a fiscal regime. The model holds revenues and
costs constant for each country, so that the only variable is the country’s tax regime (clearly,
differences in wage rates, energy costs and transport costs have a large influence on project
costs). Accordingly, the IRR in Table 7 is a good indicator of the relative impact of each country’s
tax regime on the project’s IRR.

Table 7 – International Comparison of Government Share and Project IRR
                                                   Government
                                                                                      Project
                                                  Share of Pre-
                 Country                                                          Internal Rate of
                                                   Tax Project
                                                                                  Return (IRR) (%)
                                                  Cash Flow (%)

Kazakhstan                                                52.9                            16.2

Argentina                                                 46.4                            17.0
Australia (Western Australia)                             50.8                            14.9
Brazil                                                    48.2                            15.1
Burkina Faso                                              51.4                            13.7
Canada (Ontario)                                          43.9                            17.8

20
  The model is a medium-cost gold mine with a preproduction development period of three years and twelve years of
production. The model uses a gold price of $1300.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                             42
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Chile                                               43.3                             17.0
Ghana                                               64.7                             12.9
Guinea                                              56.7                             14.5
Laos                                                42.3                             17.1
Peru                                                42.3                             16.4
Sweden                                              28.0                             18.5
Tanzania                                            50.9                             16.0


As shown in Table 7, the government share of pre-tax project cash flow ranges from 28.0 per cent
to 64.7 per cent, depending on the country where the project is located – on average, 46.4 per
cent. This is consistent with the 48:52 ratio of government share and investors share shown in
Table 6.

Based on the authors’ extensive experience in financing mining projects, it is observed that a new
project in a country with relatively low country-risk (Canada or Chile, for example) would today
likely need a minimum 17 per cent IRR to be able to attract the necessary financing. By contrast,
the same project in a country with higher country-risk (Kazakhstan, for example) would need a
higher IRR.

4.2.3     Government ‘free equity’ or ‘carried interest’ in mining projects

Some regulatory regimes mandate that the government owns a specified percentage share of a
mining project. In some cases, such a government ownership interest is a carried (free) interest
only through the exploration and feasibility study stage of the project: once development starts, the
government must pay its pro rata share of capital costs and operating expenses. In some cases,
the government’s ownership interest is a carried interest for the life of the mine. In the latter case,
the investor views the government’s share as a form of ‘profit tax’, because the investor is required
to distribute a portion of profits to the government for nil consideration. The government must be
careful, then, to ensure that the government’s free carried interest, on top of other government
levies, does not adversely impact the investor’s rate of return on the project.

Where the government has the right to increase its participation by paying a fair market value price
for a percentage of the investor’s original equity, the law should provide clear procedural and
strong arbitration rules in order to protect both the government and the investor. The same
comments apply where the law provides for mandatory equity participation by domestic private
interests or the local community. Before the investor commits to a costly exploration and
development program, the investor needs to know the rules up-front. This means that the rules for
such domestic participation should be clear up-front.21 Further, before mandating a specified
percentage of domestic equity participation by country nationals, the government should ensure
that local nationals have the financial and technical capabilities needed to make this participation
succeed.

Government equity participation in a mining project is a controversial subject. The arguments pro
and con government equity participation may be summarized as follows.

21
   Recent experience in Indonesia offers an example of the negative fallout of not having clear procedural and arbitration
rules. When BP PLC and Rio Tinto sought to fulfill their obligation to “Indonesianize” a specified percentage of their
Kaltim Prima Coal operation, the process took many years, because the relevant provisions in the Contract of Work did
not prescribe how to determine the price. This was a particularly negative experience for BP PLC and Rio Tinto, and
contributed to their desire to downsize their operations in Indonesia. More recently, Newmont suffered through a similar
experience in seeking to fulfill its obligations to “Indonesianize” the company’s Batu Hijau project. In Newmont’s case, not
only was determination of price problematic, but also it was not clear as to who should be eligible buyers for purposes of
satisfying “Indonesianization”. Newmont is unlikely to invest again in Indonesia in the foreseeable future.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                          43
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Arguments in favour of government equity participation include:

        Provide an opportunity for the people to benefit directly from the wealth generated by the
         project;
        Provide a means whereby the government, through Board of Director membership, can
         participate in high level decision making and approvals at the corporate level; and
        Provide a means whereby the government can obtain project information otherwise not
         easily obtainable

Arguments against government participation include:

        Where the government does not pay fair value, or pays nil, for its interest, the mining
         company’s return on investment is adversely affected, thus deterring investment;
        Where the government pays fair value for its interest, it is usually using scarce financial
         resources that can be better used in more traditional government functions such as
         education, healthcare, infrastructure, etc;
        Government equity participation in a mining project is a relatively high risk way of
         participating in the project, as compared to the collection of royalty or income tax;
        Experience shows that, where the government subsequently decides to divest itself of its
         interest, the process of divestment can be complex, time consuming, and costly;
        Investors tend to prefer to invest in mining projects where the government is not a co-
         investor. Investors find that government participation slows down the decision-making
         process at the enterprise level, and discourages other potential private sector investors
         from investing in the project;
        Government equity participation can result in conflict between the investor and the
         government – e.g. regarding dividend payment policy;
        Government equity participation can result in conflict of interest within government – for
         example, the ministry of finance may want dividends to be paid, whereas the ministry of
         mines may want profits to be re-invested for project expansion;
        Government already participates in the project through income tax, royalty, and other tax
         collections, and it is unlikely that any additional revenue is collected as a result of state
         ownership – what is gained through one way of raising revenue is lost in another, at least
         over time; and
        Where government is a part owner in an operation, a potential or real conflict exists with its
         responsibility to exercise oversight and regulate the industry.

In those few instances where government participates as an equity investor in a project, the
international norm is 10 per cent equity participation. There is nothing particularly magical about
this – the 10 per cent is probably driven by the interaction of the above pros and cons. Since 10
per cent has emerged as the norm, any percentage participation above 10 per cent would likely
come under severe scrutiny by the investment community, and could send a strongly negative
signal that the government is not serious about wanting to attract investment. The recent debate in
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), where the government proposed to raise the rate of free
government participation from 5 to 35 per cent, illustrates both that the trend may be changing, but
also that it is strongly resisted (Guarnieri, 2013). In the case of the DRC, it appears that the
planned government share will be significantly reduced.

4.2.4     The ‘tax package concept’

This may be the most important concept for a government to understand in designing a fiscal
regime for mining. In designing a fiscal regime for mining, it is important that the principal taxes and
royalty not be considered in isolation of one another. These taxes need to be considered as a

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             44
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


“package” – for example, a “package” consisting of a 25 per cent profit tax rate, a 2 per cent gross
revenue royalty, and a 5 per cent customs duty might have the same attraction as a “package”
consisting of a 20 per cent profit tax, a 3.5 per cent NSR royalty, and a 5 per cent customs duty.
But, a package consisting of a 35 per cent profit tax, a 4 per cent gross royalty, and a 10 per cent
customs duty might well be an obstacle to investment, because such a package would result in the
investor realizing an unacceptably low return on investment. In designing the complete fiscal
regime, the government needs to run models to see what combination of taxes and royalties
results in a “win-win” for both the government and the investor.

Table 8 illustrates the “Package Concept”. The major tax components of each of these tax
‘packages’ are different, but each ‘package’ results in the same project IRR when applied to the
model mine.

Table 8 – The ‘Package Concept’ Illustrated
                            Case A                    Case B                    Case C                      Case D

Profits tax                  25%                       30%                       20%                      28%
Royalty                    2% gross                  2% gross                 3.5% NSR                  1% gross
Customs duty                 5%                        0%                        5%                       5%

Project IRR                  18.2%                     18.2%                     18.2%                      18.2%


Where non-tax regulations give rise to significantly higher costs, as is arguably the case in
Kazakhstan, the impact of such regulations needs to be taken into account when assessing the
overall tax package.

4.2.5     Individual mining taxes

While the overall tax package is important, it is also important to understand common features and
trends for each of the major tax categories that apply to the mining sector.

4.2.5.1 Corporate income tax trends

Profit tax rates
Over the past decade, profit tax rates have been declining primarily due to international
competition to attract and keep investment. Ten to fifteen years ago, it was common to find
corporate profit tax rates in the 45 per cent to 50 per cent range. Today, corporate profit tax rates
tend to be in the 20 per cent to 35 per cent range and below 20 per cent in some cases,
particularly in smaller European countries such as Ireland where foreign investment is the most
dynamic element of the economy.

Box 4 – Lower corporate income tax rate can be an incentive – example

In 2002, Laos replaced its four-year tax exemption, and reduced its CIT from 35 per cent to 25 per
cent. The mining industry supported this change, because the four-year exempt period was
attracting unwanted criticism from other industries that were envious of the m ining industry’s
preferential treatment, and the reduced CIT was equally attractive as an “incentive” to invest in
Laos.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                      45
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Profit tax base (taxable profit)
In the modern era, there has been a trend where governments in both developed countries and
less developed countries have modified their profit tax regimes to replace traditional fiscal
incentives (e.g. tax exemptions) with lower tax rates and accelerated amortization and depreciation
of capital costs. Canada started this trend when it replaced its three-year exempt period with
accelerated amortization and depreciation rates (see Box 5).

Box 5 – Replacing tax exemptions with accelerated write-offs

In 1972, Canada replaced its three-year tax exempt period with 100 per cent amortization and
depreciation of capital costs as an incentive. The three-year exemption from income tax was found
to be encouraging perverse operating habits. For example, mine operators were mining high grade
ore during the tax exempt period, and deferring the exploitation of low grade ore to later years.
Also, some taxpayers were found to be manipulating the date of “commencement of commercial
production”, which was the starting point for the three-year exempt period.



Table 9 shows some of these lower tax rates and accelerated amortization and depreciation.

Profit tax rules do not need to be overly sophisticated or complex. But, they need to include the
basic provisions found in contemporary fiscal regimes. For example, all expenditures should have
to satisfy three requirements in order to be deductible in arriving at taxable profit: 1. The ‘purpose
test’ – the expenditure must be incurred for the purpose of earning profit from the business; 2. The
‘reasonableness test’ – the expenditure must be reasonable in the circumstances; and, 3. The
‘legal obligation test’ – the expenditure must be incurred pursuant to a legal obligation of the
taxpayer.

In addition, the profit tax rules should address current trends. For example, reserves for share-
based compensation22 are generally not deductible, and the various ways of transferring mining
title (for example, by way of farm-in or corporate take-over) should be addressed.

Table 9 – International Comparison of Profit Tax and Capital Allowance Rates

                                              Tax
                      Corporate          Amortization of
                                                                    Tax Depreciation of
     Country          Profit Tax         Exploration and                                               Other Taxes
                                                                     Fixed Asset Costs
                        Rate              Development
                                             Costs
                                                                                                     Excess Profits
                                                                    B – 20% DDB
Kazakhstan                20%           25%                                                          Tax   (up   to
                                                                    M – 50% DDB
                                                                                                     60%)
Australia
                                                                    B – 2.5% SL
(Western                  30%           100%
                                                                    M – 5% SL
Australia)

Argentina                 35%           100%                        60%/20%/20%



22
  IFRS requires the mining enterprise to expense reserves related to the issuance of stock options and similar share-
based compensation. These reserves can be substantial, and can significantly erode accounting profit. Most
contemporary fiscal regimes do not allow a deduction on account of share-based compensation, because the taxpayer
does not make an actual expenditure – the amount of share-based compensation recorded for IFRS purposes is based
on the economic principle of “opportunity cost” and can be highly subjective.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                       46
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


                                              Tax
                      Corporate          Amortization of
                                                                    Tax Depreciation of
    Country           Profit Tax         Exploration and                                               Other Taxes
                                                                     Fixed Asset Costs
                        Rate              Development
                                             Costs
                                                                    B – 4% SL
Brazil                    34%           Life of Mine
                                                                    M – 10% SL
                                                                                                     10%
Burkina Faso              20%           Life of Mine                Life of Mine                     Government
                                                                                                     Carried Interest
Canada
(Ontario)                 25%           100%                        100%



                          17%           ⅓ of asset life SL          ⅓ of asset life SL
Chile


                                                                                                     10%
Ghana                     35%           20% SL                      20% SL                           Government
                                                                                                     Carried Interest
                                                                                                     3%     Minimum
Guinea                    35%           TBA                         TBA
                                                                                                     Tax

Laos                      24%           20% SL                      20% SL

Peru
                          30%           Life of mine SL             Life of mine SL
                                                      B – 4% SL or 5% DB
                                        20% SL or 30%
Sweden                    22%                         M – 20% SL or 30%
                                        DB
                                                      DB

Tanzania                  30%           100%                        100%


KEY:

B        Buildings and structures
M        Machinery and equipment
SL       Straight line amortization or depreciation
DDB      Double declining balance depreciation
NSR      Net Smelter Return
NPI      Net Profits Interest



Contemporary profit tax regimes include so-called ‘thin capitalization rules’, which prevent
overseas shareholders from reducing domestic taxable profit by charging unreasonably high
interest expense on in-bound loans.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                         47
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


4.2.5.2 Mineral royalty trends

Types of royalties
There are four basic types of mineral royalty23:

        Gross production royalty, which is based on some measure of production – for example,
         ounces, pounds, or tonnes;
        Gross revenue royalty, which is based on gross revenue (sales value of production); this is
         the most common form of royalty; it should normally be assessed at the mining stage in
         order to avoid perverse incentives;24
        Net smelter return (NSR) royalty, where NSR is defined to mean gross revenue minus
         treatment costs, and freight and marketing expenses; and
        Net profits royalty (NPI), which is based on net profit.

Each type of royalty has a different risk profile for the government. For example, in the case of the
gross production royalty, the government’s royalty revenue is affected only by volume of
production. At the other end of the risk spectrum, in the case of an NPI royalty, the government’s
royalty revenue is affected by changes in production volume, metal price, capital costs, and
production costs.

Royalties that are based on value or volume rather than profit have the disadvantage that they
reduce economic reserves (see Figure 7). There are two reasons why governments are prepared
to overlook this drawback:

        Volume or value based royalties offer the government a revenue stream even when mineral
         prices are low, reducing the variability of tax revenues

        Volume or value based royalties are relatively easy to administer, including in countries
         where the tax administration is weak.




23
   It should be noted that the distinction between royalties and other types of taxes is not always clear, particularly since
royalties may be levied in a large number of ways. In the final analysis, a royalty is a tax that the government decides to
call a royalty.
24
   In Zambia, some of the royalties applied were originally determined in MDAs. Differences in definitions between MDAs
have led to some confusion, with royalties levied at different stages of production (Chamber of Mines of Zambia and
ICMM, 2014).

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                            48
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Figure 7 – The distorting effect of royalties




                                                      Source: Authors

There is a rule of thumb that a 2 per cent to 3 per cent gross revenue royalty, a 3 per cent to 4 per
cent NSR royalty, and a 10 per cent NPI royalty have roughly the same impact on project IRR and
government royalty receipts. As Table 10 shows, Canada, Chile, and Peru have NPI royalties
ranging up to 10 per cent, 14 per cent, and 13 per cent respectively, yet the project IRR in each of
these countries, as shown in Table 7, is not adversely impacted. In essence, this is because the
NPI royalty is based on the taxpayer’s “ability to pay” – i.e., it is based on net profit.

Royalty rates
Typically, royalty rates are in the 3 per cent to 5 per cent range for gross revenue royalties, 4 per
cent to 5 per cent for NSR royalties, and 8 per cent to 10 per cent for NPI royalties. Table 10 sets
out an international comparison of royalty rates.

Table 10 – International Comparison of Royalty Rates

      Country                                 Royalty                                        Other Taxes
                                                                                 Excess Profits Tax (up to
Kazakhstan               2.1% to 5.7% Gross Revenue
                                                                                 60%)
Australia
(Western                 2.5% NSR
Australia)

Argentina                3% Gross Revenue

                         Gold – 1% Gross Revenue
Brazil
                         Other – 2% Gross Revenue

                         Precious Metals – 3%25                                  10% Government             Carried
Burkina Faso
                         Base metals – 5% Gross Revenue                          Interest

Canada (Ontario)         10% NPI


25
 Indexed for gold: 4% for gold prices between USD1,000/ounce and USD1,300/ounce, and 5% for prices above
USD1,300/ounce.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                       49
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


       Country                                 Royalty                                        Other Taxes

Chile                     0% to 14% NPI

                                                                                  10% Government             Carried
Ghana                     5% Gross Revenue
                                                                                  Interest

                          Precious Metals – 5% Gross Revenue
Guinea                                                                            3% Minimum Tax
                          Base Metals – 3.5%

Laos                      2.5% Gross Revenue


Peru                      1% to 13.12% NPI


Sweden                    0.2% Gross Revenue

                          Copper, Gold – 4% Gross Revenue
Tanzania
                          Iron, Coal – 3% Gross Revenue

Progressive royalties
As a result of strong commodity prices in recent years, many governments have considered the
possibility of introducing ‘progressive royalties’, where the royalty rate increases as a function of
increases in commodity price or profitability. There are advantages and disadvantages to
progressive royalties.

The advantages include:

     1. Immediate increase in royalty collections;
     2. Satisfy political/societal concerns about “fair share” of wealth for government; and
     3. Obtain a bigger share of project profits when commodity prices are high.

In the minds of many mine operators – and the views of mine operators are important since they
make the investment decisions - the perceived disadvantages include:

     1. Deter mining of lower grades at existing mines where rates are linked to prices ;
     2. Deter development of marginal (low profit) mines where rates are linked to prices ;
     3. Progressive royalty rates linked to metal price do not take into account cost increases;
     4. Progressive rates linked to profitability can be complex and difficult to understand and
        administer;26
     5. Progressive royalty rates don’t allow compensation for periods of low prices/profitability;
     6. Progressive royalty rates can be discriminatory where the rules do not index historical
        capital costs – they treat operators of comparable mines differently where the older mine
        has a lower capital cost; and
     7. Progressive royalty rates are not common internationally and therefore can result in a
        country’s fiscal regime being considered internationally non-competitive.



26
  The South African gold tax, which could be described as a profitability based royalty, has been in force and worked
well for a very long time although it could be argued that South Africa is a mature mining jurisdiction with institutions that
are well able to handle complexities.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             50
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


For these reasons, many governments have decided not to proceed with progressive royalties.

Box 7 Adverse consequences of progressive royalty rates

Probably the most important criticism of progressive royalties, progressive income taxes, excessive
profits taxes, windfall profits taxes, and similar levies is that these levies do not recognize the
cyclical nature of mineral prices and profits. The bankable feasibility study, on which the
investment decision is based, generally assumes a constant commodity price over the life of the
mine. Royalty and tax payments in the study are based on this assumption. In actuality, prices are
very cyclical. High prices and profits in some years are needed to compensate for low prices and
profits in other years in order to generate the IRR in the study. If progressive royalty and tax rates
apply in years of high prices and profits, then these high prices and profits may fail to compensate
for years of low prices and profits (unless a threshold return on capital is used to ensure that only
mines that are profitable over the life of the mine are subjected to the tax) , and the project’s IRR is
adversely affected. Consequently, lower grade ore might be left in the ground, and even premature
mine closure could ensue.

Relating royalties to profitability has been tried in some countries, in the expectation that a simpler
measure of profitability than that used for the CIT would capture more revenue. However, these
expectations are often not met. For instance, Ghana had a sliding royalty scale from 3 to 6 per
cent. In practice, most or all companies paid the minimum rate of 3 per cent. In 2010, the sliding
scale was replaced by a 5 per cent flat royalty on gross value.




4.2.5.3 Other taxes

The following government levies are typically borne by the investor before the start of production
when there is no positive project cash flow. Government needs to be sensitive to this burden.

Dead rent
Rates of dead rent (annual acreage fee) should be internationally competitive – i.e. dead rents are
typically relatively modest levies.

VAT
In a capital intensive sector such as mining, VAT can represent a significant cost, especially during
the construction phase of a project. VAT rates and rules should be internationally competitive, and
should be clear especially with respect to VAT restitution entitlements and procedures. (See
Paragraph 4.2.6.2 for further details.)

Customs duties
Similarly, import duties can represent a significant cost, especially during the construction phase of
a project, because most of the costly machinery and equipment for a modern mining project must
be imported. Customs duty rules and rates should be internationally competitive. A 5 per cent
import duty should provide the government with a reasonable source of revenue without deterring
investment in the sector. Investors often argue for custom duty exemptions, but there is generally
no reason for a government to grant such an exemption, particularly since this increases domestic
manufacturers’ exposure to external competition on this specific market.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             51
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Bonus payments
In some countries, but not many, the government, using a practice borrowed from the oil and gas
industry, imposes a signing bonus or similar lump sum up-front payment on issuing an exploration
permit. This typically occurs in the case where the permit is issued pursuant to a bidding or auction
process, and is not typical of a traditional cadastral or ‘first-come-first-serve’ permitting system. The
system is common in former Soviet countries, where it is argued that the geology is well known so
that an upfront payment can be justified. It was also common in the many agreements signed in
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in the early 2000s, most of which concerned deposits
that had been explored in detail by the state owned company Gécamines. A large signing bonus
risks deterring investors and in most cases, companies will demand other concessions on taxes in
return. Given the high discount rate that investors apply when calculating the present value of a
project, a high upfront payment may have a dramatic effect on projected profitability.

Windfall (excess profits) taxes
As a result of strong commodity prices and historically high profits generated by these high prices
in recent years, some governments have considered the possibility of introducing a special tax on
so-called “windfall profits” or “excess profits”.

While some of these taxes are simply a reaction to high prices and perceived excess profits, a
theoretical justification for taxing profits above a certain level under specific conditions exists. The
argument in favour of such taxes is that they are levied only on the resource rent part of taxable
income. Resource rent can be defined as the value of the product of a mineral resource minus all
the costs of production, including the minimum returns on capital that are necessary to induce
investment, including investment in exploration. The resource rent arises from the fact that mineral
deposits vary in composition, size and location, so that the costs of extracting a certain quantity of
saleable product will vary among operations, even if identical technologies are used. Thus,
companies exploiting better deposits or deposits that are closer to markets will earn resource rents
consisting of returns over and above the necessary compensation to production factors.

The argument for taxing the resource rent relies, from an economical point of view, on the fact that
such a tax does not affect allocative efficiency; that is, it can be appropriated by the government
without diverting investment funds from the mining sector to another industry (or vice versa),
without altering the ranking of individual investment opportunities within the mining sector, and
without changing the profit-maximizing level of production in an individual mine. Resource rent
taxes are a much more prevalent practice in the oil and gas industry, where they are considered
non-controversial.

In principle, a resource rent tax should be imposed only after the investment has been recovered,
and only on the profits exceeding a certain predetermined rate of return, in order to ensure that the
tax targets the resource rent and not necessary return to capital. Establishing the threshold rate of
return is one of the most difficult issues to solve. Experience shows that windfall taxes can be a
major obstacle to attracting investment27, particularly when they are applied without regard to
whether it is rent that is taxed or not, mainly for the following reasons:

        Windfall taxes are sometimes not linked to the taxpayer’s “ability to pay” but only to mineral
         prices. That is – windfall taxes are not linked to profitability where these taxes ignore project
         costs;



27
  For example, in June 2013, Canadian multi-national mining company Kinross Gold Corporation announced that it will
not proceed with the development of the world class Fruta del Norte gold property in Ecuador, because, after more than
two years of negotiation, the Ecuadorean government would not withdraw its capricious windfall profits tax.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                      52
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


        Windfall taxes ignore the cyclicality of metal prices. These taxes ‘skim off the cream in good
         years’, without compensating the taxpayer for low prices in ‘lean’ years, except when the
         tax specifically targets natural resource rents as defined;
        Windfall taxes may prevent marginally economic properties from being developed, since
         the very profitable projects may be needed to finance the development of marginal projects;
        In order to tax only resource rent it is necessary to distinguish between deposits since they
         generate different amounts of rent. It then becomes difficult to levy the tax on a mining
         company that operates several mines since this would require perfect ‘ring fencing’, that is,
         allocating common costs in an equitable manner to the different deposits. In practice, this
         can become quite complicated;
        Windfall taxes may treat different taxpayers in different ways. There is no ‘level playing
         field’. For example, a project brought into production ten years ago may be subject to a
         country’s windfall profits tax, whereas the identical project brought into production today
         may not be subject to the windfall profits tax due to higher capital costs;

4.2.6     Fiscal incentives

Fiscal incentives play an important part in determining investment in the industry. Two forms of
incentive are common – accelerated depreciation and amortisation, and VAT incentives.

4.2.6.1 Accelerated depreciation and amortization

In assessing the international competitiveness of a profits tax regime, it is important to understand
the relevance of tax depreciation and amortization. In recent years, governments have realized that
accelerated tax depreciation and amortization rates can serve as an important incentive in
attracting investment, due to the positive impact of accelerated depreciation and amortization rates
on project cash flow and economics.

The expenditures incurred during the life of a mining project generally fall into two categories:

    1. Capital costs; and
    2. Operating expenses.

Operating expenses consist of those expenditures that are of a recurring nature and that relate to
the current year’s operations – for example, salaries and wages, insurance premiums, fuel costs,
electricity charges, etc. For both accounting purposes and profit tax purposes, operating expenses
are deducted in full in the year incurred, and reduce profit.

Capital costs consist of those expenditures that benefit the project over a period of time beyond the
current year. Capital costs are generally considered to fall into one of two categories:

    1. Intangible costs – for example, expenditures on mineral exploration (sampling, drilling,
       assaying, etc.) and on property development (clearing the mine site, sinking a shaft at an
       underground mine, or removing overburden to gain access to the mineralized ore at an
       open pit mine); and
    2. Tangible fixed asset costs – for example, the cost of acquiring buildings, trucks, machinery
       and equipment, and other tangible fixed assets.

For accounting purposes, intangible costs are generally deducted in computing accounting profit
over the estimated life of the mineral property. This deduction is referred to as “amortization”. For
example, $10,000,000 of overburden removal cost related to an open pit mine with an estimated
life of 10 years would be amortized at the rate of $1,000,000 annually over 10 years.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             53
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


For accounting purposes, the cost of a tangible fixed asset is deducted in computing accounting
profit over the estimated life of the particular asset. This deduction is referred to as “depreciation”.
For example, a truck with a 4 year life would be depreciated over four years – i.e. 25 per cent of
the original cost of the truck would be deducted in each of the four years starting with the year of
purchase.

This accounting treatment of capital costs is based on the generally accepted accounting principle
called the “matching principle”, because the write-off of the expenditure “matches” the revenue
generated by the expenditure.

All profit tax regimes allow the deduction of amortization and depreciation in computing taxable
profit. However, the annual rates of amortization and depreciation for tax purposes are typically
different from the rates used for accounting purposes. For example, whereas a machine might be
depreciated over its estimated useful life (say, 10 years) for accounting purposes, the profits tax
law might prescribe a depreciation rate for tax purposes of 3 years. In this case, the tax
depreciation rate would be 33.3 per cent annually for 3 years. Similarly, exploration expenditures
might be 100 per cent deductible in 1 year for tax purposes, even though these expenditures are
amortized over the estimated life of the mineral property for accounting purposes.

Table 11 – Accounting and Tax Treatment of Capital Costs


                                                  Typical Accounting                    Typical “Accelerated”
   Description of Expenditure
                                                      Treatment                            Tax Treatment

Exploration (expenditure incurred in
                                              Amortize over the estimated
searching for minerals – e.g.
                                              useful life of the mineral              Amortize 100% in 1 year
prospecting,     drilling,     sampling,
                                              property
assaying)
Development (expenditure incurred
                                              Amortize over the estimated
in preparing a mineral deposit for                                                    Amortize 25% annually over
                                              useful life of the mineral
production – e.g. site clearing,                                                      4 years
                                              property
overburden removal, shaft sinking)
Tangible     fixed        asset    cost
(expenditure incurred to acquire              Depreciate     over      the
                                                                                      Depreciate 33.3% annually
building,   office      furniture   and       estimated useful life of the
                                                                                      over 3 years
computers,          machinery       and       fixed asset
equipment)

In recent years, a trend has emerged whereby tax incentives (for example, tax exempt periods)
have been replaced by accelerated tax amortization and depreciation. “Accelerated” tax
amortization and depreciation refers to amortization and depreciation rates, for tax purposes, that
“accelerate” the write-off of capital costs for purposes of determining taxable profit. With reference
to the above examples, depreciating the cost of the machine over 3 years would be considered
“accelerated” depreciation where the useful life of the machine exceeded 3 years. Also, deducting
exploration expenditures 100 per cent in the year incurred would be considered ‘accelerated’
amortization, since this exploration would be amortized in the financial statements over the life of
the mineral property.

Table 11 summarizes common accounting and tax treatment of capital costs.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                    54
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


4.2.6.2 VAT incentives

It is not unusual for mineral exploration companies to seek special VAT treatment where their
purchases of goods and supplies are subject to VAT, but their output is expected to be exported
and therefore zero-rated.. These companies argue, for example, that their cash flow would be
improved if their purchases were exempt from input VAT.

If the country’s VAT regime is working in accordance with international best practices, there should
be no need for VAT exoneration. That is to say, mining enterprises should be eligible for prompt
refund of VAT input payments, including at times when there are no VAT outputs – i.e. during the
exploration and development phases of the project’s life before the start of production. For
example, in Canada an exploration company is entitled to monthly refunds of VAT paid by the
exploration company on purchases of supplies and services.

Offering VAT exoneration to one sector of the economy will attract the attention of other sectors,
who may want the same treatment. The best approach is to have a properly working VAT regime
that applies equally to all sectors.


4.3        Non-tax benefit creation
The benefits generated by the industry extend beyond revenue generation to include employment,
backward and forward linkages and skills generation. Encouraging and enhancing these impacts
often forms part of government’s considerations when designing mineral regimes.

4.3.1      Employment

Although governments are anxious to see that the number of local people employed in a mining
operation be as large as possible, most jurisdictions do not have any legislation relating to total
employment in mining operations. This is so mainly since governments tend to accept that the total
number of employed is determined by technology and deposit characteristics and cannot be
influenced without jeopardizing the viability of the mining operation. Exceptions can, however, be
found in rich countries, where the creation of employment in disadvantaged regions is a high
priority.28 Thus, countries in northern Europe, particularly Finland and Sweden 29, have created
attractive environments for mining investment precisely because mining investment tends to target
parts of the countries (the northern parts in these two cases) with high unemployment. Both
countries also use a spectrum of support mechanisms such as targeted training programmes to
promote hiring by mining companies. The thinking behind the policies reveals an awareness of the
potential for both indirect and induced employment effects and the importance of the latter in order
to ensure that population does not fall below a critical level needed to maintain commercial and
public infrastructure. The very low share of the Swedish government in pre-tax cash flow shown in
Table 7 makes sense from this point of view.




28
   The Swedish government’s mineral strategy states in its preamble “The mining industry is of great importance for the
country’s growth and economy. It creates employment opportunities in surrounding areas, co ntributes to strengthened
attraction and creates growth in parts of the country that have long had declining populations. “(Government of Sweden,
2013, author’s translation). The high value accorded to employment is not a recent phenomenon. In 1973, the Sw edish
parliament approved a government proposal that a mining company be given a subsidy of SEK 27 million (about USD 5
million at the time) as incentive to start mining a copper/zinc deposit in the northern part of the country. The decision was
taken on the basis of a cost/benefit analysis in which the benefit of continued employment for people in the area was
assigned a high value (Government of Sweden, 1973).
29
   Sweden and Finland placed first and second respectively in the Fraser Institute 2013 Policy Perception Index. The ten
highest ranked jurisdictions were all developed country ones.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                            55
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


There are of course examples of job promotion policy measures also in developing countries.
However, they tend to focus on the creation of special industrialized zones or export zones, which
usually exclude mining companies.

Within total direct employment governments usually attempt to influence the share of nationals. It is
difficult to regulate this directly, but some governments negotiate targets for employment of
nationals. It is uncertain whether such policies have positive long term benefits. If the necessary
skills are not present, the company might be obliged to add non-productive jobs, possibly
undermining project economy and providing little lasting benefit to the employees. Companies may
also choose to circumvent the requirements. For example, in order to adjust to the requirements on
local employment in Ghana, some companies have found it easier to relocate company divisions
outside of Ghana than to recruit sufficient nationals to satisfy regulations.30

For this reason, most governments are content with a general recommendation that the share of
expatriate labour should be as small as possible and/or that nationals of the host country should be
given priority, while emphasizing training as a measure that is more productive in the long term.
Government polices usually focus on providing or facilitating training and vocational education or
requiring mining companies to do so. Experience seems to show that training programmes for the
mining sector work best when designed and implemented in cooperation between mining
companies and the government.31 While mining companies have detailed knowledge of the skills
required, governments usually know more about general skills levels and have the means to
directly influence school curricula for instance. The more impressive programmes of this kind have
been carried out in places where the existing skill levels were very low.

One example that is of interest also to regions with higher skill levels is the Diavik Diamond Mine in
Canada’s Northwest Territories, where an integrated approach to local training, employment and
procurement was applied.32 The approach built on a series of agreements and policy statements,
in particular a Socio-Economic Monitoring Agreement (SEMA) negotiated with the Government of
the Northwest Territories and five neighbouring Aboriginal groups in 1999. The mine also signed
five Participation Agreements (PAs) directly with neighbouring indigenous communities. The PAs
formalise commitments for both the mine and the aboriginal signatories to work together to
maximise community benefits by identifying business opportunities for Aboriginal service providers,
employment and training opportunities for community residents, and support for community
educational initiatives.

The mine employed about 800 people by 2008 and had met its target of having 67 per cent of its
work force comprised of Northern residents. Although the mine did not meet its Aboriginal
employment commitment, reaching 34 per cent instead of the targeted 42 per cent in 2008, this
was not an issue, since the absolute number of people was far higher than the original estimate.

While most Aboriginal employees are first engaged in entry-level or semi-skilled positions, the mine
seeks to expand their skills through its own apprenticeship and professional development
programmes, as well as with a community and government partnership that administers a series of
work force development programmes. The mine has designed a leadership development
programme targeting Aboriginal employees and contractors. Besides completing a customised
curriculum based on Rio Tinto leadership competencies, participants are also matched with a mine
manager as a mentor.

30
   (SDSG, 2012. This includes the relocation of Gold Fields’ West African Head Office from Ghana to South Africa
(SDSG 2012).
31
   In northern Chile, for instance, a vocational school set up by a mining company was turned over to the government
and has continued educating skilled staff for the local mining industry (ICMM, 2007). Other examples, particularly with
respect to training programmes for local communities, are cited in OPM, 2013.
32
   The description is based on ICMM, 2010.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                           56
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Another example is provided by the Sepon Mining Project, a gold and copper mine located in
southern Lao PDR.33 MMG Sepon is committed to giving preference to employing people from the
communities and areas closest to its operations. Recruitment, at least in the mine’s initial stages
was specifically to be based on “aptitude” rather than “formal education qualifications” – a tactic
designed to by-pass the lower levels of schooling of one of the two linguistic groups in the area.
Between 2004 and 2006, more than 50 per cent of job vacancies were filled by people living in the
vicinity of MMG Sepon’s operation. In 2007, this rate started to decline, and seems to have
stabilised at around 35 per cent in 2008 and 2009. In addition to giving priority to people from the
local communities, MMG Sepon also gives priority to women, and the percentage of female
employees has varied from 15 to 19 per cent, somewhat higher than normal in the industry.

MMG Sepon has also attempted to ensure that recruitment policies are understood by the local
population to be fair. One example is that the company has attempted to employ one person from
each household in the closest villages, but not more than one, in order to ensure that the benefits
of mine employment are shared equitably. The company has also made sure that a slight
preference was given to the poorer of the two local ethnic groups. As a result, household surveys
carried out by the company at two year intervals show that income equality has improved, both
within and between villages and ethnic groups. The lesson from the Diavik and Sepon projects is
that positive employment effects are best maximized through a process of consultation between
the mining company, local government and local communities. While such processes can often be
cumbersome and time consuming, they reduce the risk of misunderstandings and inadequately
designed training and recruitment programmes.

4.3.2       Local content

A number of countries have introduced legislation intended to encourage the establishment and
strengthening of backward linkages from mining and increased local content. Most countries are, in
principle, constrained by WTO commitments in terms of the requirements they can impose with
respect to local content. Members of the WTO are bound by the national treatment obligation
(NTO) clause under which foreign companies cannot be forced to buy from local suppliers or hire
local service suppliers if a better alternative in terms of price or quality exists abroad. Under these
rules, legislation can require investors not to discriminate against local suppliers and to accord
them preference if their prices and quality are equal to foreign suppliers, but they cannot be given
any absolute preference. Box 8 reproduces the relevant articles of the GATT.

Box 8 - Articles III.4 and III.5 of GATT

         4. The products of the territory of any contracting party imported into the territory of any other
         contracting party shall be accorded treatment no less favourable than that accorded to like products
         of national origin in respect of all laws, regulations and requirements affecting their internal sale,
         offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use. The provisions of this paragraph shall
         not prevent the application of differential internal transportation charges which are based
         exclusively on the economic operation of the means of transport and not on the nationality of the
         product.

         5. No contracting party shall establish or maintain any internal quantitative regulation relating to
         the mixture, processing or use of products in specified amounts or proportions which requires,
         directly or indirectly, that any specified amount or proportion of any product which is the subject of
         the regulation must be supplied from domestic sources. Moreover, no contracting party shall
         otherwise apply internal quantitative regulations in a manner contrary to the principles set forth
         in paragraph 1.*



33
     The description here is mainly based on ICMM, 2011, and on personal communications from MMG Sepon officials.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                     57
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Many developing countries are subject to exemptions from these rules. WTO rules include
provisions for the “special and differential treatment” (SDT) of developing countries, which allow for
certain exceptions. A blanket exception applies to Least Developed Countries (LDCs). In addition,
provisions exist to encourage foreign suppliers to assist in technology transfers and training
through so-called ‘offsets’.34 Therefore, local content policies that encourage offset activities in
countries that benefit from SDT would not be in breach of such countries’ WTO commitments.

Some countries use legislation to express a general preference for local content, but without
mandating specific requirements. This includes relatively successful mining countries, such as
Chile, Peru and Australia. Other countries have more specific requirements stated in legislation or
regulatory instruments – in some cases applying relatively ‘blunt’ industry-wide requirements. Such
approaches may be distorting as they carry different costs of compliance for different firms,
depending on the nature of the mining activity.

In other cases, industry-wide requirements are designed to increase gradually over time. Such
initiatives may be most appropriate where the country is starting from a low base of industrial
capacity and skills. It recognises that building skills and firm capabilities can take time, and that
firms as well as government policy can support this development through their interventions.

Local content requirements can also be included in MDAs. The same issues apply as when local
content requirements are set through legislation. Thus, where countries are bound by WTO
commitments, the formula used in MDAs is usually close to the one suggested by the International
Bar Association in the Model Mine Development Agreement.35

Many countries require mining companies to submit their own plans to increase domestic content
over time. This approach recognises both the time it takes to build capabilities and skills, as well as
the fact that issues may vary across different types of mining company. Examples include South
Africa’s requirement for companies to submit Social and Labour Plans (SLPs). In many countries
legislation requires that such plans be developed in a consultative manner as part of a company’s
licensing procedure (e.g. Tanzania, Brazil, Guinea and Indonesia).

In conclusion, local content legislation exists on a spectrum from setting out broad policy priorities,
to industry-wide ‘blunt instruments’. In part because more aggressive mandated local content is a
‘new’ area, there is limited evidence of its impact on business decisions. Due to the limited
availability of data, most of the evidence regarding how firms have responded to mandated local
content initiatives is anecdotal. In some cases, aggressive government policy on local content
appears to have generated perverse effects.36 Many local content regulations require significant
monitoring and reporting that is unlikely to be consistently enforced by weak government
administrations. For example, the experience in implementing the requirement for SDP in South
Africa has been mixed. As the following example demonstrates, governments can, however,
initiate positive developments by working together with industry.




34
   As Tordo et al. (2013) notes, “such offsets include preferential hiring and training of nationals, preferences for local
sourcing, encouragement of inward investment, support to domestic suppliers to develop future competitiveness, and
support of the development of operational infrastructure to be made available for public use (for example, roads, power,
water supply, and so on).”
35
   The suggested wording is that “The Company shall, when purchasing goods and services required with respect to
Mining operations, give first preference, at comparable quality, delivery schedule and price, to goods produced in the
State and services provided by the State citizens or businesses, subject to technical acceptability and availability of the
relevant goods and services in the State” (International Bar Associatio n, 2011).
36
   For instance, although mining companies in Zambia procure 80 % of goods from Zambian companies, the
overwhelming majority of these companies have no manufacturing activity but are simply importers (Chamber of Mines of
Zambia and ICMM, 2014).

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                         58
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


In the late 1990s, at the initiative of the government’s regional representative, a joint program by
government and industry to develop a mining cluster in Chile’s Region II (Antofagasta) was
established.37 The main participants in the program were the national government through its
ministerial representatives in the region, the mining industry and the Industrial Association of
Region II (which also organizes the mining companies). Under the program, various initiatives have
been taken to foster the development of a mining cluster. The government allocated US$15 million
over the period 2002 to 2006, and this sum was matched by the mining companies. The most
important undertaking was a drive to assist local companies linked to the mining industry to obtain
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9000 and 14000 certification. The number of
certified companies grew from 8 in 2002 to 122 at the end of 2004. The cost of certification was
shared between the Government, mining companies and the participating enterprises. It is believed
that the certification will make the companies more competitive, particularly in export markets, and
so far, this appears to have been the case.

4.3.3       Further processing

A number of jurisdictions attempt to influence mining companies with a view to increase
downstream processing. Various methods are used, from relatively vague commitments by
investors to give such possibilities careful consideration to export taxes on unprocessed products
and outright bans on such exports. The idea underlying export taxes and bans is that it is a natural
progression for a country exporting raw materials to move downstream into the processing of these
materials. Therefore, it can be argued, policies encouraging such downstream processing can
improve trade performance and speed up the structural transformation of the economy.

However, in practice some mining companies probably have very good reasons not to process raw
materials into processed products on their own account. If companies are not already doing it, it is
probably not profitable, for instance, because of missing economies of scale, because important
inputs have to be procured at high cost, or because the facilities are too far from consumers and
being able to deliver rapidly.

It is of course possible that the cost to the mining company may be offset by benefits accruing to
the rest of society, for instance, in terms of economic diversification and an improved skills base.
Export taxes or bans based on an analysis showing that the benefits outweigh the costs might thus
be justified. It is, however, very rare that such analyses are carried out in order to establish a
strong economic case for the introduction of export taxes. Indeed the authors know of no such
case. Instead, examples abound of export taxes on unprocessed materials being introduced “on
trust” and thereafter resulting in either reduced production of the raw material or the establishment
of processing facilities that exist solely because the export tax pushes down the price of the raw
material sufficiently that the processors can cover their costs. Such processing facilities that
depend on the continuation of the tax for their survival clearly lead a fragile existence. Examples of
processing operations that would probably be unprofitable under normal circumstances include the
small copper smelters set up in Katanga in the DRC, which could exist because of the DRC export
tax on copper concentrates and the high transport cost. Most of these smelters closed rapidly
when copper prices fell in late 2008.

A recent analysis of the effects of export taxes on unprocessed minerals in Indonesia shows that
large welfare losses, on the order of US$ 33 to 34 billion cumulative net value over six years could
be expected, due to the loss of income from raw materials exports and high processing costs. 38
While all such calculations are based on assumptions, and the reality can only be assessed ex


37
     The description is based on ICMM, 2007.
38
     USAID, 2013

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                              59
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


post, the basic argument will commonly hold true: obliging companies to do something they will not
otherwise do involves a potentially large opportunity cost for the country.

4.3.4     Social investment

Mining companies’ social investment has varied over time and still varies widely from one country
to another. From a global perspective, it is possible to distinguish three phases: until the second
half of the 20th century, mining companies tended to provide not only services such as health and
education for their employees, but also various types of services that are normally supplied
commercially. The reason for this was often that mines were located in remote areas with few
public and commercial services. The most far reaching examples were found in African colonies,
where the colonial powers assembled workers in mining camps and towns, sometimes by force,
and in the Soviet Union, where towns were built around mines. After independence, the practice of
providing comprehensive services often continued in former colonies, but in many countries under
state ownership of mines.39 With better communications and increased competition, the system
came under pressure from two directions in developing countries: mining companies began finding
it difficult to justify the expenditure on social services and as providers of commercial services they
faced increasing competition. As a result, social investment by mining companies declined in most
countries, particularly in new mines where it became minimal. In the 1990s, however, the second
phase ended, the trend turned again, and social investment came back, but now in the guise of
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).

At present, most mining companies accept the need for a certain extent of social investment,
although they would resist letting it grow so much as to risk having the company replacing
government. Among the countries where the ICMM Mining Partnership for Development has been
used, social investment has typically been 1 to 2 per cent of pre-tax profits. Typical areas of
investment are infrastructure, education, health care and local business development.

The countries of the former Soviet Union, including Kazakhstan, represent a special case. While a
system of mining towns where the mining operation also supplies social and commercial services
may have been practical and rational under a planned economy, it can easily become a major
burden for mining companies operating under competitive conditions. It may be difficult for local
government to replace mining companies as providers of social services, but in the long run it is
likely to prove necessary in order to create a level playing field.

4.3.5     Research and Development (R&D)

It is highly unusual for requirements concerning R&D to be included in mining legislation or MDAs,
although where local research institutions exist, mining companies would be both expected to and
interested in supporting them.




39
  See Chamber of Mines of Zambia and ICMM, 2014, for a description of the phases that communities in the Copperbelt
went through.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                  60
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



5         Comparative Review of Kazakhstan’s Mineral Regime

5.1       Institutional, legislative and administrative framework
Kazakhstan’s mineral legislation retains characteristics from the country’s central planning heritage
and it also appears to have been strongly influenced by its experience of oil and gas exploitation.
Salient features include a strong reliance on detailed regulations and a belief in the State’s ability
to monitor and enforce these regulations, a preference for discretionary rather than rules based
decision making and a broad array of implicit objectives, some of which could only with great
difficulty be achieved at the same time.

5.1.1     Legislative and administrative framework

The basic piece of legislation is Law No. 291 on Sub-Soil and Sub-Soil Use which was adopted in
July 2010. It replaced the Subsoil Law of 1996, the Petroleum Law of 1995, and the Offshore
Petroleum Operations, PSA Law, combining legislation for solid minerals and hydrocarbons in one
law. The Law on Sub-Soil and Sub-Soil Use contains most of the regulations relevant to the mining
industry except for taxation matters, which are included in the Tax Code. The law has been
amended several times and at the time of writing (May 2014) several additional amendments are
before Parliament. It has been stated that a new law should be prepared within two to three years.

The law is very detailed and not very clear on several points, with apparent or real contradictions.
An additional complication is that the only available official English translation is extremely poor. A
potential investor would not be able to form even a general opinion about Kazakhstan as an
investment destination on the basis of a reading of the law without consulting experts in the
country.

Hydrocarbons and mining fall under separate ministries: the Ministry of Oil and Gas deals with
hydrocarbons and the Ministry of Industry and New Technologies, specifically the Department for
Sub-Soil Use, is responsible for matters concerning the mining industry.

Kazakhstan had a moratorium on exploration and mining licenses from 2007 to 2013. No new
licenses have been granted since the moratorium was lifted. Indeed, none of the mines now
operating started later than in the 1990s. Accordingly, there is no practical experience of how the
legislation works. The present title holders have mainly obtained their titles in connection with
privatization of state owned mineral assets. Because of the moratorium, there is little practical
experience of the application of the present law with makes it difficult to draw concrete conclusions
on the legislative and administrative framework.

5.1.2     Granting of mineral rights

Kazakhstan is in the process of transitioning from a system based on auctions of mineral rights to a
more standard system based on licensing. To this end, amendments proposed to the Parliament
will result in exploration licenses being granted on a first come first served basis. At present, such
rights have been auctioned, unless the explorer works in cooperation with a ‘national’ (state
owned) company, in which case direct negotiations can be opened with the Ministry. If the holder
of an exploration license identifies a commercially exploitable deposit, he will have the right to
negotiate a contract for exploitation with the Ministry. The outcome of this negotiation will
determine the amount of the various payments as well as the company’s expenditure for social-
economic development of the region and development of its infrastructure, personnel recruitment
and training, local content in goods and services and research and development work. Although

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             61
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


the government has responded to criticisms by removing the auction requirement at the exploration
stage – since it was argued that a junior exploration company would hardly be in a position to
submit a credible bid containing details on, for instance, local content and training – exploring
companies have no knowledge of the final conditions for exploitation.

The planned changes to the legislation would appear to go part of the way towards aligning laws in
Kazakhstan with international practice. The legislation as it will stand does, however, leave
uncommonly much of the conditions to be determined by negotiation. Subsequent sections will
attempt to identify how greater clarity of investment conditions could be achieved.

5.1.3     Access to geological information

Under the present system, companies applying for an exploration license are given only a small
part of the available geological information about the area of interest beforehand. The rest is
provided once a contract has been signed, against a payment. The amounts can be important,
reaching several million dollars. However, the applicant or bidder does not know either the price or
the content of the available information beforehand. Moreover, since the information is usually
quite old and organized according to the system used in the Soviet Union its true value may be
quite low. Geological information is considered confidential and there are several rules intended to
prevent its free dissemination.
In all of these respects, the Kazakhstan legislation contrasts with that of almost all other
jurisdictions, in particular the most successful ones, where access to geological information is
generally free since it its recognized that the free provision of high quality geological information
attracts investors and that its unhindered circulation increases the probability of new discoveries.
Reforms to the system are under-way and the government appears to appreciate the advantages
of a more liberal approach to the provision of geological information. Improved access to geological
information would be likely to signif icantly increase Kazakhstan’s attractiveness for exploration.

5.1.4     State ownership

Subject to a few exemptions (e.g. for intra-group transfers) the state has a pre-emptive right where
a subsurface user transfers its subsurface rights or direct or indirect ownership interest in a mining
company to a third party. The state is entitled to acquire such rights/interests on terms no worse
than those offered to other buyers. So far, however, the right has not been exercised. A special
company, Tau-Ken Samruk, manages State holdings in various projects and is said to be actively
seeking investors.

In view of the lack of experience of the application of this particular part of the legislation it is
difficult to assess its usefulness or practicability. Generally speaking, similar arrangements have
been made in other countries (Angola, South Africa, Zambia, for instance). While no examples of
state owned companies having exercised a significant stimulating influence on exploration or
investment come to mind, it should also be noted that, for example, large companies such as
Codelco, Chile, LAKB, Sweden, and Outokumpu Oy, Finland, do not seem have driven other
companies away.


5.2       Fiscal regime
Tax legislation in Kazakhstan is governed by ‘The Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Taxes
and Other Obligatory Payments to the Budget, December 10, 2008, No. 99-IV Law RK’ (the Tax
Code), as amended from time to time. Article 55 of the Tax Code sets out a lengthy list of taxes
covered by the Tax Code. It is not permitted to include tax provisions in other legislation – all
Kazakhstan’s taxes, both federal and state, must be based in the Tax Code.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             62
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


The main taxes of primary interest to the mining sector are covered in the Tax Code, and include:

    Corporate income tax (CIT);
    Special payments and taxes of subsurface users, including
     o Excess profits tax (EPT)
     o Mineral Production Tax (MPT), or royalty
     o Signature bonus
     o Commercial discovery bonus;
    Value added tax (VAT);
    Import duty;
    Export duty;
    Withholding taxes on payments to non-residents; and
    Social tax.


As is the case in other countries, the mining industry is subject to a myriad of other taxes and
government fees, but these are the principal taxes that can affect the economics and
attractiveness of a mining project. The main features of these principal taxes, as they affect the
mining industry, are summarized below.

It is noted that none of these taxes are subject to fiscal stability. Provisions for fiscal stability
existed earlier, but were abolished in 2009. At present, it is recognized that stability of fiscal
conditions is one of the main factors influencing investor interest and therefore, the possibility of
reintroducing fiscal stability provisions in some form could be looked into. Where a taxpayer carries
on more than one mining project at the same time, the projects are subject to ‘ring fencing’ – i.e.
the tax base and related tax liability for each project must be determined separately and each must
be the subject of a separate contract.40

The only fiscal incentives in the Tax Code apply to businesses carried out in defined “special
economic zones”.41 Mining is not eligible for these incentives.

Recommendation 1

Until Kazakhstan is able to demonstrate a track record of fiscal stability, the Government should
legislate a form of fiscal stability that meets investors’ concerns. At a minimum, the Government
should ensure that there is multi-stakeholder input where significant changes to the tax law are
being considered or proposed.



Annex B reproduces an example of fiscal stability provisions contained in a mineral development
agreement, and Annex C shows an example of fiscal stability provisions incorporated in law.

5.2.1     Corporate income tax (CIT)

For the most part, the CIT provisions of the Tax Code are modern and comprehensive.

The CIT rate is 20 per cent of taxable income.42 Accounting profit, as determined using
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), is the starting point for determining taxable


40
   Article 308 of the Tax Code.
41
   Article 150 of the Tax Code.
42
   Article 147 of the Tax Code.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             63
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


income.43 Accounting profit is then modified to exclude non-deductible expenses that are specified
in the Code44, and to include income that might not otherwise be reflected in accounting profit.

Exploration and development costs incurred before the start of commercial production can be
amortized for CIT purposes at the rate of 25 per cent per annum on a straight line basis beginning
with the first year of production.45 The cost of buildings can be depreciated for CIT purposes at the
rate of 10 per cent on a declining balance basis starting with the first year of production, while the
cost of machinery and equipment can be depreciated at 25 per cent on a declining balance basis.
In the first year of production, the taxpayer can elect to depreciate these buildings, machinery, and
equipment on a double declining balance basis (i.e. at 20 per cent and 50 per cent respectively),
provided the taxpayer commits to use these assets for at least three years. This election applies
only to fixed assets owned in the first year of production.46

Tax losses can be carried forward for 10 years.47 Mine reclamation and closure costs are
deductible in accordance with specific provisions of the Code.48

Complex “thin capitalization” rules prevent the erosion of taxable income by deductions of
potentially excess interest expense paid to related third parties.49 In most jurisdictions with thin
capitalization rules, these rules apply only to debt financing by a related party (a shareholder, for
example): there is a presumption that debt financing provided by a bank or other third party will
reflect normal commercial terms. The thin capitalization rules in some of these jurisdictions permit
the government to apply the rules to third party debt financing where there is evidence of intent to
evade the thin capitalization rules – for example, through back-to-back loans involving a third party
bank and a shareholder.

Recommendation 2:

The Government should consider revising the thin capitalization rules to make them easier to
understand and administer, and to make them applicable only to related party financing. Canada’s
Income Tax Act offers a good example of a simple and effective thin capitalization rule.



Annex D reproduces Canada’s thin capitalization rules.

Transfer pricing rules seek to ensure that transactions are effected at fair market value. The rules
are in accordance with international standards, except that the transfer pricing rules in the Tax
Code appear to apply to transactions with third parties as well as related parties. In most other
jurisdictions, the transfer pricing rules apply only to related party transactions. The application of
transfer pricing rules to arm’s length transactions adds an element of risk to doing business,
because it gives the government the authority to override normal commercial transactions with
third parties.

Annex E shows a straight forward and effective example of transfer pricing rules incorporated in
income tax legislation.



43
   Article 56 of the Tax Code.
44
   Article 115 of the Tax Code.
45
   Article 111 of the Tax Code.
46
   Article 120 of the Tax Code.
47
   Article 137 of the Tax Code.
48
   Article 107 of the Tax Code.
49
   Article 103 of the Tax Code.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             64
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


Recommendation 3:

The Government should consider revising the transfer pricing rules to make it clear that these rules
apply only to related party transactions.


5.2.2       Excess profits tax (EPT)

In addition to CIT, mining profits are subject to a tax on so-called ‘excess profits’.50 The rules for
calculating the EPT are very complex and difficult to understand In essence, the taxpayer is in a
position of having to pay EPT in a particular taxation year when after-tax net income exceeds 25
per cent of costs claimed in that year for CIT purposes. Table 12 illustrates the calculation of the
EPT.

Table 12 – Simplified Illustration of EPT
     Gross revenue                                                            $1000
     Deductions (operating and capital costs)                                   600
     Taxable income for CIT purposes                                            400
     CIT (20% of $400)                                                           80
     “Net income” for EPT purposes                                             $320

                                                                      Allocate Net
                  Maximum Amount of Net Income to                                         EPT Rate in          EPT
      Level                                                            Income of
                      Be Allocated to this Level                                           this Level       Payable ($)
                                                                          $320
        1       25% of deductions (25% of $600)                              $150                     0%              0
        2       5% of deductions (5% of $600)                                   30                   10%              3
        3       10% of deductions (10% of $600)                                 60                   20%             12
        4       10% of deductions (10% of $600)                                 60                   30%             18
        5       10% of deductions (10% of $600)                               2051                   40%              8
        6       10% of deductions (10% of $600)                                 052                  50%              0
        7       70% of deductions (70% of $600)                                  0                   60%              0

      Total                                                                     $320                               $41
Source: Authors’ calculations

It is notable that the EPT uses taxable income for income tax purposes as a starting point. By
virtue of being able to claim tax depreciation at the rate of 50 per cent per annum on a declining
balance basis, the operator can recover most of his capital costs before paying income tax, and
therefore also before paying EPT. This is an important feature of the EPT, as this accelerated tax
depreciation provision effectively obviates some of the common criticisms of excess profit tax
regimes in general.

As suggested by Table 9, relatively few countries have adopted an excess profits tax.
Kazakhstan’s EPT is one of the main contributing factors to the country’s relatively poor position in
enabling an investor to earn an acceptable IRR on a typical mining project (see Table 7).

Recommendation 4:

The Government should consider either repealing the EPT or reducing the top marginal tax rate
from the present 60%. (See also Recommendation 7 for a range of possible rates.)


50
   Article 347 of the Tax Code.
51
   Allocate balance of Net Income ($320 minus $150 minus $30 minus $60 minus $60 = $20), not to exceed $60.
52
   Not to exceed unallocated net income – i.e. nil, because all net income has been allocated to the first 5 brackets.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                           65
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


5.2.3     Mineral royalty (MPT)

Mineral production is subject to an annual royalty (the tax on production of useful minerals or
Mineral Production Tax) based on gross revenue derived from the sale of minerals.53 The Tax
Code lists ten categories of mineral, and applies a different rate to each mineral, with the highest
being the royalty for uranium at 24 per cent.54 The royalty rates applicable to metallic minerals are
show in Table 13.

Table 13 – Royalty rates
                                             Royalty
 Mineral                                     rate
 Copper                                         5.7%
 Zinc                                            7%
 Lead                                            8%
 Gold, silver, platinum & palladium              5%
 Tin and nickel                                  6%


The royalty rates must be considered relatively high compared to most other countries, particularly
for the base metals (see Table 10). Kazakhstan’s royalty rates are one of the main contributing
factors to the country’s relatively poor position in enabling an investor to earn an acceptable IRR
on a typical mining project (see Table 7). As shown in Table 10, most countries do not impose
different royalty rates on different minerals, mainly because this requires a difficult judgemental
assumption about the relative profitability of different minerals.

Recommendation 5:

The Government should consider reducing its royalty rates to more competitive levels, and should
consider reducing the number of royalty rates to two – one rate for gold and other precious metals,
and another rate for other metals. (See also Recommendation 7 for a range of possible rates.)



It is notable that royalties can be waived for companies that do not make any profits. Coal
production is not subject to royalty, but, as noted below, coal exports are subject to a 2.1 per cent
export tax, meaning that coal production is, in effect, subject to a 2.1 per cent royalty when the coal
is exported.

5.2.4     Signature bonus and commercial discovery bonus

The signature bonus55 and the commercial discovery bonus56 are payments payable on issuance
of mineral rights.

Signature bonuses, which under the present legislation, now proposed to be changed, were
declared to be an important factor in the award of exploration licenses, have been low in the past,
normally below US$ 100,000 according to industry sources. However, there is no recent
experience on which to base estimates of future signature bonuses, which will have to be


53
   Article 338 of the Tax Code.
54
   Article 339 of the Tax Code.
55
   Article 311 of the Tax Code
56
   Article 317 of the Tax Code

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             66
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


negotiated with the government in order to obtain a production agreement. The law specifies only a
minimum amount.

The commercial discovery bonus could in theory amount to a substantial sum. According to the
Tax Code it is calculated as 0.1 per cent of the value of the discovery. Thus obtaining a production
license for a medium-sized copper deposit containing 5 million tonnes of copper would require a
payment upfront of US$ 35 million at present copper prices. So far, bonuses have been quite
modest, again, less than US$ 100,000. However, investors have no guarantee that they will remain
low. In addition, the purpose of this bonus is unclear. It cannot be considered payment for access
to geological information since that is paid for under another heading. Moreover, it appears
somewhat strange that an exploration company should pay a discovery bonus to the State if it has
found a commercial deposit through its own efforts.

In the mining industry, where mineral exploration and permitting is on a first-come-first-served
basis, or a cadastral system, such bonus payments are rare.

Recommendation 6:

The Government should consider repealing the signature bonus and commercial discovery bonus.
If these bonus requirements are retained for application to permits granted on an auction or
privatization, the rules should be easy to understand and administer.




5.2.5     Value added tax (VAT)

The VAT provisions in the Tax Code reflect international best practices. In essence, the purchase
of goods and services is subject to 12 per cent VAT (input VAT), and the sale of goods and
services is subject to 12 per cent VAT (output VAT)57. Exports are zero rated.58 Also, the sale of
fine gold to Kazakhstan government bodies is zero rated59.

As is common in other VAT jurisdictions, when production is exported, the taxpayer is in a constant
VAT refund position, because input VAT always exceeds output VAT. The Tax Code prescribes
refund provisions to address VAT refunds.60 For large companies, a system of self-assessment is
applied and VAT is usually refunded with two weeks.

5.2.6     Import duty

Import duties apply mainly to the import of alcohol and tobacco products, and vehicles. 61 The
importation of mining machinery and equipment is not subject to import duty, which is consistent
with international practice. It should be noted, however, that the exclusion of mining equipment
from import duty, although common internationally as a way of attracting investment, may conflict
with other mining policy objectives. Specifically, it places domestic suppliers of equipment at a
relative disadvantage. A truck manufacturer may, for instance, be protected from competition by
import duties when supplying other sectors, but not the mining industry. It would seem that if a
government has decided to accord protection to an industry then this protection should apply also
when the industry supplies mining companies. Most developed countries do not exclude imports of
mining equipment from duty.
57
   Article 268 of the Tax Code.
58
   Article 242 of the Tax Code.
59
   Article 244-4 of the Tax Code.
60
   Article 273 of the Tax Code.
61
   Article 279 of the Tax Code.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             67
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


5.2.7     Export duty

As indicated above, coal exports are subject to a 2.1% export tax and oil and gas exports are
subject to a special scale of export taxes. No other mineral exports are subject to export duty.62 In
its effect, this export tax is a royalty on coal production that is exported. It is noted that coal
production is not subject to the MPT (royalty) that is discussed in Section 5.2.3.

It would appear that the decision to subject only exported coal to royalty is a policy decision to
exempt coal production from royalty where the coal is used domestically. While this policy is
unusual, it is unlikely to impact investment in the coal sector either negatively or positively.

5.2.8     Withholding taxes

A number of payments to non-residents are subject to non-resident withholding tax63. These rates
are shown in Table 14.

Table 14 – Withholding taxes
 Dividends                         15%
 Interest                          15%
 Royalties                         15%
 Insurance premiums                20%
 Other income (fees, etc.)         20%


These withholding tax rates, which are consistent with international norms, may be reduced by tax
treaty. Kazakhstan is party to tax treaties with 44 other countries, and 2 treaties are awaiting
ratification.

5.2.9     Social tax

The mining enterprise must pay an 11 per cent ‘social tax’ based on remuneration paid to
employees.64 This tax rate is consistent with international norms and somewhat lower than in most
developed countries.

5.2.10 Tax administration

The Tax Code prescribes contemporary rules for tax administration, including tax audit,
assessment, and appeals.65 Although it is not uncommon for mining companies to complain about
bureaucracy, generally speaking, the Code appears to be applied in a competent manner. The
complexity of parts of the Code and the lack of a clear track record of its application is a larger
problem.

5.2.11 The ‘tax package’ in Kazakhstan

As indicated in Table 7, Kazakhstan’s current fiscal regime allows a typical medium cost mining
project to generate an IRR (16.2 per cent) that is probably less than the IRR that would ordinarily
be needed in current circumstances to attract investment. As noted in Sections 5.2.3 and 5.2.2, the

62
   Article 300 of the Tax Code.
63
   Article 194 of the Tax Code.
64
   Article 359 of the Tax Code.
65
   Article 555 of the Tax Code.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             68
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


main reasons for this shortfall in IRR are attributed to relatively high royalty rates and the
application of the EPT. In addition, the calculations in Table 7 do not take into account the impact
on returns of the other fees and requirements in the Kazakhstan legislation, such as the signature
and discovery bonuses, payment for geological information, the local content requirements and the
required payments for training, social investment and R&D.

The Government should consider modifying the royalty and EPT rates in order to allow a typical
medium cost mining project to generate a more competitive IRR – for example, a 17.5 per cent
IRR, which would likely be considered a minimum IRR in light of country risk. Table 15 illustrates
this point. In all cases in Table 15, the CIT is maintained at the current 20 per cent. If the
Government decided in the future to increase the current 20 per cent CIT rate, then corresponding
changes to either the EPT and/or royalty rates would have to be considered in order to preserve
the international competitiveness of the overall fiscal regime.

Table 15 – Royalty and EPT rate combinations to maintain a competitive tax package
                                                                                                        Government Share
                      Royalty Rate            Maximum EPT Rate                  Project IRR              of Pre-Tax Cash
                                                                                                               Flow
Current rates               5%                          60%                        16.20%                     52.90%
Case A                      3%                          10%                        17.60%                    46.50%
Case B                    3.50%                          5%                        17.50%                    46.10%
Case C                    4.00%                          0%                        17.50%                    45.90%



From the point of view of both the government and prospective investors, any of Cases A to C
would present acceptable optics and reality. The government share of pre-tax cash flow generated
by the project would fall within the prevailing international range66, and the royalty rate would be
more internationally competitive than the current 5 per cent.

Recommendation 7:

The Government should consider adopting a combination of royalty and EPT rates along the lines
shown in the example in Table 15 in order to make the country’s fiscal regime for mining more
internationally competitive.




5.3       Non-tax benefit creation

5.3.1     Employment and training

In the contract that a mining investor has to conclude with the government, the investor has to
make commitments concerning the employment of Kazakh nationals and their training. Legislated
firm undertakings of this kind are very uncommon internationally, although they are often included
in MDAs. While it does not seem that the commitments are overly burdensome or that the results
are much different from what companies would do in any case, investors may be deterred by the
uncertainty created by a legal commitment. Moreover, the relatively severe penalties for breaches
of any of the contractual commitments add a deterring effect.



66
   The average Government Share in Table 7 is 46.4%, and the ratio of Government Share to Investor Share in Figure 5
is 17:18.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                        69
                          Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


5.3.2        Local content

Kazakhstan has a highly demanding system for regulating local content. Regulations related to
local content in the procurement of goods, works and services in mining activities fall under the
Law on Subsoil and Subsoil Use. The National Agency for Development of Local Content
(NADLoC) is responsible for implementation.

Since 2010, all subsoil users are obliged to: (1) procure all goods, works and services under the
government’s Procurement Rules; (2) download all procurement information onto an online registry
(i.e. advertisement, tender documentation, results of the tenders, contractor selected); and (3)
place advertisements and results in periodicals disseminated three times a week throughout
Kazakhstan, in Kazakh and Russian languages.

Local content performance is monitored by NADLoC. Data is analysed to understand what is
purchased, volumes purchased, and where potential exists for growth or entering other markets.
The data informs development of local content action plans. Kazakhstan’s 2010 - 2014 local
content programme has set a target of 16 per cent for goods and 85 per cent for services. Actual
spending is close to, or exceeds targets, with 14 per cent and 92 per cent respectively in 2012
(Esteves et al., 2013).

The Kazakh Government’s Decree No. 367/2010 formalised the measurement of local content in
goods, works and services, using the ‘Uniform Method of Kazakh Content Calculation’ (the
‘Uniform Method’). Subsoil users are required to provide a 20 per cent discount to Kazakh
manufacturers.

The percentage of Kazakh content in goods is stated in the CT-KZ certificate. The certificate is
issued by the Ministry of Industry and Trade’s Technical Regulation and Metrology Committee to a
Kazakh manufacturer. CT-KZ is issued for a period of one year. It is not mandatory for
manufacturers to obtain a CT-KZ certificate, however to claim local content, subsoil users need to
have one.

Kazakh content in services is equal to the share of total salary expenses paid to Kazakh
employees, including subcontractors. The supplier determines this share, indicated as a
percentage on the official letterhead with the certified director's signature and the company’s seal.

Subsoil users have to submit their annual, medium term and long term procurement program, and
quarterly reports.

In March 2012, NADLoC, which is under the Kazakh Ministry of Industry and New Technologies,
claimed that most of the 229 companies mining companies do not meet the legal requirements for
local content in the Law on Subsoil Use 67. In 2011 mining companies purchased 568 billion tenge
worth of goods and services but only half were made through the register that is required to be
used for procurement purposes according to the Law on Subsoil Use. The violations were
estimated at 212.2 billion tenge (US$ 1.38 billion). The main barriers are believed to be lack of
locally produced equipment and machinery and lack of local production facilities.

The Kazakh local content rules differ from those applied in other countries lacking Kazakhstan’s
Soviet past, being considerably more detailed, binding and with breaches being associated with

67
     http://www.interfax.kz/?lang=eng&int_id=expert_opinions&news_id=880, cited in Estedves et al., 2013.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                               70
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


severe penalties. They are likely to impose sub-optimal technical and procurement solutions
compared to what would otherwise be the case. The fact that the proportion of locally sourced
goods and services in Kazakhstan does not differ dramatically from that in other countries may
mean that there are low additional costs. However, the requirement that companies give local
suppliers a 20 per cent discount may result in considerable rent seeking and exploitation of
monopoly situations. Moreover, the existence of legally binding requirements constitutes a
deterrent to investment. Complying with the rules is also burdensome and labour consuming both
for the government and for investors, and is unlikely to be the best use of resources.

5.3.3     Further processing

Unlike the case in several other countries, the legislation does not contain any specific
requirements concerning further processing. However, other pieces of legislation carry implications
that may provide incentives for a mining company to process the minerals it produces. Thus, it
automatically becomes a manufacturing company, which makes it eligible for certain types of
government support.


5.3.4     Social investment

The contribution to local economic development and infrastructure is an important element in the
consideration of competitive bids for exploration contracts under the present legislation. Under the
rules now proposed to Parliament, companies will still have to negotiate an agreement with the
Ministry on these issues. From a global point of view, it is relatively unusual to require a formal
legally binding agreement on these matters. In some cases, social investment has been an
element of Mineral Development Agreements, but this usually reflects particular historical
circumstances, as in the case of the Zambian MDAs concluded in the early 2000s, where a
continuation of some of the services provided by the previous state owned company was included.
The requirement has to be seen against the historical background where in Kazakhstan as in other
parts of the then Soviet Union, it was taken for granted that companies supplied a wide range of
social services and where state administered social safety nets have not yet fully replaced the
corporate ones. Indeed, large mining companies in Kazakhstan provide these services. The
transition to a system that will be less demanding on investors is likely to be both inevitable and
complicated.

5.3.5     Research & Development

Similarly, the investor has to make commitments regarding support to R&D carried out by Kazakh
institutions. It is expected that this support should correspond to 1 per cent of turnover. This
requirement probably does not have a major deterring effect on investment. Mining companies
may have some problems identifying worthwhile research projects to support, particularly since the
percentage is fairly high in an international perspective, but as long as the requirement is known
and does not change, investors would not be expected to balk at it.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             71
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



6         Conclusions and recommendations
Judging from official policy pronouncements and interviews the objectives of Kazakhstan’s mining
policy are to promote employment and economic diversification, build skills and maintain existing
regions and towns that depend on mineral production. Maximization of government revenue does
not appear to be the paramount objective that it often is in mineral rich countries, mainly because
government revenue from hydro carbons ensures that there are sufficient financial resources to
meet development needs. The country is growing fast, resources for the improvement of the quality
of life and living standards are not lacking, and it is doubtful if more could easily be absorbed, as
seen from the rapid improvement in all components of the HDI. Accordingly, Kazakhstan can
devote its policy making efforts to ensuring that the country is placed on a track towards transition
to a diversified and more resilient economy and, among oil and gas dependent countries,
Kazakhstan is in the lucky and uncommon position to have attractive alternatives to hydrocarbons,
not least in the form of a generous endowment of non-fuel mineral resources. The policy and
regulatory framework for mining should reflect the stated economic policy priorities and should
therefore emphasize employment creation and building skills rather than the maximization of the
government share of profits.

On the basis of what is known about the country’s mineral resources and its sheer size,
Kazakhstan can realistically aspire to building a world class mining industry. In order to do so it
needs to attract foreign investment. Today, hardly any country can build and maintain a large,
technically sophisticated mining industry without investment from abroad, not even countries such
as Australia or Canada. Almost no country has sufficient risk capital, technology, entrepreneurial
ideas and creativity to guarantee continued, sustainable growth. It would seem therefore to be in
Kazakhstan’s interest to focus on improving the strategic aspects that help to draw investors,
particularly the kind of investors that can contribute not just capital but also technical innovation
and a long term commitment. These are the investors that can make a lasting impact and help
building skills and competence.

The changes under-way concerning the way that exploration rights are attributed mark a distinct
improvement in Kazakhstan’s attractiveness to investors. Mining companies are not comfortable
placing themselves in a situation where they lack a guaranteed right to exploit the mineral deposits
that they have found and where they perceive themselves to be at the mercy of the government’s
discretion. Thus, the application of a first come, first served rule to the allocation of mineral rights
should lead to increased exploration interest in Kazakhstan. In particular, security of title and the
right to trade titles would be expected to attract the junior companies that account for most mineral
discoveries globally.

For those discoveries to result in projects that eventually become large scale mines, the political
and regulatory framework has to accommodate investors, particularly the right type of investors
already described. In the following, different aspects of the framework are reviewed from this
angle.


6.1       Institutional, administrative and legislative framework
For the outside observer, it appears that the design of the regulatory framework for non-fuel mining
in Kazakhstan can be traced to two factors: an influence of oil and gas industry experience, and a
reliance on detailed regulation and government discretionary decision making that seems to be a
legacy of the planned Soviet economy. As already noted, mining companies have a different
perception of risks than oil and gas companies, they feel comfortable with a regulatory regime that
leaves as little as possible to government discretion and they consider detailed regulations as
constraints leading to suboptimal solutions, preferring regulation by result to regulation by
methods.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             72
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


6.1.1     Different legislation for oil and gas and solid minerals

As has already been argued, maintaining the current ‘dual purpose’ legislation has more
drawbacks than advantages. When the time comes for a more comprehensive review of solid
mineral legislation, it may therefore be appropriate to consider placing the regulations in a separate
law.

6.1.2     Agreements or laws

As has already been argued, negotiating on a case by case basis invites clever stratagems on the
part of companies, privileging companies with good legal advice, possibly to the detriment of the
ones with good mining engineers, posturing on the part of politicians and capture of negotiations by
interests external to the agreement. Transparent, foreseeable, consistent and stable application of
clear and unambiguous laws will attract companies that are willing to take on geological and
technical risks while being reassured about other risks. Sophisticated mining companies with long
experience also know that cleverly negotiated agreements often do not stand the test of time and
that arrangements based in law often have better lasting value.

6.1.3     English translation of the mining law

The international mining community uses English as its working language. Consequently, having a
good and easy to understand English translation of the mining law reduces the risk of
misunderstandings and constitutes an advantage when attracting investors. The translation of the
Kazakhstan mining law that is currently available unfortunately leaves much to be desired. Part of
the problem is the law itself, which to somebody used to current practice mining laws seems
unnecessarily detailed and complicated. But the quality of the English translation also contributes
to reducing the accessibility of the law. A priority measure to be taken in order to raise
Kazakhstan’s attractiveness as a destination f or mining investment would therefore be to
commission a new translation and field test it on mining industry professionals that are native
English speakers.


6.2       Fiscal regime
The mining tax system in Kazakhstan has four characteristics that reduce its competitiveness:

         The investor cannot be sure of the amount of some of the taxes that have to be negotiated,
          thus introducing an element of uncertainty in the investment calculation.
         Kazakhstan does not have stability clauses; which further exacerbates uncertainty.
         Some taxes have to be paid up front, which, considering the long lead time for investment
          and that mining companies operate under uncertainty, tends to have a disproportionate
          deterring effect.
         Finally, most importantly, the marginal tax rate that is generated by a combination of the
          EPT and the mineral royalty is high; which raises the hurdle rate that investment projects
          have to clear, thereby reducing the amount of investment and maintain production and
          employment below potential.

The first and second point concern mainly the signature bonus and the commercial discovery
bonus. If these bonus requirements are retained for application to permits granted on an auction or
privatization, the rules should be easy to understand and administer.

In terms of improving the competitiveness of the fiscal regime in Kazakhstan, the following
recommendations can be made:



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             73
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


        Until Kazakhstan is able to demonstrate a track record of fiscal stability, the Government
         should legislate a form of fiscal stability that meets investors’ concerns. At a minimum, the
         Government should ensure that there is multi-stakeholder input where significant changes
         to the tax law are being considered or proposed.

        The Government should consider revising the thin capitalization rules to make them easier
         to understand and administer, and to make them applicable only to related party financing.
         Canada’s Income Tax Act offers a good example of a simple and effective thin
         capitalization rule.

        The Government should consider revising the transfer pricing rules to make it clear that
         these rules apply only to related party transactions.

        The Government should consider either repealing the EPT or reducing the top marginal tax
         rate from the present 60 per cent (see also final bullet point for a range of possible rates.)

        The Government should consider reducing its royalty rates to more competitive levels, and
         should consider reducing the number of royalty rates to two – one rate for gold and other
         precious metals, and another rate for other metals (see also final bullet point for a range of
         possible rates).

        The Government should consider repealing the signature bonus and commercial discovery
         bonus. If these bonus requirements are retained for application to permits granted on an
         auction or privatization, the rules should be easy to understand and administer.

        It would appear advisable to consider reviewing tax rates on the basis of the total tax
         package. The Government should consider adopting a combination of royalty and EPT
         rates along the lines shown in the example in Table 15 (replicated below) in order to make
         the country’s fiscal regime for mining more internationally competitive.

                                                                                                        Government Share
                      Royalty Rate            Maximum EPT Rate                  Project IRR              of Pre-Tax Cash
                                                                                                               Flow
Current rates               5%                          60%                        16.20%                     52.90%
Case A                      3%                          10%                        17.60%                    46.50%
Case B                    3.50%                          5%                        17.50%                    46.10%
Case C                    4.00%                          0%                        17.50%                    45.90%

Concerning the final point, this requires an in-depth understanding of the dynamic relationship
between the various taxes, something that can be attained, for instance, by using a tax model, as
mentioned in the Terms of Reference for the present report.68

In considering whether to emulate another country’s tax legislation in order to avoid a potentially
time consuming process of “re-inventing the wheel” through trial and error, consideration should be
given to:

     1. The nature of the other country’s resources as compared to those of Kazakhstan, including
        geography, geology, climate, access to energy, social policies and sentiments, educated
        labour force, and so forth;
     2. The maturity of the other country’s mining industry and fiscal framework; and
     3. The country’s fiscal objectives and other political policies.

68
  Given budgetary limitations, this is foreseen as a further project or a consultancy hired directly by the Government of
Kazakhstan.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             74
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan




Canada may be a good example of a county for Kazakhstan to emulate. Canada’s modern income
tax regime, as set out in the Income Tax Act (Canada), had its beginnings in 1951 following an
extensive reform of the law. Since then, Canada’s Income Tax Act and tax policies have
undergone a series of refinements that enhance effectiveness and efficiencies. For example,
where taxpayers’ aggressive tax planning has sought to avoid or evade the thrust of the law, the
law has been amended and improved to reinforce the spirit of the law and enforce tax collections.

Rather than reinventing the law, Kazakhstan can benefit from the experience of other countries,
such as Canada, by incorporating tax provisions that have proven themselves as workable and
desirable. For example, in the 1980s when Canada resolved to replace its federal sales tax with a
value added tax, the Canadian government surveyed existing value added tax systems around the
world, and decided to copy New Zealand’s value added tax system, which adapted well to
Canada’s economy.

Annex F shows a profile of Canada’s world leading mining industry today.


6.2.1     Local content

Local content regulations are perceived to confine the industry in a straitjacket of constraining
details and to burden them with onerous monitoring and reporting obligations. In a worst case,
local content regulations could even become an obstacle to technical efficiency by making the
introduction of best practice technology subject to the availability of offsetting local goods in other
areas. The penalties for failure to meet the targets are also considered to be unduly harsh, since a
company could lose its license for having missed them. Accordingly, investors tend to be critical of
the present local content regulations, even when they have no particular difficulty in meeting the
requirements.

In addition to the negative effect on attractiveness to investors, the local content regulations as
they stand would appear to contradict WTO rules. Kazakhstan’s accession to the WTO would
therefore require rather radical changes in the approach to local content. A further reason to
consider changes is the planned entry into full force of the Customs Union with Belarus and Russia
in 2015. Presumably, this means that Belarus and Russian companies will have to be considered
as local under the legislation. There would seem to be little interest on the part of the Kazakhstan
government in maintaining a legislation that would mainly benefit Russian suppliers to the mining
industry.

Finally, the cost to mining companies from complying with local content regulations would be more
acceptable if the regulations could be shown to have substantial positive results. However, the
proportion of goods and services that are locally supplied, almost 14 per cent in the case of goods
and almost 87 per cent in the case of services (Esteves et al., 2013), while well in line with what
has been achieved elsewhere, do not seem to differ dramatically from the situation in other
countries with more flexible regulations.

Accordingly, the present policy of setting targets for local content that are enshrined in binding
agreements with monitoring and reporting based on a detailed accounting would not appear to be
suited to Kazakhstan’s needs. Neither does it appear possible or desirable to retain it in view of
anticipated changes to Kazakhstan’s international trade relations. Finally, it is questionable if the
policy is effective enough to justify its costs.

A shift to a more flexible policy that would reduce the perceived up front risks to investors while still
contributing to industrialization and growth of skills could be considered. Such a policy should
recognize that it is in the interest of mining companies to build up a portfolio of reliable and
qualified local suppliers. As has been the case in other countries, it could be based on
consultations between government (including local ones) industry associations and mining

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             75
                           Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


companies, aiming to identify promising branches of industry and the obstacles with respect to
skills, logistics or capital provision that will have to be removed for those industries to realize their
potential.69 Making the agreements on local content between government and mining companies
voluntary instead of mandated by law, while at the same time broadening their scope to
encompass the more general issues indicated would probably not yield significantly lower results in
terms of overall local content. But the policy would reduce costs to both government and mining
companies.

6.2.2        Social investment

Modern international mining companies consider their social investments as an essential element
of ensuring that they retain a ‘social license to operate’. They therefore devote substantial financial
resources to spending on infrastructure, social services and local business development, with the
latter often being pursued jointly with efforts to orient procurement towards local suppliers. The
main dilemma from a governance point of view is for companies to avoid replacing government.

Kazakhstan represents an unusual challenge to foreign investors insofar as companies there
traditionally provide a much broader range of services than is common in countries not having
been part of the Soviet Union. Foreign investors could in principle envisage taking over some or all
of the responsibility for services performed by former state owned companies where there is no
other easily identifiable entity that could assume that responsibility. This is not uncommon in other
countries where public service provision through mining companies has been common. When it
comes to green field projects, however, investors are unlikely to accept the same level of
responsibility. Accordingly, negotiations between the government and investors would probably be
more successful if the difference between new and old projects were explicitly recognized and the
government made clear its expectations in this regard.

6.2.3        Research and Development and training

At present, companies are expected to contribute 1 per cent of turnover to R&D and spend the
same amount on training of its employees. While companies are unlikely to object to the second
requirement, which is largely in line with industry averages, the first may be more problematic. The
world mining industry as a whole spends less than 1 per cent of turnover on R&D and companies
may find that a requirement of the present magnitude constitutes a tax under another name.
Accordingly, it would seem prudent to review this requirement in the context of an overall review of
the level and composition of the Kazakhstan mining tax package.




69
     Areas for intervention have been identified, thus potentially simplifying the task (Esteves et al., 2013).

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                   76
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



References / Bibliography
Barrick Gold Corporation, 2013, Annual Report
Boyce, J., and Ndikuma, L. 2012. Capital flight from sub-Saharan African countries: Updated
   estimates, 1970–2010. Political Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts,
   Amherst, October 2012.
BP PLC, 2013, Statistical Review of World Energy
Chamber of Mines of Zambia and ICMM, 2014, Enhancing mining’s contribution to the Zambian
economy and society, case study by OPM.
Engineering and Mining Journal, 6 January 2011
Esteves, A.M., Ogorodnikova, V., Putz, C., Coyne, B., 2013, Increasing Domestic Procurement by
the Mining Industry in Central Asia, Report prepared for the World Bank
E&Y, 2013, Global Tax Guide
Fraser Institute, 2013, Annual Survey of Mining Companies
Freeport-McMoRan Copper & Gold Inc., 2013, Annual Report
Global Financial Integrity, 2013, Illicit Financial Flows from Developing Countries: 2002-2011
Government of Canada, 2014, Income Tax Act (Canada)
Government of Chile, 1974, Foreign Investment Statute
Government of Indonesia, 1998, Contract of Work
Government of Kazakhstan, 2010, Law No. 291 on Sub-Soil and Sub-Soil Use
Government of Kazakhstan, 2008, Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan «Concerning Taxes and
Other Obligatory Payments to the Budget
Government of Sweden, 1973, Kungl. Maj:ts proposition angaende statligt stöd till upptagande av
gruvdrift vid Stekenjokk Prop. No. 1973:52 (Proposal by His Majesty the King’s Government
concerning state support to the establishment of mining at Stekenjokk, author’s translation).
Government of Sweden, 2013, Sveriges mineralstrategi (Sweden’s mineral strategy)
Guarnieri, D., 2013, Presentation at iPAD, RDC Mines et Infrastructures Indaba, Kinshasa, 9-11
   October.
International Bar Association, Model Mine Development Agreement, April 4, 2011
    (http://www.mmdaproject.org/)
ICMM, 2006, Synthesis of Four Country Case Studies, The Challenge of Mineral Wealth: using
resource endowments to foster sustainable development.
ICMM, 2007, Chile. The Challenge of Mineral Wealth: using resource endowments to foster
sustainable development
ICMM, 2010, Mapping in-country partnerships
ICMM, 2011, Utilizing mining and mineral resources to foster the sustainable development of the
   Lao PDR
ICMM,2012, Community Development Toolkit , revised 2012

IMF, 2013, Republic of Kazakhstan, 2013 Article IV Consultation, IMF Country report No. 13/290

IMF, 2014a, World Economic Outlook database, April 2014

IMF, 2014b, Article IV Consultation, Concluding Statement of the IMF Mission, May 1, 2014


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             77
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


KPMG, 2014, Chile – Country Mining Guide

Land, B., 2010, Resource Rent Tax: A Re-appraisal, in The Taxation of Petroleum and Minerals:
Proinciples, Problems and Practice, edited by Philip Daniel, Michael Keen and Charles
McPherson, Washington D.C., Routledge.
Newmont Mining Corporation, 2013, Annual Report
Mining Association of Canada, 2013, Facts and Figures of the Canadian Mining Industry
OPM, 2013, Sustainable Mining: How good practices in the mining sector contribute to more and
better jobs, Report to ILO
OPM, 2014, Increasing domestic procurement in Zimbabwe’s mining sector, Report to the World
Bank
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012, Doing Business Guide – Kazakhstan
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012, Corporate income taxes, mining royalties and other mining taxes
– 2012 update
SDSG (2012), African Mining and Mining Administration Skills Gap Analysis. Prepared by
  Sustainable Development Strategies Group for the Australia-Africa Partnership Facility (AAPF).
  18 October 2012
Tordo, S., M. Warner, O. E. Manzano, and Y. Anouti. 2013. Local Content Policies in the Oil and
   Gas Sector. World Bank Study. Washington, DC.
UNCTAD, 1994, The mineral sector in Indonesia (UNCTAD/COM/38)
UNCTADstat (http://unctadstat.unctad.org)

UNDP, 2013, Human Development Report 2013

USAID, 2013, Economic Effects of Indonesia’s Mineral-Processing Requirements for Export,
  produced by Nathan Associates Inc.

World Bank, 2013, Doing Business 2014, Economy Profile: Kazakhstan

World Bank, 2002, From Natural Resources to the Knowledge Economy: Trade and Job Quality
World Gold Council, 2013, Economic Contribution 2012




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             78
                           Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Annex A                 Terms of reference

The World Bank, with funding from the Kazakhstan Joint Economic Research Program, is
supporting a program to provide input for the policy reform of the Kazakhstan mining sector.70 This
project, the second to be undertaken, will focus on best practice in mining taxation.

Background
Kazakhstan is fortunate compared to many other mining countries in that the country does not
need a rapid expansion of the sector for foreign exchange or fiscal reasons. The reasons for
expanding the mining sector are more related to: (i) a desire to diversify production; (ii) increasing
employment and related social development; (iii) increasing business opportunities and
innovations’ potential; and (iv) given the large infrastructure needs of many mining operations,
increasing opportunities for partnership in infrastructure development that can impact on all of the
above.

However, under the current mining legislation, Kazakhstan is not likely to see a large increase in
investment either for mining exploration or exploitation, and without this investment none of the
four objectives listed above can be attained. Changing the status and raising the profile of mining
legislation is extremely important for the further development of Kazakhstan's economy and
creation of a favorable investment climate that will ensure a steady flow of foreign direct investment
in the mining industry.

In his Address to the People of Kazakhstan “Socio-Economic Modernization as Main Vector of
Development of Kazakhstan” President- the Leader of the Nation Nursultan Nazarbayev said that
“protection and support of domestic and foreign investors, predictability of legislation and
transparency should be the fundamentals of business climate in Kazakhstan.” In this regard setting
sound and effective legislative framework regulating mining industry operations seems very timely
and appropriate. These Terms of Reference set out the framework for a research to improve
country’s investment climate on mineral taxation.

Objective and Scope of Work
Analysis of and recommendations in the world’s best approaches to mineral taxation with respect
to achieving a proper balance of the fiscal return to the state, benefit creation beyond tax revenues,
and attractiveness to investors.

In the recent 2012/13 prestigious Fraser Institute of Canada’s Survey of Mining Companies on the
attractiveness of the subsoil use legislation, Kazakhstan ranked 80st of 96 countries on the
investment legislations’ policy potential index that considers elements such as taxation, stability of
policies, implementation of policy, governance, trade barriers, currency restrictions, predictability
of policy, etc. In important areas such as the taxation regime, Kazakhstan ranked 65th; the quality
and access of the geological database - 71st; and uncertainty in mining policy and implementation-
66th. With current regulations, the geological potential of Kazakhstan is ranked at 69th of 96
countries, but this would change to 32nd of 96 countries if best practice regulations are in place.
This makes Kazakhstan the 16th highest in the survey on ‘room for improvement’.

There are a number of questions related to the subsoil use in Kazakhstan that could be improved:

          the current system of taxation;

          the procedure for granting rights for the subsoil use71;

70
     In this assignment, mining does not include oil and gas but could include coal if relevant.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                79
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


        the effectiveness of the existing system of providing contractual areas;

        local content development; and

        stimulating investment in mining and exploration.

This study would look at mineral taxation from a multi-lensed perspective, including the impact on
mining investment and exploitation of non-tax benefits that are provided by companies (whether
legislated or not). Subject to additional funding, the topic could include training on tax models to
show the impacts of different mixes of taxes on effective tax rates, frontloading and backloading of
taxes, and other matters of concern to the Government and investors in the context of improving
the investment climate.

Assignment Description
The World Bank has committed to continue to provide technical assistance in the development of
Kazakhstan's mining sector and share a wide international experience of other countries, which will
be of great value in the further development and promotion of the mining sector in Kazakhstan.

The work will encompass a comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in
Kazakhstan with a sample of important mining countries. Subject to additional funding, follow-up
training would be undertaken on developing and running a simulation model of the fiscal impact of
the tax regime on mining operations in various scenarios. 72The tax regime will be broadly defined
to include other obligations of mining companies that have financial implications. The study would
include: (i) comparison of tax rates (royalties, income tax, accelerated depreciation, etc.) of
Kazakhstan’s mining sector with the sample countries; (ii) development of a model to calculate the
effective rates of taxation for the Kazakhstan mining sector, including impacts on frontloading and
backloading of taxes; (iii) comparison of the effective rates of taxation on gross revenues and net
profits in Kazakhstan’s mining sector with the sample countries, focusing on two of Kazakhstan’s
                                       73
most important mineral commodities ; (iv) a comparison of non-tax benefits that companies are
mandated to provide and which impact effective rates of return; (v) a comparison of the institutional
framework for administering the mining tax regime, including legal and dispute resolution
procedures, in Kazakhstan and the sample countries; (vi) an analysis of the impact of the fiscal
regime on investment in exploration and exploitation; (vii) analysis and provision of justification for
having separate legislative basis for solid minerals and hydrocarbons with a main focus on tax
obligations and differences, including lessons learned from taxation of the hydrocarbon sector in
Kazakhstan; and (viii) a comparison of other issues that impact the mining fiscal take in
Kazakhstan and the sample countries, such as transfer pricing, and other issues considered
particularly pertinent for Kazakhstan by the Government. The final analysis of the mineral tax
regime should also be conducted in the framework of recent fiscal policy changes in Kazakhstan.

The sample countries for the study would be chosen in discussion with the Government of
Kazakhstan. For all countries in the sample, fiscal revenues from taxation would be an important
part of the country’s fiscal revenues. At the same time, the countries will b e chosen to represent
diverse situations, such as countries with long-established mining sectors and recent ‘boom’
countries as well as countries where the state mining sector has an important role to play in
ownership.



71
   This was covered under the JERP mining program for FY13.
72
   Note that the proposal should not include a detailed description of such training, nor should it include a budget to do
so. However, the ability of the Consultant to undertake such work should be illustrated briefly.
73
   The choice of comparator countries would to some extent depend on those for which recent calculations of effective
rates of taxation have been undertaken.

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                              80
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


The focus of the study is on the effectiveness of different tax instruments on the fiscal take and
effective tax rates faced by mining companies. However, it will include an analysis of the overall
impact of the fiscal system (including non-tax obligations) on investment levels.

An international consultant or firm will be selected to lead the work through international tender.
The consultant/firm will work with a local consultant/firm with a deep understanding of the Kazakh
mineral sector.

Deliverables
The Consultant is expected to submit the following outputs:

        A study of the mining sector fiscal regimes in a sample of major global mining countries;

        Based on the previous analysis, recommendations on a mining fiscal regime to the
         Government of Kazakhstan.

Reporting
The Consultants will report to Gary McMahon (Senior Mining Specialist) and Yerlan Akishev
(Senior Operations Officer), both at the World Bank.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                             81
                          Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Annex B                Example of fiscal stability provisions in mineral
                       development agreement

Indonesia’s Contract of Work (CoW) offers a very good example of fiscal stability delivered through
a mineral development agreement. Indonesia introduced the CoW in 1967 to stimulate inbound
foreign investment and used it for all inbound foreign investment through 1997. The CoW is the
cornerstone for Indonesia’s modern mining industry, which is a world leader in terms of producing
copper, nickel, gold, tin, and coal. Indonesia abandoned the use of the CoW and fiscal stability in
1998, because the Indonesian Government felt that the industry was mature enough to no longer
need a mineral development agreement. The legislative provisions set out below are extracted
from the template last used by Indonesia in 1997.

Box 9 - Indonesia’s Contract of Work

Article 13 - TAXES AND OTHER FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE COMPANY

Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, the Company shall pay to the Government and fulfill its tax liabilities
including its obligation as tax withholder as hereinafter provided:

(i)      Deadrent in respect of the Contract Area or the Mining Area;

(ii)     Royalties in respect of the Company's production of Minerals;

(iii)    Corporate Income Tax in respect of income received or accrued by the Company;

(iv)     Personal income tax (Article 21/26);

(v)      Obligation to withhold income tax under Article 23 and or Article 26 of Income Tax Law 1994 in respect of
         payment of dividends, interest, including remuneration due to loan payment warranty, rents, royalties and other
         income related to the utilization of property, remuneration for technical and management services as well as
         other services;

(vi)     Value Added Tax (VAT) and Sales Tax on Luxury Goods on import and or delivery of taxable goods and or
         services;

(vii)    Stamp Duty on documents;

(viii)   Import Duty on goods imported into Indonesia;

(ix)     Land and Building Tax in respect of:

         a) the Contract Area or the Mining Area; and

         b) the utilization of land and building in the area where the Company constructs facilities for its mining
            operations.

(x)      Levies, taxes, charges and duties imposed by Local Government in Indonesia which have been approved by
         the Central Government;

(xi)     General administrative fees and charges for facilities or services rendered and particular rights granted by the
         Government to the extent that such fees and charges have been approved by the Central Government;
(xii)     Duty on registration and transfer of ownership of motorized vehicles and ships in Indonesia.

The Company shall not be subject to any other taxes, duties, levies, contributions, charges or fees now or
hereafter levied or imposed or approved by the Government other than those provided for in this Article and
elsewhere in this Agreement. (Bold font added by author for emphasis.)

1.       Deadrent in respect of the Contract Area or the Mining Area.

         The Company shall pay, in Rupiah or in such other currencies as may be mutually agreed, an annual amount
         of money as deadrent to be measured by the number of hectares included in the Contract Area or Mining Area
                                              st           st
         respectively, calculated on January 1 and July 1 of each Year, such payments to be made in advance and in
         two instalments each payable within thirty (30) days after the said dates during the term of this Agreement and

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             82
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


       payable as stipulated in Annex “D” attached hereto.

2.     Royalties in respect of the Company’s production of Minera ls.

       (i)     The Company shall pay royalties in respect of the products (as defined in Annex “F” and detailed in
               Annex “G”) from the Mining Area, to the extent that such products are products for which value
               according to general practice is paid or payable to the Company by a buyer. Royalties shall be paid in
               Rupiah or such other currency as may be mutually agreed and shall be paid on or before the last day of
               the month following each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a statement
               showing in reasonable detail the basis of computation of royalties due in respect of the production of the
               Company during the preceding calendar quarter.

               Royalties will be computed from the rates specified in Annex “F” as follows:

               a) the tonnage or quantity by weight used in the computation shall be based on the final product
                  produced by the Company. In the case of concentrates or dore bullion, the quantity by weight of
                  each mineral, and or metal subject to royalty shall be properly determined by internationally
                  accepted assay methods.

               b) The Government shall (upon written request by the Company) specify the royalty tariff in column 4 of
                  Annex “F” for those minerals for which no tariff reference is given.

       (ii)    The Company undertakes that any mining, processing or treatment of ore prior to domestic sale or
               export shipment by the Company shall be conducted in accordance with such generally accepted
               international standards as are economically and technically feasible, and in accordance with such
               standards the Company undertakes to use all reasonable efforts to optimize the mining recovery of
               products from the ore, provided it is economically and technically feasible to do so, and shall submit
               evidence to the Department of compliance with this undertaking. Royalty shall be payable at the rates
               specified in Annex “F” on any industrial minerals separately quarried from the Contract Area by the
               Enterprise except for those industrial minerals (C minerals category) used for regional development.
               Any waste minerals moved to allow operations to proceed or extracted in the course of mining and used
               by the Enterprise are exempted from such royalty.

       (iii)   If in the opinion of the Government, the Company is failing without good cause to recover products at
               the recovery rate indicated in the feasibility study, it may give notice in writing to the Company. Within
               three (3) months of the receipt of this notice the Company shall:

               a) commence work to improve its mining method, treatment and processing facilities to the reasonable
                  satisfaction of the Government, provided that the Company shall in no event be obliged to conduct
                  mining, processing or treatment activities otherwise than as provided in item (ii) paragraph (2) Article
                  13;

               b) submit to the Government evidence in justification of its performance in accordance with item (ii),
                  paragraph (2) of this Article 13. In the event that the Government remains unsatisfied with the
                  Company’s performance in mining ore from the proven reserve and recovering products from the
                  ore, the Government shall have the right to commission independent technical studies to determine
                  a fair average recovery rate taking into account the nature of the proven reserve and the ore and the
                  economic and technical feasibility of achieving increased recovery by the Company in accordance
                  with item (ii), paragraph (2) of this Article 13. Such studies shall be carried out by internationally
                  recognized consultants appointed by the Government and agreed to by the Company. In the event
                  that the Government and the Company fail to agree on the appointment of the consultant, each
                  party shall appoint one consultant. The two consultants shall then jointly appoint a third consultant.
                  The results shall be determined by the findings of the majority in this event. The Government and
                  the Company shall have the right to prepare submissions to the consultants. If the said consultants
                  find that the performance of the Company’s operations is not satisfactory, then the cost shall be
                  borne by the Company. If it is found that the performance of the Company’s obligations is
                  satisfactory, then the cost shall be borne by the Government. If following the completion of such
                  studies, the Company fails within a reasonable period to achieve the recovery rate indicated by the
                  majority of such studies, the Government shall have the right if the Company is not then observing
                  its undertaking in item (ii), paragraph (2) of this Article 13 to increase the royalty applicable to such
                  products in proportion to the extent that recovery of such products by the Company falls short of the
                  fair average rate indicated by such studies. But at no time shall the payment of such increased
                  royalty free the Company from the obligation to observe its undertaking in item (ii), paragraph (2) of
                  this Article 13.

3.     Corporate Income Tax in respect of income received or accrued by the Company :

       (i)     The Company shall pay Income Tax on income, that is any increase in economic ability received or
               accrued by the Company, whether originating from within or outside Indonesia, in whatever name and


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                               83
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


               form, including but not limited to gross profit from business, dividends interest and royalties and the tax
               rates to be charged for the duration of this Agreement shall be as follows:

               a) Ten percent (10%) for taxable income up to twenty five million Rupiah (Rp 25.000.000);

               b) Fifteen five percent (15%) for taxable income exceeding twenty five million Rupiah (Rp 25.000.000)
                  up to fifty million Rupiah (Rp 50.000.000);

               c) Thirty percent (30%) or lower rate as set forth by Government regulations for taxable income
                  exceeding fifty million Rupiah (Rp 50.000.000).

               Should the income brackets be amended by the Minister of Finance, then the tax rates mentioned in a),
               b), and c) will be applied to the amended income brackets.

       (ii)    To calculate the taxable income, the rules for computation of Income Tax as provided for in Annex “H”
               attached to and made part of this Agreement shall apply. Except as otherwise stipulated in this
               Agreement, the rules as provided in Income Tax Law 1994, and its implementations regulation, shall
               apply.

       (iii)   The Company shall pay instalments for its current tax year in accordance with Article 25 Income Tax
               Law 1994 and its implementing regulations.

       (iv)    For specific income as stipulated in paragraph (2) Article 4 of Income Tax Law 1994, shall be subject to
               specific tax rate in accordance with the provisions of Government Regulation.

4.     Personal Income Tax (Article 21/Article 26)

       (i)     the Company has liability to withhold and remit Income Tax on income related to work, including
               severance payment and pension paid to employees of the Company as resident taxpayer according to
               Article 21 or Article 26 of the Income Tax Law 1994.

       (ii)    expatriate Individuals employed or engaged by the Company who are present in Indonesia for less than
               one hundred and eighty three (183) days in any twelve month period shall be subject to Income Tax
               through withholding tax by the Company based on Article 26 of the Income Tax Law 1994, with a rate of
               twenty percent (20%) or such lower rates due to the enforcement of relevant Tax Treaty on the gross
               income for services, activities or works in Indonesia.
               The income of such Expatriate Individuals, which is taxable in Indonesia includes all kinds of
               remuneration paid to them for services rendered in Indonesia subject to the provisions of paragraph 7 of
               Annex “H”.

       (iii)   expatriate individuals who are employed or engaged by the Company and who are present in Indonesia
               for more than one hundred and eighty three (183) days in any twelve month period or intending to
               reside in Indonesia, shall be subject to Income Tax through withholding tax by the Company based on
               Article 21 of the Income Tax Law 1994, from the income paid to the Company’s employees with
               consideration being given to the regulations relating to non taxable income. The income of such
               Expatriate Individuals shall include all kinds of remuneration paid to them by the Company, subject to
               the provisions of paragraph 7 of Annex “H”.

       (iv)    severance payments paid to employees working in the Contract Area shall be subject to Income Tax in
               accordance with the prevailing regulation.

5.     Income Tax under Article 23 and Article 26.

       The Company in accordance with the Income Tax Law 1994 and regulation prevailing at the date of signing of
       this Agreement is obliged to withhold and remit Income Tax to the Government at a rate specified in this Article
       or such lower rate due to the enforcement of relevant Tax Treaty as follows:

       (i)     dividends, interest in whatever form including loan guarantee fee;

       (ii)    rents, royalties and other income related to the utilization of property;

       (iii)   compensation paid for technical services, managerial services, and other services;

       (iv)    grant and reward;

       (v)     insurance premiums which are paid to non-resident insurance company;

       The rates of such withholding tax in force as from the date of signing of this Agreement are :



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                              84
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


       (a)     fifteen percent (15%) of gross income in the case of payments of dividends, interest, and royalties, paid
               to resident taxpayer excluding dividend, paid to a resident company, cooperative, foundation or similar
               organization, state owned company or company owned by local government.

       (b)     seven and a half percent (7.5%) of gross income in the case of payment of dividend to a non resident
               founder shareholder and individual resident founder shareholder.

       (c)     fifteen percent (15%) of deemed net income on rents and income related to the use of property, and
               compensation paid for technical, management and other services in accordance with Article 23 Income
               Tax Law, 1994 in case of payment made to resident taxpayer.

       (d)     twenty percent (20%) of gross income or such lower rate due to the relevant Tax Treaty in case of
               income payment as stipulated in Article 26 of Income Tax Law 1994 made to non resident taxpayer.

6.     Value Added Tax (VAT) and Sales Tax on Luxury Goods according to the VAT Law 1994 and its implemental
       regulations in effect.

       With due regard to the general liability under VAT Law 1994 and all of its implemental regulations, the
       Company has liability

       (i)     to report its business and apply for registration as a Taxable Firm;

       (ii)    to collect, remit and report VAT on the delivery of taxable goods at the rate of ten percent (10%) or
               other rates in accordance with VAT Law 1994 and its implemental regulations;

       (iii)   to withhold remit and report VAT and or Sales Tax on Luxury Goods as VAT witholder based on the
               VAT Law 1994 and its implementing regulations;

       (iv)    the Company is subject to the VAT and or Sales Tax on Luxury Goods, on import or the purchasing of
               taxable goods or obtaining taxable services which are based on VAT Law 1994 and its implemental
               regulations, subject to VAT and or Sales Tax on Luxury Goods;

       (v)     in case Input Tax exceeds Output Tax in a particular tax period, overpayment of Input Tax can be
               compensated with Output Tax for the following tax period, excluding overpayment on Input Tax resulting
               from export and or delivery to the VAT witholder, which may submit a request for refund at any tax
               period;

       (vi)    taxable goods and or services related directly to the Contract of Work which were accrued by the
               shareholder as a part of expenses before the establishment of the Company and thereafter transferred
               to the Company will not be considered as delivery of taxable goods and or services for VAT purposes to
               the extent that such shareholder is a Taxable Firm;

       (vii)   the transferred Input Tax on taxable goods and or services, for VAT purposes, referred to sub-
               paragraph (vi) paragraph 6 of this Article, may be credited by the Company, to the extent it has not
               been credited yet by the shareholder.

7.     Stamp Duty on Documents.

       The Company will be subject to stamp Duty in accordance with the provisions stipulated in Law Number 13
       Year 1985 regarding Stamp Duty and its implementing regulations.

8.     Import Duty on goods imported into Indonesia

       (i)     exemption and tax reliefs on import duty on capital goods, equipment, and machinery and supplies are
               granted to the Company based on Law Number 1 Year 1967 concerning Foreign Capital Investment as
               amended by Law Number 11 Year 1970, as provided in Article 12 of this Agreement.

       (ii)    import of other goods into Indonesian customs areas, including personal effects shall be subject to the
               customs rule in accordance with the prevailing Law and Regulations.

       (iii)   excise tax on excise taxable goods are governed by prevailing legislation.

9.     Land and Building Tax

       The company shall pay Land and Building Tax (PBB) in Rupiah or in other currencies as may be mutually
       agreed, as follows :

       (i)     during pre-production periods (General Survey, Exploration, Feasibility Studies and Construction
               Periods), the Company shall pay Land and Building Tax of an amount equal to the amount of deadrent


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                            85
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


               as stated in Article 13 paragraph (1) of this Agreement;

       (ii)    during the Operation Production Period, the company shall pay Land and Building Tax of an amount
               equal to the amount of deadrent plus an amount of 0.5% x 30% of gross revenue from the mining
               operations;

       (iii)   the Company shall also pay Land and Building Tax on land/water and building outside or inside the
               Contract Area/Mining Area used by the Company for its facilities which are closed to the public, an
               amount to be measured by the number of square metres of land/water and floor space and type of the
               building in accordance with the provisions of Law Number 12 Year 1985 as amended by Law Number
               12 of 1994 and the classification and the amount of Sales Value of Tax Object stipulated by the
               Regional Tax Office of the Directorate General of Taxes and such Land and Building tax payment shall
               be imposed during the term of this Agreement;.

       (iv)    imposition and payment of Land and Building Tax for the Contact Area/Mining Area during pre-
               production period as stipulated in sub paragraph (i) above, shall be governed by the general payment
               procedure on Land and Building Tax;

       (v)     imposition and payment of Land and Building Tax for the Contract Area/Mining Area during the
               Operation Production Period and for land/water and building used by the Company, shall be governed
               by sub paragraph (ii) and (iii) above, and the general payment procedure on Land and Building Tax.

10.    The Company shall pay levies, taxes, charges, and duties imposed by the Local Government in Indonesia
       pursuant to Law Number 18 of 1997 concerning Local Taxes and Charges and all of its implementing
       regulations.

11.    The company shall pay general administrative fees and charges for facilities or services and special rights
       granted by the Local Government pursuant to Law Number 18 of 1997 concerning Local Taxes and Charges
       and all of its implementing regulations.

12.    Duty on transfer of ownership.

       The Company shall pay duties on transfer of ownership for :

       (i)     motor vehicles, which shall be levied by the Local Government where the vehicles are registered at a
               rate in accordance with the relevant Local Government regulations;

       (ii)    registration certificates and transfer of ships or sea transportation operating in Indonesia.

       Tax compliance of the Company and its subsidiaries or its Affiliates, in connection with formal and
       material tax obligations such as Tax Identification Numbers, Tax Returns, Tax payments, reporting, etc,
       and rights on taxation such as appeal on tax assessment, refund, tax credit, compensation and
       penalties are subject to provisions provided in Law Number 6 of 1983 concerning General Tax
       Provisions and Procedures as amended by Law Number 9 of 1994, Income Tax Law 1994, Value Added
       Tax Law 1994, Law Number 12 Year 1985 concerning Land and Building Tax as amended by Law
       Number 12 of 1994, Law Number 13 of 1985 concerning Stamp Duty, and all of its implementing
       regulations. (Bold font added by author for emphasis.)

       In determining the Company's net taxable income, sound, consistent and generally accepted accounting
       principles as usually used in the mining industry shall be employed, provided, however, that where more than
       one accounting practice is found by the Government to prevail with regard to particular item, the Government
       shall consult with the Company in relation to such particular item.

       Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, for accounting purposes, the Government shall in no event be
       bound by the Company's characterization of any transaction with an Affiliate as stated by the Company.

       In the event that the Government has determined an unreasonable situation exists, or one that is not in
       accordance with general practice followed by independent parties in similar transactions on a certain payment,
       deduction, charges for expenses or other transactions with an Affiliate for the purposes of determining the
       Company's income tax, the Government shall substitute the payment, deduction, charges for expenses or
       other transactions which would have prevailed had the transaction occurred between independent parties.

Annex “H” - RULES FOR COMPUTATION OF INCOME TAX

1.     “Year”, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties, means

       a)      Calendar year or part thereof as from the date of the signing of this Agreement up to the first December
               31st;



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                           86
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


       b)     Each subsequent full calendar year from January 1st up to December 31st, inclusive during the term of
              this Agreement; and

       c)     The period from January 1 up to the date of termination of this Agreement for the calendar year or part
              thereof where this Agreement shall be terminated.

2.     “Products” has the same meaning as set out in Article 1 of this Agreement.

3.     Subject to the provisions of the Income Tax Law 1994 and its implementing regulations, “Operating Expenses”
       in any year means the amount paid or accrued for all expenditures attributable to the Enterprise in such year to
       the extent that the useful life is less than one (1) year. Operating expenses include, among others, the
       following expenses :

       a)     expenses in respect of material, supplies, equipment and utilities;

       b)     expenses for contracted service on behalf of the Enterprise;

       c)     expenses for premiums for insurance (foreign and domestic) on tangible assets, inventories and for
              premiums against business and operational interruptions and for premiums against other parties claims,
              provided that where such premiums are paid to an Affiliate, the premiums shall not exceed the amount
              payable in arm’s length transaction to other independent parties;

       d)     expenses in respect of damage or losses to the extent that they are not fully compensated for by
              insurance or otherwise;

       e)     expenses for royalties, interest and other payments including those to Affiliates for patents, designs,
              technical information and services provided that such amounts and payments shall not exceed the
              amount paid for similar transactions with independent parties;

       f)     amounts in respect to losses resulting from obsolesence, theft, or inventory damage that make them no
              longer useable in operations, supported by appropriate evidence with an official report witnessed by the
              Department. The amount to be deducted is the book value of such inventory.

       g)     expenses for rental payments of tangible goods.

       h)     expenses for Deadrent, Land and Building Tax, Royalties, uncredited Value Added Tax, Sales Tax on
              Luxury Goods, Stamp Duty, transfer of ownership tax, import duty and levies paid based on this
              Agreement, except the Company’s Income Tax;

       i)     expenses for treatment, washing, and other processing expenses;

       j)     expenses for handling, loading, storing, transporting and shipping;

       k)     expenses for repairs and maintenance;

       l)     expenses for commissions and discounts, including expenses paid to the Affiliates, provided that such
              cost and payments shall not exceed the amount should have been paid for similar transactions with
              independent parties;

       m)     Environmental Management and Reclamation Costs, which is deducted from reserve for reclamation
              cost account;

       n)     allowable for deductions governed by paragraph 4 though 12 below.

4.     Group of Assets and rate of depreciation for tangible assets owned and used in the Contract Area and Project
       Area are based on Government Regulation Number 34 of 1994. If the lifetime of mine is shorter, then the
       remaining book value may be fully depreciated at once.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                           87
                          Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan




                                 DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION TABLE
                         ACCORDING TO GOVERNMENT REGULATION NUMBER 34 OF 1994

                      Group of Assets                       Life time         Rates of Depreciation and Amortization
                                                                                     based on the method of:
                                                                                 __________________________
                                                                                 Straight line         Declining
                                                                                                       Balance
       I. Non Building or intangible asset

       Group I
       Group 2                                               2 years                  50%                     100%
       Group 3                                               4 years                  25%                     50%
       Group 4                                               8 years                 12.5%                    25%
                                                            10 years                  10%                     20%
       II. Building

       Permanent                                            20 years                  10%
       Non permanent                                        10 years                  20%


       Depreciable assets comprise tangible assets owned and used in the enterprise or owned to obtain, to claim
       and to maintain income with a useful life of more than one year including buildings, machinery, equipment,
       vessels, railways, vehicles, bridges, piers, roads, shipyards, and other depreciable tangible assets in
       accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, including facilities provided by the Company for
       public purposes, such as roads, schools, and hospitals together with their equipment in the Contract Area or
       Project Area.
       For other depreciable tangible assets owned and used by the Company located outside the Contract Area or
       Project Area, provision as provided in Article 11 and 11A of Income Tax Law 1994 will apply.

5.     Groups of assets and rate of amortization for intangible assets are based on the Government Regulation
       Number 34 of 1994. If the lifetime of mine is shorter then the remaining book value may all be amortized at
       once at the end of the lifetime in the last year of lifetime.
       Expenses on amortizable intangible assets is an expense on intangible assets with a useful life of more than
       one (1) year, owned and used by the Company to obtain, collect or preserve income, including :

       a)      expenses on patents, rights, concessions, licences, rental contracts and other intangible assets which
               can be amortized in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;

       b)      all expenses incurred prior to commencement of the Operating Period, including expenses to obtain
               mining or survey rights, or mining or survey information, general survey, exploration, feasibility and
               development, employee training, assistance for education and other deductions allowed under this
               Agreement and permitted under Income Tax Law 1994.

6.     “Expenses incurred prior to the establishment of the Company” expended by shareholders, and directly related
       to this Contract of Work Agreement, can be consolidated into the Company’s account as cost element. These
       expenses must be audited by a public accountant and approved by the Director General of Taxes.

7.     With due regard to the provisions of the Income Tax Law 1994 and all of its implementing regulations, “selling,
       general and administrative expenses” in any year can be deducted from gross income and include but are not
       limited to management expenses, compensation fees for services rendered abroad, executive salaries,
       communication expenses, contributions and subscriptions, advertising and other selling expenses, public
       relations and office expenses, marketing expenses (but limited only to reasonable expenses relating to the
       mining enterprise and excluding expenses for unrelated production research), legal and auditing expenses,
       general administration expenses, including reasonable charges from Affiliates to be allocated to the operations
       in Indonesia to the extent that these charges represent actual cost of services provided in such year.

       The following items shall also be included in selling, general and administrative expenses of the Company :

       a)      Wages, salaries and other compensation including employee remuneration of personnel employed or
               engaged by the Company or any Affiliate of the Company, who are assigned to the Company on a
               temporary, part-time or permanent basis.

       b)      Remuneration in the form of benefit in kind given to the employee assigned to the Contract Area or
               Project Area in the form of:


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                          88
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



              -      transportation facilities for employees and their families from the point of hire within Indonesia to
                     the Contract Area by means of land, water, and air transport facilities on economy class fares;

              -      accommodation including housing for employees and their families in the Contract Area or
                     Project Area;

              -      compensation or remuneration given in kind such as supply of food/drink for employees on the
                     job location and supply of foodstuffs for their families to fulfill their daily basic necessities;

              -      medical services in the Contract Area or Project Area or in other areas within Indonesia to the
                     extent that these are unavailable in the Contract Area or Project Area, including limited medical
                     check ups and medical treatment to fulfill medical requirements of their jobs, assignment,
                     including medicinal treatment as well as hospital treatment either in the Contract Area or Project
                     Area or in other areas within Indonesia, to the extent that these are unavailable in the Contract
                     Area or Project Area;

              -      education facilities for employees families limited to general education of Elementary School,
                     Junior High School, Senior High School and other School at the same level in the Contract Area;

              -      sports facilities for employees and their families in the Contract Area, excluding golf, boating,
                     squash, bowling, hunting, horse racing, and gliding facilities;

              -      domestic leave travel facility for employees, including expatriates, once a year for maximum
                     fourteen (14) days, these limited to the round trip transportation allowance reimbursement;

              -      transportation facilities for employees and their families from the Contract Area or Project Area to
                     the point of hire at the time of termination either in the case of pension or other reasons, limited
                     only to land, water, and air transport by economy class fare,

       c)     all facilities necessary to be provided in the Contract Area or Project Area for employees’ education and
              training, and the facility for religious activities, and employee canteen;

       d)     General administrative expenses for product research and development, market development and
              technical services, legal and accounting services of personnel employed or engaged by any of the
              Company’s Affiliates, who are not assigned to the Company, but such services are required for the
              benefit of the Enterprise, but not exceeding the amount to be paid in similar transactions with other
              parties not affiliated to the Company;

       e)     All necessary travelling expenses for travelling within Indonesia, to and from Indonesia, and other
              countries in relation to Company business. In the case of an employee is assigned to the enterprise,
              such travel expenses shall include reasonable accommodation expenses to and from Indonesia and his
              country of residence.

       (f)    Charges for laboratory and technical services rendered to the Company by any of its Affiliates and/or
              sub-contractors. These expenses shall consist of the cost of the charge for such services and shall not
              exceed the cost payable to a non-Affiliated party for such services.

8.     “Interest Expenses” paid or incurred in any year on loan capital including loan from shareholders in so far as
       the authorized capital of the Company has been fully paid, provided that the ratio between the loan capital over
       the equity capital does not exceed 5 : 1 for investment of an amount up to two hundred million United States
       Dollars (US$200,000,000) and 8 : 1 for investment of an amount more than two hundred million United States
       Dollars (US$200,000,000) and the interest on loan capital does not exceed the generally applicable market
       interest rate at the time of borrowing.

9.     In the event of a loss incurred after gross income is deducted by the expenses mentioned in the above Articles,
       such a loss can be compensated with income within the following eight (8) years after the year in which the
       loss occurred. The first losses occurring shall be first deducted from net income in the following eight (8)
       succeeding years.

10.    “Exploration Expenses” in any year means all amounts of expenses related to exploration or evaluation of
       mineral deposits, including but not limited to camp construction cost, compensation payment, land rent, drilling,
       development, pumping, labor, clearing, access roads, electricity connection and waterworks, service charges
       for erecting transmission lines, piping, project communication facilities and other similar expenses incurred in
       preparing the Contract Area or Project Area or Mining Area or in the Processing of Minerals.

11.    “Reserve for Reclamation Cost” is an amount retained by way of calculation in the financial records of the
       Company in respect of management of environment and reclamation work to be carried out at the end of the
       mine life calculated from the commencement of the Operating Period and revised annually (subject to audit by


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                              89
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


       the public accountant and approved by the Directorate General of Taxes). Such amount retained shall be
       calculated in accordance with the regulations in force, and deposited in the State owned Bank. The actual cost
       of management of environment and reclamation incurred during the contract period shall firstly be drawn from
       such reserve, if the amount of actual cost exceeds such reserve then the excess is deductible as expenses.

12.    “Other Expenses” in any year means expenses in respect of reasonable expenditure during each year to
       obtain, claim and maintain income, or for the purpose of the Enterprise in such year as stipulated in Article 6 of
       Income Tax Law 1994.

13.    “Gross Income” means all income, other than exempt income defined under Income Tax Law 1994 and
       regulations which are in force at the date of signing this Agreement, paid to or accrued by the Company,
       comprising of and not limited to :

       (a)    gross income received or accrued from sale of products F.O.B. port of shipping in Indonesia based on
              the rule formulated in Article 11 of this Agreement.

       (b)    income from sale or transfer of property shall be treated in accordance with Article 4 of Income Tax Law
              1994.

       (c)    other income of the Company other than mentioned above which is actually received or accrued.

14.    “Taxable Income” in any year means Gross Income in such year after deducting expenditures, costs (including
       the items defined in paragraph 4 to 13 above) as permitted under Income Tax Law 1994 and prevailing
       regulations in force and under this Agreement.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             90
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Annex C               Example of fiscal stability provisions in legislation

The development of Chile’s mining industry in the latter part of the 20th century has been one of
the great success stories in South America. Fiscal stability played an important role in this success.
Following a period of political and social unrest in the late 1960s and the early 1970s, Chile’s
government recognized that investors badly needed fiscal stability. The government responded to
this need by introducing fiscal stability in the country’s foreign investment law, which is reproduced
below. This law served Chile very well in attracting foreign investment.

Box 10 – Chile: Fiscal stability in the foreign investment law

FOREIGN INVESTMENT STATUTE

DECREE LAW 600

FOREIGN INVESTMENT COMMITTEE

REPUBLIC OF CHILE

DECREE LAW 600

FOREIGN INVESTMENT STATUTE

Restated, Coordinated and Standardized Text of Decree-law N° 600, as of 1974 of the Foreign Investment Statute
(published in the Official Gazette en December 16, 1993), established by the Decree having force of law N° 523 of the
Ministry of Economy, Development and Reconstruction as of September 3, 1993.

Title 1

FOREIGN INVESTMENT AND INVESTMENT CONTRACT

Article l. The regulations of this Statute shall apply both to foreign individuals and body

corporates and to Chilean individuals resident and domiciled abroad that transfer foreign capital into Chile and enter
into a foreign investment contract.

(Article 2 excluded here)

Article 3. Foreign investment authorizations shall be evidenced in a contract executed by means of a public deed and
subscribes, on the one part, by the President of the Foreign Investment Committee on behalf of the Chilean State
should the investment require the agreement of said Committee or, should this not be applicable, by the Executive
vice-president and, on the other part, by the persons contributing the foreign capital, hereinafter called "foreign
investors" to all effects of this Decree Law.

The contracts shall state the term within which the foreign investor may bring in the capital. This term shall not exceed
8 years for mining investments and 3 years for all others. The Foreign Investment Committee, however, by unanimous
agreement of its members, may extend this limit up to twelve years in the case of mining investments, when previous
exploration is required, depending on their nature and estimated duration thereof; in the case of investments in
industrial and non-mining extractive projects for amounts not less than US$ 50,000,000 - United States dollars or its
equivalent in other foreign currencies - the Committee may extend the term up to eight years when the nature of the
project so requires it.

(Articles 4 to 6 excluded here)

Title II

RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

OF FOREIGN INVESTORS

Article 7. holders of foreign investments made under the terms of this Decree-Law are entitled to include in the
contracts entered into a clause to the effect that, for a 10 year period from the commencement of the company's


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             91
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


operations, they shall be subject to an effective fixed overall tax rate of 42% on taxable income, including taxes
applicable under the Income Tax Law applicable at the time the contract is executed. Even if the foreign investor has
decided to claim for the invariability benefit, he may, once only, waive this right and ask for the application of ordinary
tax laws, in which case he shall be under the general taxation scheme with the same rights, options and obligations as
national investors consequently, forfeiting the invariability agreed upon.

The effective overall tax burden referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall be computed by applying to the net
taxable income of the First Category tax, determined in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Law, such
rate corresponding to the First Category as is set forth in the said law. Any rate differential necessary to complete the
effective overall tax burden guaranteed in said paragraph shall be applied to the corresponding taxable basis, in
accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Law. To such basis it shall be added an amount equivalent to the
First Category tax having been applied to taxable income.

The tax established in the third paragraph of article 21 of the Income Tax Law which by virtue of paragraph one of this
article requires permanent establishments and companies receiving foreign investments to pay an effective 42% rate -
shall be applied, in the case of stock corporations and joint-stock companies, to the corresponding taxable basis, pro
rata the share the investors subject to this system may hold in the profits of the company. Any excess tax shall be
exclusively borne by these shareholders and be withheld and annually paid by the corresponding company.

To the effects herein, "commencement of operations" shall mean the commencement of operations related to the
project being financed by the foreign investment, once income is derived from activities within the scope of such
project, in the event that the activity carried out is a new project or, should it deal with investments in ongoing
activities, the calendar month next succeeding the bringing into the country of any part of the investment.

Article 8. Foreign investments and companies participating therein shall be subject to the general indirect taxation
scheme and to customs regulations applicable to national investments. Notwithstanding the above subparagraph,
holders of foreign investment brought into the country under the terms of this Decree-Law shall be entitle to include a
clause in their contracts stating that for the term authorized to effect the investment agreed upon, there shall be no
changes in the taxes on sales and services and customs duties in force at the time of signing the contract applicable
to the import of machinery and equipment not manufactures in the country included in the list referred to in number 10,
letter B, Article 12, of Decree-Law N' 825 of 1974. The same invariability shall apply to the companies receiving
foreign investments, in which foreign investors participate, for the corresponding to such investment.'

Article 9. Similarly foreign investment and companies participating therein shall also be subject to the general laws
applicable to domestic investment, and shall not be discriminated against, either directly or indirectly, save for the
provisions of article 11.

Legal or regulatory provisions affecting specific productive activities shall be deemed discriminatory should they
become applicable to the whole or the major part of said activities in the country, to the exclusion of foreign
investment. Likewise, legal or regulatory provisions which create special schemes for certain sectors of the economy
or geographical areas of the country shall be deemed discriminatory if foreign investment is refused access thereto,
despite their complying with the same conditions and requirements demanded from national investors. For the
purposes of this article, a specific productive activity shall be that performed by companies which fall within the same
definitions of internationally accepted classifications and produce goods located in the same tariff bracket in
accordance with the Chilean Customs Tariff Scheme, the same tariff bracket being understood to be one in which
goods do not differ by more than one unit in the last digit of the tariff applied to them.

Article 10. Should juridical rules deemed to be discriminatory against holders of foreign investment or companies
participating therein be issued, they shall be entitled to request to removal of such discrimination, provided the
relevant request is made before the lapse of one year from the date of issue of such regulations. The Foreign
Investment Committee shall rule on the petition within a term not exceeding 60 days, running from the date on which
the application is filed, and either refuse it or take the appropriate administrative steps to remove the discrimination or
require the proper authorities to do so in the event that such steps are beyond the scope of competence of the
Committee.

In the absence of a timely ruling from the Committee, or if an adverse ruling is passed, or should it not be possible to
remove the discrimination administratively, the foreign investors or the companies in which they participate may resort
to the ordinary courts of justice in order to obtain a ruling as to whether or not discrimination exists and, if so, that the
general rule of law must be applied.

Article 1l. Notwithstanding article 9 above, reasonable regulations may be issued limiting access to internal credit by
foreign investments covered by this Decree-Law.

Article 11 bis. In the case of investments for amounts not under US$ 50,000,000 - United States dollars or its
equivalent in other foreign currencies - the purpose of which is the development of industrial or extractive projects,
including mining projects - which are brought into the country pursuant to article 2 - the following terms and rights may



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                 92
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


be applied:

l. The ten-year period referred to in article 7 may be extended in such terms as may be compatible with the estimated
duration of the project, but under no condition shall it exceed 20 years.

2. Stipulations may be included in the respective contracts receiving contributions, as from the date of execution of
such contracts and for the effective period established in the first paragraph of article 7 or to NI 1 of this article, of the
legal provisions and of the resolutions or circular letters which the Internal Revenue Service may have issued, in force
at the date of execution of the contract, with respect to asset depreciation regimes, carrying forward of tosses and
startup and organization expenses. Likewise, the resolution of the Internal Revenue Service authorizing a foreign
investor or a company receiving the contribution to keep its accounting in foreign currency may also be included in the
contract. The rights granted in accordance with the preceding paragraph may be waived only once, in which case an
investor or company shall abide by the common regime applicable to the waived right, under the terms set forth in the
final part of the first paragraph of article 7.

In any event, the waiver referred to in article 7 above shall imply the waiver of the rights mentioned in this number,
save for that related to the accounting in foreign currency, for which an express waiver shall be necessary. In the
event that there is more than a foreign investor party to such investment contract having claimed the tax invariability
benefit prescribes by article 7 referred to above, a waiver by any one of them shall be understood as a waiver to the
rights granted by such article both by the waiving party and the other foreign investors or receiving company, save for
the right to keep accounting records in foreign currency, which shall be expressly waived. At any rate, there shall be
no waiver to the rights granted by this paragraph should foreign investors have agreed, as evidenced in the relevant
investment contract, that such a waiver shall only become effective if the foreign investors waiving their right to tax
invariability hold a share exceeding a certain percentage in the total investment governed by the contract which has
effectively materialized at the time of the waiver.

3. In the case of projects which consider the export of all or part of the goods produced, the Foreign Investment
Committee may grant the respective investors or the companies receiving contributions, for terms not exceeding those
granted under the first paragraph of article 7, or NI 1 of this article, the following rights:

a) To stipulate the invariability of the legal provisions and regulations in force at the date of execution of the
corresponding contract, as regards the right to export freely.

b) To authorize special regimes with respect to the return and liquidation of part or the total value of such exports and
of indemnities resulting from insurance or other sources. In accordance with such regimes, the maintenance of the
corresponding foreign currency abroad may be allowed in order to pay obligations authorized by the Central Bank of
Chile, to make disbursements accepted as expenses of the project for tax purposes pursuant to the provisions of the
Income Tax Law, or effect remittance abroad of capital or net profits arising therefrom.

In order to authorize this special regime, the Foreign Investment Committee must previously have a favorable report
of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile, which shall set forth the specific manner of operation for such special
regime, as well as the regime, manner and conditions under which the access to foreign currency market shall be
granted in order to remit capital and profits abroad. Furthermore, the Central Bank of Chile shall supervise the
compliance with the stipulations of the contract relating to these matters.

The annual taxable profits which, according to the respective balance sheets, may be generated by the permanent
establishment of foreign investors or the corresponding receiving companies, that for any reason maintain foreign
currency abroad in accordance with this letter (b), shall be considered for tax purposes as having been remitted,
distributed or withdrawn, as the case may be, on December 31 st of each year, in the part corresponding to the
foreign currency maintained abroad by investors. Income or other benefits produced by the foreign currency which,
according to this provision, may be maintained abroad shall be considered, for al] legal purposes as Chilean-source
income.

These rights may be exercised only when the investment has reached the amount indicated in paragraph one.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                  93
                            Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Annex D                   Thin-capitalization legislation

Section 18 of Canada’s Income Tax Act offers a good example of legislation that is intended to limit
the deduction of interest expense on loans from non-resident shareholders. As a matter of policy,
this legislation does not limit the deduction of interest expense paid to non-resident third parties
such as banks, unless the third party loan is part of a back-to-back loan arrangement involving a
non-resident shareholder.

Box 11 - Section 18 of Canada’s Income Tax Act

            Limitation on deduction of interest

(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act (other than subsection (8)), in computing the income for a taxation
year of a corporation or a trust from a business (other than the Canadian banking business of an authorized foreign
bank) or property, no deduction shall be made in respect of that proportion of any amount otherwise deductible in
computing its income for the year in respect of interest paid or payable by it on outstanding debts to specified non-
residents that

        o             (a) the amount, if any, by which

                              (i) the average of all amounts each of which is, in respect of a calendar month that ends in
            the year, the greatest total amount at any time in the month of the outstanding debts to specified non-
            residents of the corporation or trust,

        exceeds

                              (ii) 1.5 times the equity amount of the corporation or trust for the year,

is of

        o             (b) the amount determined under subparagraph (a)(i) in respect of the corporation or trust for the
        year.

            Marginal note: Definitions

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act (other than subsection (5.1)), in this subsection and subsections (4)
to (6),
“beneficiary”
« bénéficiaire »
            “beneficiary” has the same meaning as in subsection 108(1);

“equity amount”
« montant des capitaux propres »
            “equity amount”, of a corporation or trust for a taxation year, means

                  o   (a) in the case of a corporation resident in Canada, the total of

                              (i) the retained earnings of the corporation at the beginning of the year, except to the
                      extent that those earnings include retained earnings of any other corporation,

                              (ii) the average of all amounts each of which is the corporation’s contributed surplus (other
                      than any portion of that contributed surplus that arose in connection with an investment, as defined
                      in subsection 212.3(10), to which subsection 212.3(2) applies) at the beginning of a calendar month
                      that ends in the year, to the extent that it was contributed by a specified non-resident shareholder of
                      the corporation, and

                              (iii) the average of all amounts each of which is the corporation’s paid -up capital at the
                      beginning of a calendar month that ends in the year, excluding the paid-up capital in respect of
                      shares of any class of the capital stock of the corporation owned by a person other than a specified
                      non-resident shareholder of the corporation,

                  o   (b) in the case of a trust resident in Canada, the amount, if any, by which



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                 94
                           Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


                             (i) the total of

                                    (A) the average of all amounts each of which is the total amount of all equity
                       contributions to the trust made before a calendar month that ends in the year, to the extent that
                       the contributions were made by a specified non-resident beneficiary of the trust, and

                                       (B) the tax-paid earnings of the trust for the year,

             exceeds

                           (ii) the average of all amounts each of which is the total of all amounts that were paid or
                  became payable by the trust to a beneficiary of the trust in respect of the beneficiary’s interest under
                  the trust before a calendar month that ends in the year except to the extent that the amount is

                                       (A) included in the beneficiary’s income for a taxation year because of subse ction
                       104(13),

                                       (B) an amount from which tax was deducted under Part XIII because of paragraph
                       212(1)(c), or

                                       (C) paid or payable to a person other than a specified non-resident beneficiary of
                       the trust, and

             o    (c) in the case of a corporation or trust that is not resident in Canada, including a corporation or trust
             that files a return under this Part in accordance with subsection 216(1) in respect of the year, 40% of the
             amount, if any, by which

                         (i) the average of all amounts each of which is the cost of a property, other than an interest
                  as a member of a partnership, owned by the corporation or trust at the beginning of a calendar
                  month that ends in the year

                                    (A) that is used by the corporation or trust in the year in, or held by it in the year in
                       the course of, carrying on business in Canada, or

                                     (B) that is an interest in real property, or a real right in immovables, in Canada, or
                       an interest in, or for civil law a right in, timber resource properties and timber limits, in Canada,
                       and in respect of which the corporation or trust files a return under this Part in accordance with
                       subsection 216(1) in respect of the year,

             exceeds

                           (ii) the average of all amounts each of which is the total of all amounts outstanding, at the
                  beginning of a calendar month that ends in the year, as or on account of a debt or other obligation
                  to pay an amount that was payable by the corporation or trust that may reasonably be regarded as
                  relating to a business carried on by it in Canada or to an interest or right described in clause (i)(B),
                  other than a debt or obligation that is included in the outstanding debts to specified non-residents of
                  the corporation or trust;
“equity contribution”
« apport de capitaux propres »
         “equity contribution”, to a trust, means a transfer of property to the trust that is made

             o    (a) in exchange for an interest as a beneficiary under the trust,

             o    (b) in exchange for a right to acquire an interest as a beneficiary under the trust, or

             o    (c) for no consideration by a person beneficially interested in the trust;
“outstanding debts to specified non-residents”
« dettes impayées envers des non-résidents déterminés »
         “outstanding debts to specified non-residents”, of a corporation or trust at any particular time in a taxation
         year, means

             o   (a) the total of all amounts each of which is an amount outstanding at that time as or on account of a
             debt or other obligation to pay an amount

                             (i) that was payable by the corporation or trust to a person who was, at any time in the
                  year,


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                  95
                          Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


                                  (A) a specified non-resident shareholder of the corporation or a specified non-
                      resident beneficiary of the trust, or

                                  (B) a non-resident person who was not dealing at arm’s length with a specified
                      shareholder of the corporation or a specified beneficiary of the trust, as the case may be, and

                           (ii) on which any amount in respect of interest paid or payable by the corporation or trust is
                  or would be, but for subsection (4), deductible in computing the income of the corporation or trust for
                  the year,

         but does not include

             o   (b) an amount outstanding at the particular time as or on account of a debt or other obligation to pay
             an amount to

                          (i) a non-resident insurance corporation to the extent that the obligation was, for the non-
                  resident insurance corporation’s taxation year that included the particular time, designate d
                  insurance property in respect of an insurance business carried on in Canada through a permanent
                  establishment as defined by regulation, or

                           (ii) an authorized foreign bank, if the bank uses or holds the obligation at the particular time
                  in its Canadian banking business;
“specified beneficiary”
« bénéficiaire déterminé »
         “specified beneficiary”, of a trust at any time, means a person who at that time, either alone or together with
         persons with whom that person does not deal at arm’s length, has an interest as a beneficiary under the trust
         with a fair market value that is not less than 25% of the fair market value of all interests as a beneficiary
         under the trust and for the purpose of determining whether a particular person is a specified beneficiary of a
         trust,

             o    (a) if the particular person, or a person with whom the particular person does not deal at arm’s
             length, has at that time a right under a contract, in equity or otherwise, either immediately or in the future
             and either absolutely or contingently, to, or to acquire, an interest as a beneficiary under a trust, the
             particular person or the person with whom the particular person does not deal at arm’s length, as the
             case may be, is deemed at that time to own the interest,

             o   (b) if the particular person, or a person with whom the particular person does not deal at arm’s
             length, has at that time a right under a contract, in equity or otherwise, either immediately or in the future
             and either absolutely or contingently to cause a trust to redeem, acquire or terminate any interest in it as
             a beneficiary (other than an interest held by the particular person or a person with whom the particular
             person does not deal at arm’s length), the trust is deemed at that time to have redeemed, acquired or
             terminated the interest, unless the right is not exercisable at that time because the exercise of the right is
             contingent on the death, bankruptcy or permanent disability of an individual, and

             o    (c) if the amount of income or capital of the trust that the particular person, or a person with whom
             the particular person does not deal at arm’s length, may receive as a beneficiary of the trust depends on
             the exercise by any person of, or the failure by any person to exercise, a discretionary power, that
             person is deemed to have fully exercised, or to have failed to exercise, the power, as the case may be;
“specified non-resident beneficiary”
« bénéficiaire non-résident déterminé »
         “specified non-resident beneficiary”, of a trust at any time, means a specified beneficiary of the trust wh o at
         that time is a non-resident person;

“specified non-resident shareholder”
« actionnaire non-résident déterminé »
         “specified non-resident shareholder” of a corporation at any time means a specified shareholder of the
         corporation who was at that time a non-resident person or a non-resident-owned investment corporation;

“specified proportion”
         “specified proportion”[Repealed, 2013, c. 34, s. 427]

“specified shareholder”
« actionnaire déterminé »
         “specified shareholder” of a corporation at any time means a person who at that time, either alone or together


Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                96
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


         with persons with whom that person is not dealing at arm’s length, owns

             o   (a) shares of the capital stock of the corporation that give the holders thereof 25% or more of the
             votes that could be cast at an annual meeting of the shareholders of the corporation, or

             o    (b) shares of the capital stock of the corporation having a fair market value of 25% or more of the
             fair market value of all of the issued and outstanding shares of the capital stock of the corporation,

         and for the purpose of determining whether a particular person is a specified shareholder of a corporation at
         any time, where the particular person or a person with whom the particular person is not dealing at arm’s
         length has at that time a right under a contract, in equity or otherwise, either immediately or in the future and
         either absolutely or contingently

             o    (c) to, or to acquire, shares in a corporation or to control the voting rights of shares in a corporation,
             or

             o    (d) to cause a corporation to redeem, acquire or cancel any of its shares (other than shares held by
             the particular person or a person with whom the particular person is not dealing at arm’s length),

         the particular person or the person with whom the particular person is not dealing at arm’s length, as the
         case may be, shall be deemed at that time to own the shares referred to in paragraph ( c) and the corporation
         referred to in paragraph (d) shall be deemed at that time to have redeemed, acquired or cancelled the shares
         referred to in paragraph (d), unless the right is not exercisable at that time because the exercise thereof is
         contingent on the death, bankruptcy or permanent disability of an individual.

“tax-paid earnings”
« bénéfices libérés d’impôt »
         “tax-paid earnings”, of a trust resident in Canada for a taxation year, means the total of all amounts each of
         which is the amount in respect of a particular taxation year of the trust that ended before the year determined
         by the formula


                                                                A–B

         where

         A
         is the taxable income of the trust under this Part for the particular year, and

                   B
         is the total of tax payable under this Part by the trust, and all income taxes payable by the trust under the
         laws of a province, for the particular year.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                                97
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Annex E               Transfer pricing legislation

The following text is extracted from Canada’s Income Tax Act. This text has been in place and has
worked well since 1972.

The Income Tax Act (Canada) does not define the meaning of “fair market value”, but the
Canadian courts have consistently defined the term “fair market value” as used below to mean “the
amount paid by a willing buyer to a willing seller in an open and free market with a full knowledge
of all the facts”.

Paragraph 251(1)(c) below is of particular importance, because this allows the Canadian Revenue
Agency to apply Section 69 to a transaction between two unrelated parties where there is, for
example, evidence of collusion to avoid the application of Section 69.

Box 12 - Canada’s Income Tax Act

         69. (1) Except as expressly otherwise provided in this Act,

o   (a) where a taxpayer has acquired anything from a person with whom the taxpayer was not dealing at arm’s
    length at an amount in excess of the fair market value thereof at the time the taxpayer so acquired it, the taxpayer
    shall be deemed to have acquired it at that fair market value;

o   (b) where a taxpayer has disposed of anything

        (i) to a person with whom the taxpayer was not dealing at arm’s length for no proceeds or for proceeds less
         than the fair market value thereof at the time the taxpayer so disposed of it,

        (ii) to any person by way of gift inter vivos, or

        (iii) to a trust because of a disposition of a property that does not result in a change in the beneficial
         ownership of the property;

    the taxpayer shall be deemed to have received proceeds of disposition therefor equal to that fair market value;
    and

o   (c) where a taxpayer acquires a property by way of gift, bequest or inheritance or because of a disposition that
    does not result in a change in the beneficial ownership of the property, the taxpayer is deemed to acquire the
    property at its fair market value.

Arm’s length

         251. (1) For the purposes of this Act,

o   (a) related persons shall be deemed not to deal with each other at arm’s length;

o   (b) a taxpayer and a personal trust (other than a trust described in any of paragraphs (a) to (e.1) of the definition
    “trust” in subsection 108(1)) are deemed not to deal with each other at arm’s length if the taxpayer, or any person
    not dealing at arm’s length with the taxpayer, would be beneficially interested in the trust if subsection 248(25)
    were read without reference to subclauses 248(25)(b)(iii)(A)(II) to (IV); and

o   (c) in any other case, it is a question of fact whether persons not related to each other are, at a particular time,
    dealing with each other at arm’s length.
Definition of “related persons”

    (2) For the purpose of this Act, “related persons”, or persons related to each other, are

o   (a) individuals connected by blood relationship, marriage or common-law partnership or adoption;

o   (b) a corporation and

        (i) a person who controls the corporation, if it is controlled by one person,

        (ii) a person who is a member of a related group that controls the corporation, or



Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                             98
                        Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan


        (iii) any person related to a person described in subparagraph 251(2)( b)(i) or 251(2)(b)(ii); and

o   (c) any two corporations

        (i) if they are controlled by the same person or group of persons,

        (ii) if each of the corporations is controlled by one person and the person who controls one of the
         corporations is related to the person who controls the other corporation,

        (iii) if one of the corporations is controlled by one person and that person is related to any member of a
         related group that controls the other corporation,

        (iv) if one of the corporations is controlled by one person and that person is related to each member of an
         unrelated group that controls the other corporation,

        (v) if any member of a related group that controls one of the corporations is related to each member of an
         unrelated group that controls the other corporation, or

        (vi) if each member of an unrelated group that controls one of the corporations is related to at least one
         member of an unrelated group that controls the other corporation.

Corporations related through a third corporation

     (3) Where two corporations are related to the same corporation within the meaning of subsection 251(2), they
shall, for the purposes of subsections 251(1) and 251(2), be deemed to be related to each other.




Joint Economic Research Program                                                                                        99
                         Comparative study of the mining tax regime for mineral exploitation in Kazakhstan



Annex F               Profile of Canada’s mining industry

The Canadian mining industry is:74

A major employer:

          More than 418,000 people across Canada work in the mining and mineral processing
           industries.
          Mining is the largest private sector employer of Aboriginal peoples in Canada on a
           proportional basis, and employment is poised to increase.
          Canada has one of the largest mining supply sectors globally with more than 3,200
           companies supplying engineering, geotechnical, environmental, financial and other services
           to mining operations.
          Those who work in mining enjoy the highest wages and salaries of all industrial sectors in
           Canada with an average weekly pay of $1,559, surpassing the earnings of workers in
           finance, manufacturing, construction and forestry.

An economic engine:

          Mining contributed $52.6 billion to Canada’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2012.
          The mining industry's payments to Canadian federal and provincial governments total $71
           billion in taxes and royalties over the last decade (2003-2012).
          The industry accounted for 20.4% of the value of Canadian goods exports in 2012.
          Canada’s value of mineral production was nearly $47 billion in 2012.

A global leader:

          Thanks to its rich geology, Canada is one of the largest mining nations in the world
           producing more than 60 minerals and metals.
          Canada ranks in the top five countries in the global production of potash, uranium,
           aluminium, cobalt, titanium, tungsten, cadmium, diamonds, platinum, sulphur and nickel.
          Almost 60% of the world’s public mining companies are listed on the TSX and TSX-Venture
           Exchanges, and 70% of the equity capital raised globally for mining companies is raised on
           these exchanges.
          Canadian-headquartered mining companies accounted for nearly 37% of budgeted
           worldwide exploration expenditures in 2012, and Canada has been the recipient of the
           largest share of global exploration spending since 2004.
          Globally, Canada is recognized for its leadership in safety and sustainability. Mining
           companies in Canada were the first in the world to develop an externally-verified
           performance system for sustainable mining practices with the creation of MAC’s Towards
           Sustainable Mining initiative in 2004.




74
     Sources: Facts & Figures 2013 (Mining Association of Canada), and Natural Resources Canada

Joint Economic Research Program                                                                              100
