                                                         94507




The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola in Liberia


       Results from a High Frequency Cell Phone Survey

                     November 19, 2014
This note was prepared by Kristen Himelein, Senior Economist / Statistician in the Poverty Global Practice at the
World Bank Group, with substantial inputs from the Dr. T. Edward Liberty, Director General of the Liberia
Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services in Monrovia, Liberia, and from his team, including Kormay
Adams, Nagraj Rao, and Sehr Syed. The implementation of the high frequency phone survey was led by
Stephanie Kafka and Patrick Bogart of the Gallup Organization. Very capable research assistance was provided
by Shweta Bhogale of Innovations for Poverty Action. In addition, the team benefitted from useful advice and
comments from World Bank Group colleagues, including: Joao Pedro Azevedo (Senior Economist, Poverty
Global Practice), Amparo Ballivian (Lead Economist, Development Economics Data Group), Kathleen Beegle
(Lead Economist, Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region), Timothy J. Bulman (Senior Economist,
Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice), Andrew Dabalen (Lead Poverty Specialist, Poverty
Global Practice), David Evans (Senior Economist, Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region), Pablo Fajnzylber
(Sector Manager, Poverty Global Practice), Errol Graham (Senior Economist, Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management Global Practice), and Laura Ralston (Economist, Social Protection and Labor Global Practice).




                               Vice President                  Makhtar Diop
                               Country Director                Yusupha Crookes
                               Senior Director                 Ana Revenga
                               Sector Manager                  Pablo Fajnzylber
                               Task Manager                    Kristen Himelein




                                                                                                             2
                                               Overview
As of early November, 2014, Liberia has had nearly 7,000 cases of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) and more
than 2,500 deaths. Many of the cases have occurred in the poorest and most densely populated areas of
the capital city, Monrovia, but all counties have now been affected by EVD.

In an effort to measure the economic impact of EVD on Liberian households, the World Bank, with the
Liberian Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services and the Gallup Organization, has conducted
two rounds of mobile-phone surveys, in October and November 2014. Based on these results, it is clear
that the EVD has substantially impacted the Liberian economy across all sectors of employment, in both
affected and non-affected counties. In all, nearly half of the working population of Liberia is no longer
working since the crisis began.

Those engaged in self-employment activities have been the hardest hit, in large part due to the closure
of markets in which they operate. Before the crisis, over 30 percent of working household heads were
self-employed—as of this latest survey, this is down to just above 10 percent.

The wage employment sector has also seen substantial job losses, with only about half of those
originally surveyed still working since the crisis unfolded. The main reason cited by respondents is that
their business or government office is closed; illness-related absence was only named by a small
percentage of respondents.

After an initial downturn, the agricultural sector is showing the most resilience in the face of EVD. Rural
areas have seen a substantial return to farming; the latest survey round coincided with the beginning of
harvest season in many areas of the country.

These economic impacts have exacerbated existing issues, especially those related to food prices and
food security. Imported rice prices have seen a huge jump—of nearly 40 percent over the average for
October—but over 70 percent of respondents said that regardless of price, they do not have enough
money to afford food. Many households have reduced the number of meals eaten, and restricted adult
consumption in order to feed their small children, but still more than 90 percent of those surveyed
worried that their household would not have enough to eat. With the arrival of the harvest, these
figures have and will likely continue to trend downward, but they remain alarmingly high.

Whether directly affected by the virus or not, communities in every corner of Liberia are suffering from
its consequences. Government mandated closures and other policies to contain and reverse the spread
of EVD are in place across the country, and therefore the negative economic effects of EVD touch
everyone. It will be essential to focus relief efforts not only in areas where the virus is active, which is
crucial, but also in those remote counties where the population was already quite poor, food availability
was scarce and is now worsening, markets are closed, and mobility is extremely limited.

“The Ebola virus has tempered our economy. It has hurt our economic investments. Our businesses
have been closed down and our country has been abandoned.” – 39 year old male respondent, Bomi
county

                                                                                                           3
Map




      4
Objective
The Economic Impact of Ebola survey is a high frequency cell phone survey designed to monitor the
socio-economic impacts of the ongoing Ebola crisis in Liberia. The survey has been conducted in two
rounds in the fall of 2014 and is based on the nationally representative Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) implemented from February to August 2014 by the Liberia Institute of
Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS). This effort was designed to provide rapid indicators
from households across the country at a time when conducting a traditional face-to-face survey is
extremely challenging. To that end, the survey was conducted by phone, calling a sub-sample of
households who participated in the HIES and for whom cell phone numbers were recorded. The
Methodological Annex provides details on the data collection and the survey weights. Low response
rates hinder the representativeness of the survey.

This report begins with a brief background of the situation in Liberia in terms of Ebola-related deaths at
the time of data collection. This is followed by five sections focusing on the survey findings with respect
to knowledge of Ebola, employment, prices, food security, and migration.


Background
Montserrado county and the city of Monrovia specifically are some of the most highly affected areas,
but new infections are no longer concentrated only in the north and west of the country. Since its
initial appearance in December 2013 in rural Guinea, the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) has spread to four
other West African countries. As of November 4, 2014, Liberia has had nearly 7,000 cases and more
than 2,500 deaths. There have been a significant number of cases in the capital of Monrovia, many
occurring in the poorest and most densely populated parts of the city. In the short period of time during
which the two rounds of the survey were conducted (October 1- October 7 and October 21-November
7), the geographic pattern of the disease has shifted. At the time of the first round, the most affected
county was Montserrado, which contains the capital Monrovia. The next highest counties in terms of
total deaths were Lofa and Margibi, but there were a higher number of new infections in Bong county.
Figure 1. New and cumulative cases by county for survey periods
                             week ending October 5                                                                    week ending November 4
                                cumulative       new                                                                      cumulative     new
                 1400                                  200                                                   1600                              200
                                                             deaths in previous 7 days




                                                       180                                                                                     180
                                                                                                                                                     deaths in previous 7 days
                                                                                         cumulative deaths
 cumulative deaths




                 1200                                                                                        1400
                                                       160                                                                                     160
                 1000                                                                                        1200
                                                       140                                                                                     140
                                                       120                                                   1000                              120
                     800
                                                       100                                                    800                              100
                     600                               80                                                                                      80
                                                                                                              600
                     400                               60                                                                                      60
                                                                                                              400
                                                       40                                                                                      40
                     200                               20                                                     200                              20
                      0                                0                                                        0                              0
                             Grand Cape…




                                                                                                                      Grand Cape…
                                    Bomi
                            Grand Gedeh


                               River Cess
                                Gbarpolu




                               Maryland


                             Grand Bassa

                                  Nimba


                                     Lofa
                               River Gee




                                    Bong
                                 Margibi

                           Montserrado*
                                   Sinoe




                               Grand Kru




                                                                                                                        Maryland


                                                                                                                      Grand Bassa

                                                                                                                           Nimba


                                                                                                                              Lofa
                                                                                                                        River Gee
                                                                                                                            Sinoe




                                                                                                                             Bomi


                                                                                                                          Margibi

                                                                                                                    Montserrado*
                                                                                                                     Grand Gedeh


                                                                                                                        River Cess

                                                                                                                        Grand Kru
                                                                                                                         Gbarpolu




                                                                                                                             Bong




      * includes Monrovia                                                                     * includes Monrovia
Source: Humanitarian data exchange (accessed November 12, 2014)

                                                                                                                                                                     5
For the week ending on November 4, the highest numbers of cumulative and new deaths were again in
Montserrado, but Margibi had surpassed Lofa county for the second highest total. Margibi also had a
higher number of new deaths during this period, and there were growing numbers in Nimba and Grand
Cape Mount counties. Deaths had also declined in the previously affected counties of Bomi and Bong.

“He is not alive.” - 29 year old man in Monrovia in response to why household head is no longer at
previous job.


                                            Figure 2. Source of information on EVD
                                                                                       45




                                                percentage have received information
Knowledge of Ebola                                                                     40
Information campaigns about EVD
                                                 35
launched by government, NGOs, and
                                                 30
donor organizations were widely
                                                 25
successful in reaching the population.
The overwhelming majority of round 1             20

respondents, more than 93 percent, had           15
heard of EVD. In addition, when this             10
question was asked to new round 2                 5
respondents, all but one had heard of             0
the virus. Of those having heard of the
virus, nearly all said they knew how to
protect themselves and had received
information from one or more sources,
including healthcare workers (39)
percent, the radio (39) percent, local
authorities/palava hut (27) percent,
neighbors/family (16) percent, TV (12)
                                                                    Source of information
percent, poster/billboard/flyer (10)
percent, traditional healers/pastor/faith- Source : Results from high frequency phone survey (October –
based healers (7) percent, SMS (6) November 2014)
percent, and through a phone number (4) percent. In addition, 35 percent of respondents indicated
having received information from other sources.

 “Because of the Ebola virus - I did not want the contact with people.” - 28 year old man in Monrovia
in response to question on why he is not working.


Employment
Prior to EVD, the majority of the rural labor force was in smallholder agricultural activities while wage
work non-agricultural self-employment activities were equally prevalent in urban areas. Figure 3
shows the distribution of the working age (16-64) adult population across five employment categories:


                                                                                                       6
wage labor, self-employment outside agriculture, agriculture (smallholder farming), unpaid household
work, and out of the labor market. The latter category includes groups such as the unemployed and
students. Figure 4 shows the same distribution but for household heads only, the group most directly
comparable to high frequency phone survey respondents. Urban areas have the largest share of workers
evenly split between wage labor and non-agricultural self-employment, while the majority in rural areas
works in agriculture. While the data refers to household heads, these results can be generalized to the
working population generally since EVD would impact all those in working in the sector.

Figure 3. Distribution of working age adults prior to EVD

                    wage       self-employment          agriculture    unpaid family work     other*



 urban


  rural


  total


          0%      10%        20%        30%        40%        50%      60%      70%         80%    90%   100%
 * outside labor market - includes unemployed, those in school, etc)

Figure 4. Distribution of household heads prior to EVD


 urban



  rural



  total


          0%      10%        20%        30%        40%        50%      60%      70%         80%    90%   100%
 * outside labor market - includes unemployed, those in school, etc)
Source: Preliminary findings from the HIES (2014)

“The construction closed, no more job available.” - 28 year old man in urban Bong county in response
to question on why he is not working.

“There is not enough people to work. People are staying back and not going to work.” - 41 year old
woman in urban Margibi county in response to question on why she is earning less.



                                                                                                                7
EVD has substantially impacted employment activities, especially in urban areas and for those
previously engaged in non-agricultural self-employment. Figure 5 shows the impact of EVD by sector
and location for those working at the time of the HIES baseline (conducted earlier in 2014). The gray
area shows the fraction of those who had been working but were out of work by mid-October (Round 1)
and early November (Round 2). In urban areas the wage and self-employment sectors were the most
heavily impacted, while the small share involved in agriculture was largely unaffected. This is consistent
with large numbers of public servants that were deemed to be non-essential staff being released from
work, though most are still being paid for this period. The self-employed experienced the largest decline
in work with the closure of markets in which they operate. In rural areas, the impact is roughly evenly
divided between three main groups: wage, self-employed, and farming. By Round 2, there was almost
no change in urban areas, though there was a further decline among the self-employed. Rural areas saw
a substantial return to farming; this round coincided with the beginning of the harvest period for many
areas of the country.

Figure 5. Impact by sector and location on those respondents working at baseline

                               wage     self-employment     agriculture     not working


         baseline
 urban




         round 1                                                                     45%

         round 2                                                                   53%




         baseline
 rural




         round 1                                                                           36%

         round 2                                                                                31%




         baseline
 total




         round 1                                                                         42%

         round 2                                                                     46%

                    0%   10%      20%      30%     40%      50%      60%      70%         80%         90%   100%
Source : Results from high frequency phone survey (October – November 2014)




                                                                                                                   8
Employment impacts were not disproportionately worse in counties most affected by EVD. As there
are not a sufficient number of observations to detect differences within the sectors at county level, four
groups of counties are constructed. The first is Montserrado county, which contains the capital city of
Monrovia. The second consists of Lofa and Margibi counties, the two most affected counties after
Monrovia. The third includes Bomi, Bong, Grand Bassa, and Nimba counties, which were all affected by
EVD though not to the same extent as the previous three. The final category includes the remaining
counties which have been thus far only marginally affected. In Round 1, there were no statistically
significant differences between these categories in the probability of not working compared to the
baseline in any of the three sectors.1 In addition, the level of affectedness of the county explains very
little of the variation in the probability of not working, with an R2 of 0.01 for wage employment, 0.02 for
self-employment, and 0.10 for agriculture. In round 2, there are still not statistically significant
differences between the geographic areas for the three sectors. The values of R2 have increased slightly
to 0.02, 0.06, and 0.07 for wage, self-employment, and agriculture, respectively.

Some in agriculture have returned to work since early October, but the wage and non-agricultural self-
employment sectors have seen further losses. By using the 424 households that responded in both
rounds, it is possible to examine the transitions into and out of work. Of those working at the baseline,
respondents are divided into four groups: those that were consistently working in both rounds of the
high frequency phone survey, those that were consistently not working in both rounds, those that had
returned to work or found new jobs between rounds 1 and 2, and those that stopped working between
round 1 and round 2. Overall job loss was greatest for the wage sector and the self-employed sector
between rounds, while agriculture saw a substantial percentage returning to work. Figure 6 shows
these transitions in further detail.

Figure 6. Work transitions by sector

                                               returned to work         working   left work         not working


                           round 1         not working                                                                  working
               wage




                           round 2
    agriculture employed




                           round 1
                  self-




                           round 2

                           round 1

                           round 2

                                     1.0      0.8     0.6         0.4      0.2    0.0         0.2       0.4       0.6   0.8   1.0
Source : Results from high frequency phone survey (October – November 2014)


1
 There was a statistically significantly lower probability of working in agriculture in Montserrado county in round 1
but this finding is based on only three observations.

                                                                                                                                    9
Wage Labor
Many in wage labor are not working because their business or government office is closed, and very
few have been able to return or find alternative employment. In the HIES, 38 percent of household
heads indicated their primary employment was in wage labor. Of these wage employees, 40 percent
indicated they were no longer working in their previous job in round 1 and 51 percent in round 2. The
percentage was relatively steady between rounds in urban areas, just about 45 percent, but seems to
have increased in rural areas (though the limited sample size makes it difficult to measure the
magnitude). The main reason cited in round 1 was the closure of the business or government office
where the respondent was working (46 percent), followed by temporary absence (14 percent), and a
reduction in staff due to reduced business (13 percent). As shown by figure 7, which presents the
results from round 1, this is true in both urban and rural areas. Relatively few respondents indicated
health reasons for their absence: one percent for illness and three percent to care for an ill relative.
Also while interviewers and analysts allocated responses into specific categories that best described the
reason, the majority of respondents mentioned Ebola specifically in their answers. Of those no longer
working in their the same job as in the baseline, five percent indicated that they were able to find other
employment in round 1, but nearly universally this group indicated that they were earning less. Of the
panel respondents, approximately six percent were able to find another job between rounds 1 and 2,
though a further 15 percent stopped working in their original position during this period. Of those who
returned to work, nearly 90 percent went to a different job from that in which they were previously
working. It should also be noted, however, that many public servants are still being paid even though
they are not going to work, so the negative welfare impacts are somewhat overstated. It is estimated
that approximately 15 percent of wage employees are in the public sector.

Figure 7. Reason household head not working in job from baseline
               business/government closed                      reduction in staff due to less business
               temporary absence / seasonal position           illness / care for ill relative
               other

  total


 urban


  rural

          0%       10%       20%      30%       40%    50%         60%     70%       80%        90%      100%
Source : Results from high frequency phone survey (October – November 2014)

“It’s a driving business, nothing good going on.” - 48 year old man in Monrovia in response to
question on why he is not working.

“All the teachers are sitting home, no way to put bread on the table.” - 37 year old man in Monrovia
in response to question on why he is not working.


                                                                                                            10
Self-Employment
The largest and most sustained impacts were on those engaged in the non-agricultural self-
employment sector. Self-employment was the second most common sector for household heads,
employing 28 percent in the HIES, including 33 percent of urban heads. In the overall labor market for
adults aged 16-64, self-employment is more prevalent than even wage labor. Additionally, of the
working age population engaged in self-employment, nearly two-thirds were women and it is the most
common source of livelihood for female headed households. Of those interviewed in the high frequency
phone survey, 57 percent in round 1 and 64 percent in round 2 were no longer operating their
businesses. Of this group, the most common reason cited in the first round was usual place of business
closed due to Ebola (60 percent), followed by cannot travel / transport goods for trade (18 percent), and
cannot get inputs (12 percent). Similar to wage employment, very few respondents cited reasons
related to health. In both urban and rural areas, the usual location for business being closed was the
most prevalent reason. Transportation issues were also important in rural areas and the inability to
procure inputs was cited only in urban areas. See figure 8 for further details on round 1. Of the 73
respondents in the non-farm self-employment sector, only one was able to find a new job as of round 1.
Of those respondents in the panel, less than two percent returned to work between the first and second
rounds, while an additional 12 percent stopped working. More than 90 percent of those who were not
working in the first round remained out of work by round 2.

Figure 8. Reason household head not working in job from baseline
          usual place of business closed because of Ebola         can’t travel/transport goods for trade
          can't get inputs                                        no customers
          illness / care for ill relative                         other


  total


 urban


  rural


          0%       10%         20%          30%   40%       50%     60%       70%       80%       90%      100%

Source : Results from high frequency phone survey (October – November 2014)

“Ebola is in Liberia. Everyone is not buying clothes and shoes, they are just buying food.” - 41 year old
woman in Montserrado county in response to question on why her small business is earning less.

“I sell oranges. The business is way down.” - 36 year old woman in Bong county in response to
question on why her small business is earning less.



                                                                                                              11
Agriculture
There has been a substantial return to agriculture since early October but it is too early yet to
estimate the impact on the ongoing harvest. Agriculture was the most common sector of employment
in rural areas, comprising 31 percent of the 15-64 aged rural population, and was the main source of
livelihood for 49 percent of rural household heads. Agriculture is also the most difficult sector to
accurately measure with this instrument. The response rate is particularly low in rural areas due to
limited cell phone network and availability of electricity to charge handsets. Also the nature of
agricultural work naturally has extended lapses in activities, such as in the post-planting and post-
harvest periods.

The 2014 harvest period in Liberia began in August and finished in September for the southern counties
of Maryland, Grand Kru, Rivergee, Sinoe and Grand Gedeh. This is one month later than the normal
agricultural season due to a slightly late start for the rainy season in these areas. In the remainder of
the county, the harvest season began around October and will be completed by December.

In the first round of the survey, corresponding to pre-harvest period for most of the country, 30 percent
of respondents indicated that they were no longer working in agriculture compared to the baseline HIES.
The majority cited worries about Ebola as the main reason they were not working. At the same time, of
this group, two-thirds indicated that someone within the household was still engaged in farming. This
suggests that generally farms were not being abandoned by households. While it is not possible to
distinguish between staple farming and vegetable gardening, more than 70 percent of farm households
that were growing rice in the HIES will harvest. About half believe the harvest will be smaller than last
year’s, 35 percent believe it will be larger, with the remainder believing it will be about the same. By the
second round of the survey, corresponding with the start of the harvest in many areas, the percentage
of rural households in which the head indicated not working had halved. Of those who were still not
working, more than 80 percent indicated that someone in the household was farming.

With the caveat that the agriculture section has the most methodological issues, the high frequency
phone survey shows that while agriculture has been affected by EVD, the impact is short of some of the
more dire predictions of wide spread farm abandonment. It is difficult, however, to gauge the overall
impact on food security from pre-harvest estimates. Also many farmers depend on the kuu system of
shared labor during the harvest period. Mobility limitations and fear of infection may limit available
labor this year. Follow-up question on labor during the harvest period and on yields in the post-harvest
period are planned for later rounds.

“The sickness has affected us. My strength has gone down, personally.” - 47 year old man in rural
Grand Cape Mount county on why the harvest will be smaller this year.

“People are afraid to leave their houses to work on the farms.” - 35 year old man in rural Grand Cape
Mount county on why the harvest will be smaller this year.

“We are afraid of going to the farm. The rice is used to feed the animals.” - 35 year old man in rural
Grand Cape Mount county on why agricultural profits will be lower this year.

                                                                                                         12
Prices
Rice prices have spiked well Figure 9. Price index for rice for 2014 compared to average for 2012 and 2013
above      usual     seasonal
                                                           2014         2012 / 2013
increases. Due to the lack of
available historical data, it is 160
difficult to analyze the
                                 140
impact of EVD on prices.
Numerous surveys, the high       120

frequency phone survey           100
included, have shown price
                                  80
increases since the outbreak
began in July.           Some     60
increase in price, however, is    40
to be expected due the
                                  20
seasonal shortages of locally
produced rice in the               0
immediate        post-harvest
period. Figure 9 shows the
estimated price for a 50 kg
                                    * October 1 - 7, 2014
bag of rice in 2014 as well as
                                    ** October 21 - November 7, 2014
the average for 2012 and
2013 by month.2 The price Source: 2014 HIES, high frequency phone survey, WFP VAM
trends upwards historically, particularly during September and October, but the 2014 increase was
markedly higher. In 2012/13 data, prices were about seven percent higher than their January base
price. In October 2014, however, the observed increase reached above 40 on average percent above
the baseline.

There are a number of different factors behind the rice price increase. While the high frequency
survey has neither a large enough sample nor a sufficiently extensive questionnaire to fully disentangle
the issues, the spatial price variation and information on availability can provide some information on
driving factors. In both the first and second rounds, approximately 30 percent of respondents indicated
that they could not purchase rice at their local market. These households were concentrated in
Monrovia, Bong, Lofa, and Nimba counties. At the same time, though prices have risen compared to the
pre-EVD baseline across the country, the price data showed statistically significantly lower prices in
Monrovia compared to the rest of the country, and higher prices in the three easternmost counties
(Rivergee, Grand Kru, and Maryland). The other three counties with availability issues did not have
higher prices than the remainder of the country. It would seem contradictory to basic supply-and-



2
  In the HIES the question refers specifically to imported rice while in the high frequency phone survey, the
question is more general. These issues of comparability will be corrected in the next round, though the impacts
are likely to be small due to the relative unavailability of local rice during this part of the agricultural calendar.

                                                                                                                   13
demand that market shortages would not automatically head to higher prices. The pattern may be
explained, however, if the lack of availability was caused by market closures and transportation issues.

If the markets are closed, traders either stop participating or move to areas where they are still able to
sell. This densification, accompanied by the fact that as the main port of entry for imported rice, prices
in Monrovia are historically lower, explain both the lower prices and limited availability. Prices are
higher outside the capital due to transportation costs, and there are similar issues with market closures
in Nimba, Bong, and Lofa counties due to EVD. In addition, travel limitations may prevent supply from
reaching some areas as well as preventing people from traveling to other areas with availability to push
up prices there. Also, the distribution of food aid though treatment centers would offset upward price
pressures. Finally, the poor infrastructure and travel restrictions would increase transportation costs,
which would be most acutely felt in the more remote areas, particularly if border closures limit
alternatives. This pattern of a lack of availability without accompanying price increases has also been
observed in neighboring Sierra Leone according to the International Center for Growth’s November
Report on Markets, Traders, and Food Security, and will be an area of focus in subsequent rounds of the
high frequency survey in Liberia.

Despite large rice price increases, evidence suggests insufficient income may be a larger threat to food
security than prices. Such large increases in food prices have most likely had significant negative effects
on food security, but this has been compounded by reductions in disposable income. In both the first
and second rounds of the high frequency phone survey, conditional on rice being available for sale,
more than two-thirds of respondents indicated that at some point in the previous two weeks they were
unable to buy enough rice for their household. As with prices, it is likely that there is a seasonal
component to food shortages, but when asked as to the reason why they were unable to buy enough
rice, only about one-quarter indicated that the prices were too high. A small percentage cited
availability issues, but the vast majority, approximately 70 percent across the two rounds, said that they
did not have enough money consistent with the large job losses. This finding points to important
income effects compounding the impact of higher prices.

“The price has increased. We do not have money. There is a state of emergency here and the
government is not allowing travel to Monrovia.” - 35 year old man in rural Grand Cape Mount county
on why he was not able to buy enough rice for his household.


Food Security
There is evidence of widespread food insecurity though it is difficult to estimate the relative impact of
EVD compared to seasonal issues. More than 90 percent of households indicated that they were
worried that their household would not have enough to eat at some point in the previous week over the
two rounds of data collection. Sixty-two percent said yes to this measure of food security in both
rounds, 10 percent did not report issues in the first round but did in the second round, and 20 percent
had issues in the first round but not the second. While these figures remain high by most measures,
they do show a downward trend. This means that it is likely that at least some of the issues are related
to seasonal food insecurity, and will continue to decrease as the harvest progresses. The largest

                                                                                                        14
reductions between the two rounds occurred in Nimba county, which is the largest grain producing area
of the county and which traditionally begins the harvest in late October. Overall households have
pursued a variety of coping mechanisms to deal with food insecurity, the most common being reducing
the number of meals eaten and restricting adult consumption. The frequency of these strategies has
not changed markedly between rounds. See table 1 below for further details.

Table 1. Coping strategies for food insecurity
           In the past 7 days, how many days have you or someone in your household had to…
           …rely on less        …limit portion …reduce number … restrict           … borrow food,
           preferred            size at meal-  of meals eaten   consumption by or rely on help
           and/or less          times?         in a day?        adults in order    from a friend or
           expensive                                            for small          relative?
           foods?                                               children to eat?
Round 1           2.9                  3.0            3.4               3.3                2.1
Round 2           2.6                  3.1            2.6               2.8                2.3
Source: High frequency phone survey (October – November 2014)


Migration
Migration has been limited and local and is most likely for economic reasons rather than health fears.
In the first round of data collection, a small number of households, about 14 percent, indicated having
moved dwellings since the Ebola outbreak, but only 30 percent of these households left the county in
which they had been living. Of those that remained in the county as in the HIES, about one-third were
located within Monrovia, but overall movement was no more common in affected counties than in the
remainder of the country. In addition, seven percent of households indicated that a regular household
member had left due to Ebola, with more than half indicating that the member went to Monrovia and a
further one-quarter said they remained within the same county but in a different location.
Approximately five percent indicated that a household member had left Liberia.

By the second round, the percentage of households that moved remained constant around 15 percent,
but the percentage of households in which a usual member had left had nearly doubled to 13 percent.
The majority of these movers remained within the original county, with only about one-quarter going to
Monrovia. Among those interviewed in both rounds, 94 percent of households remained in the same
county. Of those that moved, 39 percent shifted from Montserrado to another county. Most did not go
to the largely unaffected areas in the east, but rather to Bomi or Grand Cape Mount counties, which had
low but growing numbers of infections. Of the remainder of the movers, 35 percent moved to
Montserrado, coming from a range of counties distributed across the country. The remaining 26
percent moved between counties outside Montserrado, but again there was not a definite pattern.

Overall migration during this period was limited, possibly in part due to the uncertainty of the situation
and the restrictions on travel put in place by the government. A small percentage changed dwellings but
this is more likely natural movement as it did not occur more frequently in affected counties compared
to the unaffected. Between the two rounds, a growing number of households indicated that though the


                                                                                                       15
household itself remained, a usual household member had left. Since it was single members or small
groups leaving, it is more likely to be attributed to economic migration than related directly to fear of
infection. There also appears to be limited evidence for the hypothesis that there has been a recent
increase in migration to previously unaffected areas. Also the data shows that a small number of
households reported a usual member leaving the country but these were rare events occurring mainly in
the earlier part of the outbreak.3


Conclusion
The Ebola Virus Disease has severely impacted the Liberian economy across all sectors of employment.
Large percentages of those in wage employment have either been asked to stay at home or have lost
their positions entirely. Similarly those involved in non-agricultural self-employment activities, such as
small scale traders, have seen their business fall as markets are closed, potential customers become
more reserved in their spending, and travel restrictions disrupts supply. This group is more vulnerable
to negative impacts on their well-being because they are not receiving public sector salaries and
because they have been less able to find alternative jobs. The impact on farmers has been the smallest
in terms of overall percentage of the workforce, and there are signs that many that had stopped farming
have now returned to farming, consistent with the start of the harvest period. There is still the potential
for food insecurity as many farmers believe the harvest will be smaller this year, in part due to lack of
labor from the traditional shared-labor systems. Food insecurity is widespread in the country, though a
fraction of this is seasonal. The annual shortage in the pre-harvest period is being compounded this
year by both higher prices and loss of income due to the inability to work because of EVD. Though some
limited migration has taken place in response to these conditions for the most part this has been local
and likely more focused on economic activities than fear of infection. There is some evidence of people
leaving the country in the early stages but this seems to have decreased as the situation normalized.
Overall the situation remains quite serious but there are some signs that it may be improving, including
a return to farming. Further information will be available as the situation develops and after the next
round of the survey is fielded in December.




3
 It should be noted that the nature of the high frequency phone survey is vulnerable to under-reporting events
such as outmigration. If members leave the country, they can no longer receive phone calls on their Liberian
numbers. The propensity score component of the weight calculations to some extent adjusts for this, though
some underestimation may remain.

                                                                                                                 16
Methodological Annex
The high frequency economic impact of Ebola survey was initiated by the World Bank, in partnership
with the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Informational Services (LISGIS) and implemented by the
Gallup Organization, to estimate the socioeconomic impact of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD). The first
round was conducted from October 1 through October 7 and the second round from October 21 to
November 7. This note describes the survey methodology underlying the data collection and analysis.

Sample Design – The sampling frame uses the Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES), a
nationally representative household survey launched by the LISGIS in February 2014 and halted about
halfway through collection, in August, due to the outbreak. Since the HIES was designed to produce
representative estimates for each quarter, the half-year dataset is representative nationally though not
at the originally planned level of precision. As part of that survey, interviewers collected re-contact
information for the households, including cell phone numbers for household members. Of the 4088
households for which data was collected before fieldwork stopped, 2137 included numbers. The limited
list of available numbers is due to relatively low levels of cell network penetration in Liberia. The
available numbers represent nearly all urban households and about one-third of the rural sample.
Those households reporting numbers is unevenly distributed across the sample, but fortunately there is
at least partial coverage in all counties, ranging from 80 percent with numbers in Monrovia /
Montserrado county to 11 percent in Nimba county. All available numbers from the HIES were included
in the high frequency phone survey.

Questionnaire – As the survey was being administered over the phone, the targeted length was 15
minutes. The round 1 questionnaire focused on economic impacts, including labor market conditions,
remittances, prices, and food security. The questionnaire also included a number of questions on
knowledge of EVD, focusing on whether the respondent had heard of Ebola, what were their main
sources of information, etc. Questions specifically related to health were excluded since the instrument
was not designed to detect and analyze rate events, such as EVD illness, and as to not increase suspicion
among respondents at a time of high levels of distrust in the government and foreigners. The questions
were worded as closely as possible to those in the HIES to allow for differences-in-differences analysis.
Where topics were outside those covered in the HIES, previously pretested questions, such as those
included in the Listening-to-Africa questionnaires, were used. For round 2, the new respondents
received the round 1 questionnaire while the panel respondents received a slightly modified version
which dropped certain questions (such as the knowledge of Ebola section) and took into account the
fact that respondents had previously provided some information.

Implementation – The survey was implemented by the Gallup Organization from their Nebraska-based
call center. During the review of the concept note, there was extensive discussion around this decision.
The benefits of using Gallup were that they had extensive experience in the planning, programming,
collection, and documentation of surveys of this type. This is in contrast to the only other viable
implementation partner, the LISGIS, which has limited capacity overall and no experience in conducting
telephone-based surveys. In addition, travel restrictions due to EVD limited the scope for technical
assistance from consultants.


                                                                                                      17
The interview plan was for each number to be called up to five times. If the phone was answered, the
interviewer identified if the respondent was an original member of the household, and if so, which
member. Even if the respondent was not an original member, the interview was continued after
collecting a few necessary identifying characteristics, such as name, age, gender, location, and main
source of employment in the previous 12 months. The assumption was that in most of the cases in
which the respondent was unrelated to the original household, there was likely an error in the number,
either at the recording stage or the data entry stage. This type of error would result in the de facto
selection of a random respondent, which would, on average, be the same as the originally interviewed
respondent that the team was attempting to contact.

Response Rate – Overall the response rate was lower than had been targeted during the design phase.
The first round resulted in 648 complete interviews, 30 percent of the available 2137 numbers and the
16 percent of the total 4088 households. Following the results from this round, the team decided to
implement a test for the non-responding households in the first round of data collection. These non-
responders received a text message describing an incentive payment of one US dollar in phone credit for
completed interviews. All numbers were again attempted five times, but the exercise netted only 48
additional households. This incentive structure was also used in the second wave of data collection.
Prior to the second wave, the text message was sent to all respondents that participated in the first
wave of data collection. The text message prior to the second round explained the purpose of the call
and told them about the incentive. The Gallup Organization then re-contacted the original 648,
completing 426 interviews. The second round then has a total of 472 observations, 426 of which form a
panel with the first round. According to the metadata collected by Gallup, of the original 2137 numbers,
the largest component of the non-response was from those that did not answer the call at any point
during the repeated attempts. Table A1 below shows further details on the breakdown of call
outcomes. The categories include interviewed households; did not connect, which includes mainly
those that never answered the phone even though it rang; disconnected numbers for which the
interviewer received a recorded message saying the number was no longer in service; and refusal in
which the phone was answered but the respondent declined to participate in the survey.

 Table A1. Round 1 and round 2 outcomes from original 2317 numbers
                                                            second round
                                 interviewed    did not connect            disconnected   refusals        total
               interviewed          427               184                      22           15             648
 first round




               did not connect       47              1205                       0            0            1252
               disconnected          0                 0                       376           0             376
               refusals              0                 0                        0           41             41
               total                474              1389                      398          56            2317


There are a number of hypotheses as to why these calls have gone unanswered. One is related to the
suspicion of potential respondents to unknown foreign numbers, particularly during a crisis situation. A
second relates to respondents not paying to have phones charged at a time when incomes have been
reduced. Similarly, travel restrictions have limited the ability of traders to bring diesel to rural areas to

                                                                                                          18
power generators, further complicating the process of charging phones. To explore these possibilities,
the text messages were sent using a system that confirms delivery. Of the 1011 text messages sent
before the second round, only 621 were delivered. This means that only about 61 percent of cell
phones were turned on at any point during the week-long survey period, and suggests that both
hypotheses played a role in the high non-response rates.

Overall the characteristics of respondents were similar in distribution to those in the original sample. Of
the 648 interviewed in the first round, 83 percent were household heads, seven percent were other
members of the original household, and ten percent were not part of the original household. These
figures were 92, 4, and 4 percent, respectively in the second round. Comparing the average age of
respondents to that of the original sample of household heads, the most logical available comparison
group, the average age of a respondent was both 40 in the first and second rounds, compared to 39 in
the original sample. In the high frequency phone survey, 22 percent of respondents were female in the
first round and 21 percent in the second round, compared with 26 percent of household heads in the
original sample. Tables A2 and A3, found at the end of this section, show the distribution by sector of
employment and geography for the original sample and the two cell phone rounds. There are no
statistically significant differences between the two samples, though the limited sample size means that
there is limited power for these tests. The only area where there was a marked difference between
urban and rural areas was in the urban/rural status of the respondent. Seventy-two percent of
respondents in both the first and second rounds were living in urban areas, compared to 56 percent in
the original sample.

Weights – Despite the general similarities between the original sample and high frequency phone survey
respondents, it was necessary to calculate and apply an attrition correction in addition to the probability
weights. To attempt to most accurately represent the original population, two steps were applied in the
calculations. The first was to calculate a propensity score adjustment, which uses the available
characteristics of the household head from the HIES (age, gender, location, and sector of employment)
to calculate an aggregate probability of response. The results of this analysis for the two cross section
and the panel rounds are presented in table A4 at the end of this section. The inverse of this probability
is then applied to the probability weights, therefore increasing the weight for underrepresented groups.
In addition, a post-stratification adjustment was applied. This adjustment increases the total weights in
each stratum, in this case county by urban/rural, to match a known distribution. In most cases this
would be numbers from the previous census inflated for population growth, but as this information is
not available reliably at the stratum level, the total from the previous census were used. This means
that these data cannot be used to calculate totals, such as the total number of Liberians who are no
longer working, and therefore analysis of that type is excluded from this report. This methodology is
applied to the two rounds of data to produce three sets of weights: cross-sectional weights for round 1,
cross-sectional weights for round 2, and panel weights for those households that appear in both rounds.

Verbatim responses – For all questions in the questionnaire in which answer choices were given,
interviewers could select “other” if respondent did not select one of the answer choices. The
interviewer would then record the respondent’s answer verbatim to later be coded (if possible) into an
existing category. The quotes listed in blue at the end of certain chapters come from these responses.

                                                                                                        19
Table A2. Sector of employment of household head
sector of hh                 HIES        round 1     round 2
wage                         37.7          39.1        42.8
self-employment              27.9          21.8        24.2
agriculture                  20.6          21.4        12.9
unpaid family                1.5           1.2         2.4
other                        12.3          16.6        17.7

Table A3. Regional distribution of households
                                                              round 1                     round 2
                                                   % households survey         % households survey
county                  % households (census)                             n                               n
                                                      (unweighted)                (unweighted)
Bomi                             3.1                      4.0            26           4.7                 22
Bong                             10.4                      6.3           41            5.5                26
Grand Bassa                      7.1                       6.2           40            5.5                26
Grand Cape Mount                 3.6                       3.9           25            3.0                14
Grand Gedeh                      2.7                       7.6           49            7.6                36
Grand Kru                        1.3                       2.6           17            2.1                10
Lofa                             7.4                       3.4           22            3.8                18
Margibi                          6.7                       8.6           56            8.1                38
Maryland                         2.9                       4.2           27            3.4                16
Montserrado                      34.7                     37.7           244          40.7                192
Nimba                            12.0                      3.9           25            5.7                27
River Cess                       2.1                       2.3           15            3.0                14
Sinoe                            2.4                       3.6           23            1.9                 9
River Gee                         1.5                      2.6            17           2.8                 13
Gbarpolu                         2.2                      3.2             21          2.3                  11
Urban                            56.2                     71.5           463          74.2                350
Rural                            43.8                     28.6           185          25.9                122
Total                           100.0                    100.0           648         100.0                472




                                                                                                     20
Table A4: Regression coefficients for logit response model

                                                     round 1                     round 2                    panel
                                              coef             se         coef             se        coef            se
Respondent Characteristics
    female                                    -0.228*           0.126    -0.303**          0.140    -0.358**         0.146
    age                                        0.045*           0.024        0.021         0.026        0.018        0.027
    age squared                               -0.000*           0.000       -0.000         0.000       -0.000        0.000
Sector of Employment (Reference : Wage)
   self-employment                              -0.163          0.132    -0.327**          0.145      -0.258*        0.151
   agriculture                              -0.537***           0.149   -0.598***          0.169   -0.533***         0.178
   unpaid family work                           -0.199          0.430       -0.706         0.556       -0.508        0.558
   other                                         0.231          0.188        0.026         0.200        0.140        0.204
Geographic Strata (Reference : Monrovia)
   Bomi Urban                               -2.564***           0.743   -2.137***          0.744
   Bomi Rural                               -1.010***           0.264   -0.854***          0.281   -0.779***         0.287
   Bong Urban                                -0.585**           0.269   -0.861***          0.311    -0.813**         0.318
   Bong Rural                               -0.922***           0.315   -0.972***          0.359   -1.080***         0.387
   Grand Bassa Urban                            -0.281          0.258      -0.471*         0.277       -0.463        0.284
   Grand Bassa Rural                        -1.790***           0.399   -2.130***          0.534   -2.005***         0.535
   Grand Cape Mount Urban                    -1.542**           0.646      -1.119*         0.647    -2.222**         1.038
   Grand Cape Mount Rural                   -1.392***           0.268   -1.754***          0.340   -1.723***         0.354
   Grand Gedeh Urban                           -0.419*          0.231       -0.400         0.246       -0.307        0.248
   Grand Gedeh Rural                        -1.435***           0.353   -1.573***          0.420   -1.809***         0.484
   Grand Kru Urban                           -1.883**           0.770      -1.452*         0.771      -1.324*        0.771
   Grand Kru Rural                          -1.565***           0.303   -1.860***          0.388   -1.875***         0.410
   Lofa Urban                               -0.910***           0.330    -0.790**          0.359      -0.651*        0.360
   Lofa Rural                               -1.458***           0.410   -1.216***          0.436    -1.089**         0.438
   Margibi Urban                                -0.340          0.257    -0.585**          0.280    -0.570**         0.288
   Margibi Rural                            -0.742***           0.274   -0.844***          0.301    -0.773**         0.307
   Maryland Urban                           -1.020***           0.255   -1.260***          0.301   -1.386***         0.328
   Maryland Rural                           -3.124***           0.731   -3.429***          1.018   -3.306***         1.018
   Montserrado Urban                            -0.092          0.460       -0.078         0.470        0.064        0.471
   Montserrado Rural                             0.442          0.542        0.281         0.535        0.431        0.535
   Nimba Urban                              -1.054***           0.276      -0.510*         0.273    -0.635**         0.290
   Nimba Rural                              -2.106***           0.543   -1.711***          0.546   -1.898***         0.618
   River Cess Urban                          -1.859**           0.771       -0.968         0.660      -1.320*        0.772
   River Cess Rural                         -1.622***           0.328   -1.420***          0.352   -1.519***         0.381
   Sinoe Urban                              -1.108***           0.421   -1.516***          0.546    -1.364**         0.546
   Sinoe Rural                              -1.703***           0.303   -2.511***          0.475   -2.377***         0.476
   River Gee Urban                          -1.074***           0.350    -0.883**          0.373    -1.022**         0.404
   River Gee Rural                          -2.609***           0.476   -2.702***          0.601   -2.577***         0.601
   Gbarpolu Urban                                0.239          0.436       -0.689         0.521       -0.546        0.522
   Gbarpolu Rural                           -1.844***           0.377   -1.894***          0.446   -2.197***         0.532
Constant                                       -0.839           0.542      -0.665          0.585      -0.775         0.604
N                                                     2324                        2324                       2296
Pseudo R-squared                                     0.1151                      0.1124                     0.1123
note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                    21
