                                          Document of
                                  The World Bank Group
                                FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY



                                                                          Report No.: 94554-EG




       INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

                       INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

                 MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

                         COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK

                                           FOR THE

                                ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

                              FOR THE PERIOD FY 2015-2019

                                    NOVEMBER 20, 2015




Egypt Country Management Unit
Middle East and North Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group
authorization.
            The date of the last Interim Strategy Note (ISN) was June 30, 2012
                              CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                          (Exchange Rate as of November 4, 2015)
                           Currency Unit = Egyptian Pound (LE)
                                     US$1= 8.0 LE
                                      FISCAL YEAR
                                  January 1 – December 31
                            ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AFD       Agence Française de Développement        KfW        German Government Owned
AfDB      African Development Bank                            Development Bank (Kreditanstalt für
ASA       Advisory Services and Analytics                     Wiederaufbau)
CAPMAS    Central Agency for Public                LE         Egyptian Pound
          Mobilization and Statistics (National    LPG        Liquefied Petroleum Gas
          Statistics Agency)                       MENA       Middle East and North Africa
CAS       Country Assistance Strategy              MFI        Microfinance Institutions
CBE       Central Bank of Egypt                    MIGA       Multilateral Investment Guarantee
CLR       Completion and Learning Review                      Agency
CPF       Country Partnership Framework            MOF        Ministry of Finance
CPFCR     Country Partnership Framework            MSME       Medium and Small-Scale and Micro-
          Completion Report                                   Enterprises
DPF       Development Policy Financing             MWe        Megawatts electricity
DPG       Development Policy Group                 OECD       Organization for Economic
EEHC      Egypt Electricity Holding Company                   Cooperation and Development
EGPC      Egyptian General Petroleum               PFM/PIM    Public Financial/Investment
          Corporation                                         Management
EIB       European Investment Bank                 PforR      Program-for-Results
EU        European Union                           PPIAF      Public- Private Infrastructure Advisory
FDI       Foreign Direct Investment                           Facility
GCC       Gulf Cooperation Council                 PPP        Public-Private Partnerships
GDP       Gross Domestic Product                   PSD        Private Sector Development
GOE       Government of Egypt                      SCD        Systematic Country Diagnostic
HIECS     Household Income Expenditure and         SHF        Social Housing Fund
          Consumption Surveys                      SME        Small and Medium Enterprises
IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction    SOE        State Owned Enterprise
          and Development                          SSN        Social Safety Net
IDA       International Development Association    TA         Technical Assistance
IEG       Independent Evaluation Group             UAE        United Arab Emirates
IFAD      International Fund for Agricultural      UNDP       United Nations Development
          Development                                         Programme
IFC       International Finance Corporation        USAID      United States Agency for International
IMF       International Monetary Fund                         Development
ISN       Interim Strategy Note                    WBG        World Bank Group
                                                   WUA        Water Users Association

                       IBRD                       IFC                        MIGA
Vice President:        Hafez M. H. Ghanem         Dimitris Tsitsiragos       Karin Finkelston
Director:              Asad Alam                  Mouayed Makhlouf           Ravi Vish
Task Team Leader:      Poonam Gupta               Nada Shousha               Paul Barbour
ACKNOWELDGEMENTS
The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the close collaboration of the Egyptian authorities,
development partners, business groups, academia, civil society and other stakeholders in the
preparation of this Country Partnership Framework.

The strategy is the result of a team effort that relied on knowledge, experience, and guidance from
non-Governmental partners across Egypt and individuals across the World Bank Group. The CPF
was led by Poonam Gupta (MNCA3), Nada Shousha (CMEEC), and Persephone Economou and
Paul Barbour (MIGA). Aliya Husain (MNCA3) prepared the Completion Report of Bank Group
assistance during the period FY06-FY14; Husam Abudagga (MNC03) and Eman Wahby
(MNAEC) were responsible for organizing WBG consultations for the CPF. The CPF comprised
a core team consisting of Aliya Husain (MNCA3), Husam Abudagga (MNC03), Wael Afifi
(CBCCE), Guido Rurangwa (MNCA3), and Asma Al-Hanshali (MNCYE), Gustavo Demarco
(MNC03), Victoria Gyllerup (GWADR), Rapti A. Goonesekere (CBCCF), Luke Haggarty
(CBCRM), Lorraine James (EACNQ), Dahlia Khalifa (GTCDR), Ahmed Kouchouk (GMFDR),
Nehal El Kouesny (MNAEC), Bala Menon (MNC03), Bushra Ghulam Mohammad (CBCCE),
Joshua McLellan Newell (MNADE), Rami Okascha (MNCA3), Bryanne Tait (CASEE), and Dalia
Wahba (CNGS9).

We also wish to thank the following people for their contributions: Maissa Abdalla (MNAEC);
Alaa Abdel-Hamed (GHNDR); Laila Abdelkader (GFMDR); Dina Abu-Ghaida (GEDDR);
Oyebimpe Adepoju (GENDR); Edouard Al-Dahdah (GGODR); Ipek Alkan (EACIQ); Waleed
Alsuraih (GEEDR); Amira Hussein Aly Aboulkheir (GTCDR); George Anayiotos; Sara Al
Nashar(GMFDR); Nabila Assaf (GTCDR); Karim Badr (GFMDR); Olivier Le Ber (GTIDR);
Benoit Blarel (GENDR); Charles Cormier (GEEDR); Malak Draz (CASMP); Yasser El-Gammal
(GSPDR); Hazem El-Wassimy (GTCDR); Muneer Ferozie (CASMP); Thomas Gratowski
(MNCA3); Sherif Hamdy (GTCDR); Leonard Hessling (GGO17); Ann-Sofie Jespersen
(OPSRE); Amira Kazem (GEDDR); Piers Merrick (MNADE); Sarah Andrei Mikhnev (GTCDR);
Felix Neugebauer (MNCO3); Africa Olojoba (GENDR); Harry Patrinos (GEDDR); Luis Prada
(GGODR); Xavier Reille (CFGA3); Alaa Sarhan (GENDR); Maria Sarraf (GENDR); Andreas
Schliessler (GTIDR); Steven Schonberger (GWADR); Maria Vagliasindi (MNC05); Caroline Van
den Berg (GWADR); Manuel Vargas (GGODR); Hisham Waly (GGODR); Tatiana Weber
(MNC03); Caitlin Whittemore (MNADE); and Sylvia Zulu (CASDR).

We are also deeply grateful to our peer reviewer, Dr. Ziad Bahaa-Eldin, Founder and Member of
the Board of Directors of the Ahmed Bahaa-Eldin Cultural Foundation and Senior Counsel of
Hashem & Partners, a business law firm, and to Ms. Laurie Effron, consultant, to the CPF team.
                                           ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
                                     FY2015-2019 Country Partnership Framework


                                                       TABLE OF CONTENTS



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................... i

I.      INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 1

II.     REGIONAL CONTEXT AND WBG ROLE ........................................................................... 1

III. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA .............................................. 2
        A. Social and Political Context....................................................................................................... 2
        B. Economic Developments............................................................................................................ 2
        C. Poverty Profile ............................................................................................................................. 5
        D. Development Challenges to Eliminating Extreme Poverty and Boosting Shared
           Prosperity .................................................................................................................................... 6

IV. THE GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY ................................................................................... 15

V.      WORLD BANK GROUP PROPOSED PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ......................... 18
        A. Lessons from CAS Completion and Learning Review (CLR), Independent Evaluations,
           and Stakeholder Consultations ............................................................................................... 18
        B. Stakeholder Consultations ........................................................................................................ 19
        C. Overview of World Bank Group Strategy ............................................................................. 20
        D. Implementing the Country Partnership Framework ............................................................. 40

VI. MANAGING RISKS TO THE CPF PROGRAM ...........................................................44

ANNEXES
Annex 1: CPF Results Framework......................................................................................................... 47
Annex 2: Completion and Learning Review ........................................................................................ 66
Annex 3: Donor Activities .................................................................................................................... 102
Annex 4: Selected Indicators for Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ......................... 105
Annex 5: Egypt Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ....................................................... 106
Annex 6: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio ............................................................ 107
Annex 7: SCD priorities and WBG proposed interventions under the CPF .................................. 108
TABLES
Table 1: Selected macroeconomic indicators, actual and projected, 2006 – 2019 ............................ 3
Table 2: WBG Pillars and proposed lending interventions ................................................................ 21
Table 3: WBG Pillars and Proposed Bank Analytic and Advisory Services, FY16-17 ................. 21
Table 4: Egypt Portfolio at a glance, FY09-FY15 ............................................................................... 42
Table 5: Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) ............................................................... 44

BOXES
Box 1: WBG strategy: Shifts from past support ................................................................................. 22
Box 2: A Simple Framework for Improved Governance................................................................... 24
Box 3: Bringing citizen engagement and renewing the social contract into WBG operations ..... 28
Box 4: Areas of WBG Collaboration in Egypt.................................................................................... 41

FIGURES
Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate ................................................................................................................. 3 
Figure 2. Egypt Poverty Headcount Rate, 2000-2010 .................................................................................. 5 
Figure 3. Egypt Poverty Headcount Rate by Region, 2005-2010 ................................................................... 5 




                                                                        ii
                 FY2015-2019 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK FOR
                               ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

                                             Executive Summary

1.      The World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Egypt for
FY15-19 has been prepared at an important juncture in Egypt’s history to support
transformational changes to the economic and social space. It builds on the Government of
Egypt’s (GOE) medium-term strategy and national priorities for economic development, responds
to client demands, and is informed by consultations with a broad array of stakeholders in Egypt.
At the same time, the CPF proposes selective interventions in line with the development priorities
of the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Egypt,1 and draws on the WBG’s comparative
advantage. This proposed program will also seek to implement the new MENA Regional strategy,
especially the pillars on renewing the social contract, supporting economic recovery, and
promoting regional cooperation.

2.      Egypt has implemented political, economic, and social reforms, but significant challenges
remain. Egypt’s political transition is progressing, with Parliamentary elections to be completed by
end-2015. Egypt has also recently undertaken important measures to reduce the fiscal deficit and
restore macroeconomic stability by moving away from universal subsidies towards a more targeted
transfer program, taking measures to contain the wage bill and increasing tax revenues.
Macroeconomic figures show some improvement, with growth rebounding to 4.2 percent in
2014/15. Financial soundness indicators point to the continued resilience of the banking sector, and
the GOE is making efforts to deepen financial inclusion. Nevertheless, continued fiscal and
economic reforms are needed to sustain growth. Egypt has also made significant strides in human
development indicators: child mortality, life expectancy, primary and secondary school enrollment,
and literacy rates have improved dramatically in the past thirty years. Here too, however, governance
issues continue to affect health and learning outcomes. To protect the poor, the Government has
targeted 1.5 million households in a new cash transfer program.

3.      Far-reaching structural reforms are needed to transform Egypt’s economy into a
dynamic system that can reduce poverty, create productive employment opportunities, and
maintain social and political stability. Economic growth in the past three decades has been
moderate and uneven, and insufficient to reduce poverty or absorb the rapidly growing supply of
labor. Poverty rates have been persistently high, at about one-quarter of the population,
concentrated in Rural Upper Egypt, and unemployment remains high, particularly for women and
youth. At the same time, the fiscal deficit is still large, reserves are only at about 3 months of
imports, and political and social risks remain because their underlying causes – shortage of formal-
sector jobs, high unemployment and underemployment among Egyptian youth, and exclusion of
poor segments of the population – persist.

4.      A recent rebound in the population growth rate combined with the echo boom from the
last population bulge has resulted in a second youth bulge nearly 50 percent larger than the
first. This will increase pressures on the labor market, infrastructure, social services, and the

1
 Promoting Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity in Egypt, A Systematic Country Diagnostic, World Bank, (P151429),
September 2015. .http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25096259/egypt-promoting-poverty-reduction-
shared-prosperity-systematic-country-diagnostic.
                                                         i
environment, making it even more urgent for Egypt to undertake wide-ranging structural and
policy reforms.

5.      The GOE recently presented its Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt’s Vision for
the Year 2030. The strategy was developed in consultation with civil society, the private sector,
Egyptian youth, and international development partners and is focused on three main areas:
economic development, improving governance, and social justice and inclusion. Salient features
of the strategy are a focus on the leading role the private sector is expected to play in economic
development, emphasis on the need for greater transparency and accountability in the public sector,
and emphasis on inclusion. As with all strategies, the key to success will be how well the GOE’s
strategy is implemented.

6.      WBG support under the CPF is focused on the twin goals, prioritizes the first pillar of
the MENA strategy “renewing the social contract” and is organized under three closely
interconnected focus areas: (i) improving governance; (ii) private sector job creation; and (iii)
social inclusion.

          Efforts to improve governance will include improving transparency and efficiency,
           strengthening inclusive institutions that work for the poor, and promoting citizen
           engagement and feedback. The WBG will support increasing citizens’ trust in the
           state, especially with respect to service delivery, such as a targeted social transfer
           system and decentralization of service delivery for rural sanitation; improving the
           transparency and efficiency of public administration through strengthening citizens’
           ability to hold the state accountable through access to information and feedback on
           service delivery; and strengthening governance in the energy sector through energy
           subsidy and policy reforms. Governance issues lie at the heart of the remaining two
           focus areas as well.

          Support for private sector job creation will include improving the business climate for
           private investments. The WBG may also support catalytic investments in infrastructure,
           institutions, and capacities that contribute to competitiveness, including market-driven
           skills development; ensuring Egypt’s energy security and diversification, through
           enhanced energy efficiency and supporting financial sustainability of the energy sector;
           strengthening transport to spur mobility, connectivity, and economic activity; enhancing
           the productivity of agriculture by strengthening allocation and management of water
           resources and development of supply chains; and improving financial inclusion and
           governance for MSME development.

          Improving social inclusion will be addressed by strengthening the targeting of the social
           safety net (SSN) system; supporting a local development project aimed at the poorer
           governorates of Upper Egypt; improving the quality of health services, by expanding
           family health services that target the bottom 40 percent of the population, and supporting
           with TA Egypt’s efforts to prevent, diagnose, and treat Hepatitis C; enhancing access to
           improved sanitation and sewerage service; expanding housing for low-income
           households; and engaging in dialogue and analytic activities with the GOE to identify a
           transformational intervention in education to address governance weaknesses in the
           sector. The benefits in this focus area will accrue to a large extent to women.

                                                 ii
7.      This CPF presents an important departure from previous WBG strategies for Egypt. The
CPF supports a transformative program to renew the social contract to support private sector job
creation, social inclusion, and enhanced governance. The WBG is moving towards more than
doubling its lending program compared to the recent past, to a total of about $8 billion over FY15-
19 – of which an indicative amount of about $6 billion is requested by the authorities to come from
IBRD and about $2 billion from IFC. The actual volume and pace of IBRD lending will depend
on the implementation of the program, including the ability to address macroeconomic risks,
choice of instruments and economic performance in the course of the CPF period, continued
Government interest in IBRD financing, and on IBRD’s lending capacity and demands from other
borrowers. Similarly, the actual investments by IFC and guarantees by MIGA during the CPF
period will depend on improvements in macroeconomic stability and progress in investment
climate reforms that would boost investor confidence and facilitate greater private sector
participation. The Bank also intends to use a programmatic approach, including finance and
knowledge, use analytic products strategically to underpin policy dialogue and project design, and
deploy the WBG’s convening power to promote advocacy and reforms. Lending will rely more
on development policy financing (DPF) and Program for Results (PforR)s than in the past where
the main instrument was investment loans, although investment loans will continue to be used
where appropriate. Governance issues will be an integral part of all Bank Group initiatives,
including policy and institutional reforms, and increasing transparency and accountability at the
sector and project level; this will include enhancing citizens’ voice and grievance redress
mechanisms. The WBG will show greater selectivity in the use of IBRD resources in core public
sectors, with IFC leveraging the private sector. The Bank and IFC will use a joint approach in
energy, education, and competitiveness. The WBG will seek to encourage regional cooperation
in a number of areas: macroeconomic stabilization (through development partner financing
support); cross-border private investments in energy and water; and promoting a platform for
education for competitiveness.

8.      The WBG strategy also includes shifts in emphasis among sectors and within sectors.
The Bank will bring a new focus on education reforms and on lagging regions, particularly in
Upper Egypt. In energy, the WBG focus will shift from conventional power generation to
enhanced energy efficiency, improved transmission, and scaling up renewable energy from wind
and solar power facilities, with efforts aimed at bringing in private sector capital and know-how.
In health, the Bank support will focus on accountability of service providers to citizens and
improving the quality of health services, with technical assistance aimed at supporting the GOE’s
efforts to address Hepatitis C. Support to agriculture and water will be treated holistically rather
than as separate sectors, and will shift from irrigation and drainage infrastructure to linking farms
with markets and enhancing the productivity of labor-intensive agriculture. Environment will be
integrated in relevant operations, for example in energy, agriculture and transport.

9.      There are also important ways in which selectivity will be applied. First, the WBG will
focus on priority areas identified in the SCD. Second, for those areas that promote shared
prosperity but where there is no country demand for WBG support, the WBG will play an advocacy
role. Third, the Bank will refrain from lending in areas that can attract private sector investment,
leaving IFC and MIGA to take a more appropriate role in sectors where there is clear private
investor appetite. Fourth, the Bank will focus lending in sectors with strong commitment to
strengthen institutions and increase the state’s accountability to citizens.


                                                 iii
10.    Strong results are expected under the CPF through both new and ongoing projects and
Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA). The policy and institutional reforms supported under the
proposed DPF and investment operations will help to achieve the twin goals by renewing the social
contract, reducing public sector inefficiencies, and strengthening the basis for a private sector led
economy. The acceleration of existing project implementation will also bring tangible results.
Some results from new programs will be developed in the Performance and Learning Review
(PLR) to be carried out in FY18. Environmental sustainability and gender disaggregated
monitoring of results will be an integral part of WBG initiatives under the CPF.

11.      The overall rating of risks that affect the WBG program is high. Political, governance,
social, macroeconomic and sector strategies and policies risks are rated high and will be closely
monitored, with WBG making appropriate adjustments to its lending program and sector dialogue.
The Bank will continue to provide technical advice on the distributional impact of a reduction in
energy subsidies and on the better targeting of cash transfers to protect the poorest. Risks related
to institutional capacity for implementation and fiduciary risks are rated substantial; these risks
may be mitigated through technical assistance to implementing agencies and extra due diligence,
respectively. To address environmental and social risks, capacity-building will be provided to
GOE and implementing agencies for the preparation, implementation, and supervision of specific
environmental and social safeguard instruments, and will cover the use of citizen engagement and
grievance redress mechanisms.




                                                 iv
                 FY2015-2019 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK FOR

                                        ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

                                                I.        Introduction

1.   This CPF, prepared jointly by IBRD, IFC and MIGA, covers the period FY15 through
FY19. The most recent WBG strategy was the Interim Strategy Note (ISN), prepared in 2011 in a
context of political and economic uncertainty in Egypt and covering an indicative program of
support from June 2012 through December 2013. The ISN followed an earlier Bank-IFC joint
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the period FY06-09, which was extended through FY11.

2.    The WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Egypt is anchored in the dialogue
with the Government of Egypt (GOE), wide consultations, and underpinned by strong analytics.
The CPF builds upon the GOE’s Sustainable Development Strategy for 2030. It is also based on
consultations with stakeholders in Egypt, and draws directly from the analysis contained in the
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Egypt.1

3.    The CPF is organized along three interdependent focus areas for achieving the twin goals
of boosting shared prosperity and eliminating extreme poverty in a sustainable manner 2: (i)
governance; (ii) private sector led job creation; and (iii) social inclusion. In addition,
environmental sustainability, a long-term issue for Egypt, is a cross-cutting theme for WBG
assistance and will be integral to WBG initiatives under the CPF.

                                  II.       Regional Context and WBG Role

4.    The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Region is experiencing widespread turmoil
and violence, and a key challenge for the countries in the Region and their partners is to re-
establish and maintain peace and stability. MENA is beset by civil unrest and violence, inflicting
insecurity, destruction of infrastructure, and large-scale human suffering. Some sixteen million
people have fled their homes, many to nearby fragile countries that are unable to cope, giving rise
to the biggest refugee crisis since World War II. Egypt, a geopolitically important country in the
Region, has been significantly affected by this turmoil and has had to give priority to addressing
security concerns at the same time as it is grappling with constraints to economic development.

5.    The WBG’s new strategy is focused on supporting peace and stability in the Region, not
only because they are prerequisites for economic development, but also because they are global
public goods. The conflicts and violence in the Region have huge spillover effects, with refugees,
further conflict, and terrorism. The WBG strategy is aimed at reversing current trends in the



1
  The SCD is an evidence-based analysis by the World Bank Group of the constraints and opportunities in a country for
reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. For Egypt, see Promoting Poverty
Reduction and Shared Prosperity in Egypt, A Systematic Country Diagnostic, World Bank, (P151429), September 2015.
2
  This CPF organizes the three top priorities for reform and the three key drivers identified in the SCD into three pillars
for support. The first pillar of improving governance incorporates all three top priorities for reform identified in the SCD
(public sector governance, macro stability, and energy subsidies), while private-sector led job creation covers both the
same key driver in the SCD and selected aspects of the SCD’s spatial integration; the CPF’s third pillar, social inclusion,
covers other aspects of spatial integration and inclusion.
Region and helping to establish the conditions for inclusive growth.3 To do this, the underlying
causes of conflict and violence need to be addressed, while providing support for mitigating the
most urgent consequences of the conflicts.

6.     The WBG’s strategy for the MENA Region is geared towards four pillars: renewing the
social contract between the state and its citizens; promoting regional cooperation; enhancing the
resilience to displaced persons and refugee shocks; and supporting recovery and reconstruction.
In the context of Egypt, three pillars are the most relevant and will be the focus of the WBG proposed
strategy. These will involve renewing the social contract and supporting economic recovery through
enabling the private sector to create jobs, especially for the youth, promoting good governance
through greater transparency and accountability in use of resources and better quality in service
delivery, and more effective protection of the poor and the vulnerable. Regional cooperation will
be sought, particularly for cross-border private investments, pursuing regional cooperation in the
energy, water, and education sectors, and cross border engagements through stronger financial,
knowledge, and advocacy partnerships with regional development agencies.

                           III.      Country Context and Development Agenda

A. Social and Political Context

7.    Egypt is due to complete the political roadmap announced in July 2013. After three years
of political uncertainty following the 2011 Revolution,4 a new constitution was adopted by popular
referendum and presidential elections were held in May 2014. Parliamentary elections are due to
be completed by the end of 2015.

8.     The present Government has made progress in restoring security and bringing down the level
of civil disturbances and political violence, although the risk of unrest remains. The underlying
causes of the protests – shortage of formal-sector jobs, high unemployment and underemployment
among Egyptian youth, and lack of service delivery to poor segments of the population – persist and
are the focus of the GOE’s economic and social reforms. Ensuring that the political and social
environment is stable, safe, and peaceful is essential for fostering economic growth, attracting
employment-generating investments, reducing poverty, and boosting shared prosperity.

B. Economic Developments

9.    Egypt’s economic growth over the past three decades has been moderate, but insufficient
to absorb the rapidly growing population and labor force. Average per capita growth has been
around 2 percent per year since 1980. The economy has been characterized by a decline in public
investment rates, low and volatile private investment, low and undiversified exports, low labor
force participation and employment rates, especially among women, weak firm dynamics and job
creation, absence of a robust small and medium enterprise (SME) sector, and limited productivity
growth. Egypt’s economy has become increasingly capital-intensive with the share of income

3
  This is consistent with the adoption, in September 2015, by the United Nations, of Sustainable Development
Goals, which include Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
4
  President Mubarak was ousted in February 2011; Egypt’s first democratic elections brought the political arm of the Muslim
Brotherhood to power in 2012, but the Muslim Brotherhood leadership quickly alienated broad segments of the society, and
political tensions mounted. In July 2013, massive popular demonstrations removed President Morsi from office. An Interim
President was installed until the presidential election in May 2014.
                                                            2
going to labor only around 30-40 percent. Excessive subsidies to capital-intensive industries have
contributed to the limited overall job creation in Egypt relative to other middle-income countries.

10. Since 2000, economic growth in Egypt has been volatile, due to both internal and external
factors. Moderate growth rates in the early part of this period (1999-2003) began to increase in
response to wide-ranging structural reforms starting in 2004, including an accelerated program of
privatization, improvements to the business climate and exchange rate management, banking sector,
tax, and trade reforms. Private investment, driven by high net foreign direct investment (FDI),
contributed to the surge in growth, as did the booming Gulf economies and strong global economic
growth. Growth rates accelerated to over 7 percent per year in 2007-08 and per capita income grew
at a healthy rate. The 2008 global financial crisis and rising food prices halted Egypt’s strong
economic growth, however, and annual growth rates fell to 4.7-5.1 percent in 2009 and 2010, still
outpacing most emerging economies. After the
Egyptian Revolution in 2011 and ensuing political            Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate
                                                        8.0
turmoil and civil unrest, tourism and foreign



                                                                        Annual percent
investments plummeted, the business climate             6.0
deteriorated, and annual growth rates fell to some      4.0
2 percent (Figure 1). Growth is projected to
                                                        2.0
rebound to over 4 percent in 2015 (Table 1).5
Unemployment remains high, at 12.7 percent as           0.0
                                                             00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14
of June 2015, and is particularly high for women
and youth.                                           Source: IMF and Bank staff estimates.

                   Table 1. Selected macroeconomic indicators, actual and projected, 2006 – 2019
                                                            Actual                                              Projected
                 Fiscal year
                                           2006-10 2011       2012     2013              2014 2015      2016      2017      2018    2019
     Real GDP growth rate (%)                 6.2    1.8        2.2      2.1                2.2   4.2     3.8       4.4       4.8     5.2
     Unemployment rate (End of period, %)     9.3   11.8       12.6     13.3               13.3 12.7     12.5      12.       11.4    10.7
     Inflation (CPI Index, Period Average)   11.0   11.0        8.6      6.9               10.1 11.0      9.8       9.5       9.1     8.7
     FDI (% GDP)                              5.9    0.9        1.5      1.1                1.5   2.0     3.3       4.3       4.3     4.2
     National investment ratio (% GDP)       19.6   17.1       16.4     14.2               14.0 14.6     14.7      14.8      15.0    15.2
      Of w: Private investment (% GDP)       11.9   10.4       10.3      8.8                n/a n/a      n/a       n/a       n/a     n/a
     Fiscal balance (excl. grants, % GDP)    -7.5  -10.0      -10.7    -13.3              -16.7 -12.6   -10.7      -9.2      -8.0    -7.5
     Current Account Balance (% GDP)         -0.1   -2.6       -3.1     -2.0               -0.9  -3.7    -5.6      -5.2      -4.0    -3.1
     Source: Actual: National Authorities and World bank staff estimates.


11. Although Egypt has long had a large structural fiscal deficit and public spending has not
supported inclusive growth, the GOE has recently embarked on a number of important reforms.
Egypt’s chronic fiscal deficits reflect low tax revenues and high spending on subsidies, interest
payments, and civil servants’ salaries, which crowd out more productive spending on human and
physical capital formation. Government debt to GDP is expected to reach 91 percent of GDP by
end-FY15. The significant monetary financing of deficits and large Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) inflows in FY14 (para. 13) have provided temporary relief from further debt accumulation
but these flows have fallen notably in FY15. As an important start to reduce the chronic fiscal
deficit, the GOE has recently begun key reforms to reduce energy subsidies, broaden the tax base
through the introduction of new taxes, increase prices of fuel products and electricity tariffs,
improve targeting of the social safety nets, and reform the civil service. Egypt’s return to

5
    Growth during the first nine months of FY15 averaged 4.7 percent, triple the rate in the same period a year earlier.
                                                                  3
international markets in the second half of 2015 with the successful issuance of a $1.5 billion
Eurobond is a positive sign of international confidence, and the recent opening of the Suez Canal
after just one year of work and a major gas discovery in Egyptian waters bode well for the country’s
medium-term outlook.

12. Inflation has been volatile and elevated, despite real appreciation of the currency, but may be
on the decline. Even with the economic slowdown in 2011-13, inflation remained high (Table 1).
Egypt’s large fiscal deficit and the partial monetary financing of the deficit as well as persistent supply
bottlenecks have contributed to inflationary pressures. In addition, the official exchange rate remained
broadly unchanged from June 2013 to the end of 2014 due to large inflows from the Gulf, which led
to a real effective exchange rate appreciation against the dollar. In response to the widening of the
“structural” balance of payments, the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) introduced a foreign exchange
auctioning system in December 2012, to buy and sell foreign exchange. However, restrictions imposed
on the auctions and on the interbank market led to an insufficient supply of foreign exchange at the
daily exchange rate determined by the CBE and contributed to the development of a parallel foreign
exchange market. In 2015, the CBE made efforts to curb the parallel exchange market. It allowed
movement in the official exchange rate – a depreciation of 12.5 percent since beginning of 2015 – and
widened the exchange-rate margin. A gradual move toward a more flexible exchange rate policy
focused on achieving a market-clearing rate would improve the availability of foreign exchange,
strengthen competitiveness, and support exports. Inflation was in low double-digits in FY15 despite a
weaker Egyptian pound, higher prices of fuel products, and higher consumption taxes. The slightly
lower inflation projected for FY16 reflects a proactive monetary policy by the CBE, lower international
oil and grain prices, and slowing growth in the Euro area, Egypt’s main trading partner. International
reserves are currently at about 3 months of imports. Going forward, Egypt needs to meet the substantial
backlog of demand for foreign currency and improve its external competitiveness.

13. The GOE received large, exceptional financial inflows that have helped to stabilize the
economy. Since mid-2013, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait have committed
some $24 billion to Egypt in central bank deposits, cash and in-kind grants, and project aid, of
which $18-19 billion was received in FY14. These inflows helped to stabilize the economy and
partially meet the country’s energy and food needs. Further pledges from the GCC of $12.5 billion
were made at Egypt Economic Development Conference in March 2015, some of which were
received and others are in the implementation phase.

14. Vulnerabilities remain. The economy is at an early stage of recovery and remains vulnerable
to adverse internal or external shocks. Risks include slower growth in other countries that could
affect investment, tourism, and global trade; and regional conflicts or deterioration in domestic
security that could also affect investor confidence and tourism. Starting in 2014, the GOE
implemented two economic stimulus packages amounting to 3 percent of GDP, mainly investment
spending that include planned mega-projects (para. 55) that carry economic and fiscal risks, but
including as well substantial public sector wage and pension increases, helping mostly middle-
income earners. Recent energy pricing reforms are encouraging, as are the increased taxes on
selected goods and the introduction of new taxes (para. 23). Further structural reforms are needed
to put fiscal and debt levels on a sustainable path and to stimulate a strong private sector-led
economic growth. Exchange rate flexibility will be important to enhance Egypt’s macroeconomic
stability, labor intensive growth, and export competitiveness.

15. A recent Debt Sustainability Analysis by the Bank indicates that Egypt’s debt would be
sustainable over the medium term as long as a pro-growth fiscal consolidation path is adopted.
                                                    4
The primary deficit during FY16-17 and positive real interest rates would contribute to rising
indebtedness, but positive debt dynamics from GDP growth along with achieving a primary fiscal
balance in FY18 and a surplus thereafter would more than compensate and allow the debt to GDP
ratio to decline from 91 percent of GDP in FY15 to 85 percent by FY19. Debt to GDP would
nevertheless remain high and the debt servicing bill would continue to exert pressures on public
spending. In addition, the envisaged decline in the debt to GDP path over the medium term would
be reversed if the economic recovery is not sustained and if fiscal consolidation efforts weaken.

C. Poverty Profile

16.    In spite of reasonable economic growth rates during the 2000s, poverty rates increased.
Through years of both strong and moderate growth, poverty rates increased steadily from 16.7 percent
in 2000 to 24.3 percent in 2010 (Figure 2). The
welfare of the poor – as measured by the gap of the        Figure 2. Egypt Poverty Headcount Rate,
                                                                               2000-2010
average income and the poverty line – also worsened        30
between 2005 and 2010. The latest official poverty         25




                                                                     population
                                                                     Percent of
headcount indicated that more than 26 percent of the       20

population lived below the poverty line in 2013 but        15

data and methodological differences prevent                10
                                                            5
comparison of 2013 numbers with previous years.             0
During the CPF period, Egypt’s national statistical                  2000              2005              2010

office will finish field work for a new household      Source: 2000  data, Poverty and Shared Prosperity in Egypt
                                                       (2000-2013), background note; 2005, 2010, and reported in
survey which will be used to update poverty estimates. the SCD.

17.    Regional welfare disparities are an
                                                                       Figure 3. Egypt Poverty Headcount Rate by
enduring feature of poverty in Egypt. The highest                                  Region, 2005-2010
poverty rates are found in Rural Upper Egypt: by                    100
2010, half of the population in the region was
considered to be below the national poverty line.
Upper Urban Egypt has the second highest poverty                        0
                                                                                  Metropolitan Lower Urban Lower Rural Upper Urban Upper Rural
rates. Although poverty is particularly high in                                   Poverty rate 2005 Poverty Rate 2010
Upper Egypt, even core metropolitan parts of the                    Note: Excludes border regions with less than 1 percent of
country (Cairo, Alexandria, Port Said, and Suez)                    population; in 2010, Helwan and 6th October governorates are
                                                                    not included.
experienced an increase in poverty (Figure 3).                      Source: HIECS, reported in SCD.

18. Economic growth in 2005-2010 did not translate into significant employment creation.
The private formal sector has been unable to provide productive employment to the growing labor
force, and as a result, the share of low-productivity informal sector employment in small and
micro-enterprises, with increased vulnerability to economic shocks, has risen. Constraints to
private sector growth are discussed below (paras. 31-35). In addition, in spite of strong GDP
growth, household income growth declined between 2005 and 2010: annual income growth of the
bottom 40 percent (the shared prosperity indicator) was -1.3 percent, while overall average
household income fell even faster, at -1.7 percent per year. These results may explain the slight
decrease in inequality in Egypt over this period.6


6
 The measure of inequality, the Gini coefficient, was 32-34 percent for Egypt in 2008-09, lower than in previous years and
among the lowest in the world and among countries with similar per capita income. Nevertheless, perceptions of life


                                                            5
19. The bottom 40 percent of Egyptian households is concentrated in rural regions of Egypt,
where access to basic services is below national averages. Rural Upper Egypt is home to the
largest share of the vulnerable population. Although good progress has been made throughout
Egypt in access to education and several health indicators, inequities remain. In tests measuring
learning outcomes in math and science, children in rural areas performed, on average, 40 points
below those in urban areas and almost 75 points below those in Lower Urban Egypt; in basic
education, while there is nearly full enrollment for children in the richest quintiles, the poorest
quintile has enrollment rates of about 73 percent for basic education and below 50 percent in
secondary education. Geographic inequities in health also persist: under-5 children living in Rural
Upper Egypt are twice as likely to die as the same cohort in Lower Urban Egypt.7 Lower per
capita public spending and coverage rates for basic services in rural areas compared to urban areas
may perpetuate economic disparities.

20. The worrisome poverty and employment trends are compounded by the recent rebound in
fertility and population growth rates. In 2012 there were about 7.5 million Egyptians aged 15-29
(9.6 percent of Egypt’s population). As this generation joined the labor force, it put tremendous
pressure on the labor market. About 70 percent of the unemployed are between 15 and 29 years
old, and the young and women are more likely to have informal sector jobs, with irregular hours,
no written contract, and no social insurance. Although annual population growth rates had dropped
from 3.6 percent in 1980 to 1.9 percent in 2007, the rate rebounded to more than 2.5 percent, and
resulted in a second youth bulge. In 2012, there were more than 11 million Egyptians under the
age of 5, a generation nearly 50 percent larger than the first bulge. This second youth bulge will
put yet more pressure on services as well as a labor market unable to absorb the current youth, and
makes it even more urgent for Egypt to undertake wide-ranging structural and policy reforms
before this second wave enters the labor force.

D. Development Challenges to Eliminating Extreme Poverty and Boosting Shared
Prosperity

21. The SCD identified three top priorities for reform to underpin development efforts and
three key drivers for eliminating extreme poverty and enhancing shared prosperity in Egypt in
a sustainable manner. The three top priorities are macroeconomic stability, energy subsidy
reforms, and improved governance. The three key drivers identified by the SCD are private sector
development; spatial development; and social inclusion. Environmental issues also represent a
long-term challenge for Egypt to ensure the sustainability of its economy. These drivers are well
aligned with three pillars of the regional strategy which focus on a renewed social contract,
reconstruction and recovery, and regional cooperation.

         Macroeconomic stability

22. The GOE has recently undertaken important measures to reduce the fiscal deficit and restore
macroeconomic stability, but further reforms are needed. The GOE’s recent actions have addressed
subsidies, wages, and taxes, but fiscal issues have been a long-standing problem in Egypt. Persistently
high deficits have been financed by the domestic banking sector, leading to crowding out in credit


worsened among Egyptians between 2000 and 2008, with more survey respondents feeling poorer and dissatisfied with their
financial situation in 2008 than in 2000.
7
  Country Engagement Briefs on Health Systems in MENA: Egypt: Fairness and Accountability in Health Systems,
November 2013, p. 5.
                                                          6
markets for private investments. Large, distortionary subsidies, high interest payments on the public
debt, and more recently, doubling the size of the public payroll in the context of an already oversized
public sector, have squeezed fiscal space, and public sector investments and maintenance have borne
the brunt of this. Resulting persistent supply bottlenecks have kept prices – especially food prices –
high, with a disproportionate impact on the poor and vulnerable. Double-digit inflation eroded
competitiveness and been a further discouragement to private investors.

23. The GOE has introduced a range of new taxes. The GOE has introduced taxes on real
estate, dividends, and capital gains, as well as taxes on the bonuses of civil servants (which were
historically exempt), and has increased taxes on cigarettes three times successively throughout
FY15. The GOE also modified the income tax to have a unified tax ceiling of 22.5 percent, which
is likely to remain unchanged over the medium-term. In addition, the GOE is planning to replace
the sales tax with a VAT system that meets international standards. Work is underway to develop
a simplified tax regime for SMEs, as well as to improve tax compliance and control systems. The
GOE also plans to collect higher non-tax revenues by enacting recently a new mining law, by
issuance of a 4-G license, and through better oversight and performance of economic authorities
and public sector entities. These reforms prompted a sovereign rating upgrade by Fitch in
December 2014; currently Fitch, S&P, and Moody have a “stable” outlook for Egypt.

24. On the spending side, the GOE plans to reduce non-priority spending. It introduced a cap
on the value of bonuses and rewards in FY16 as well instituted measures to prevent the automatic
increases in the wage bill by delinking variable payments from basic salary. The Government
published the “Citizen Budget” and is working on approving and publishing a Medium-Term
Public Debt Strategy. The absence of sound public investment management (PIM) and
procurement undermines the potential contribution of public investment to sustainable growth.
Egypt needs to develop an effective and unified (PIM) system based on identification of priorities,
cost-benefit analysis, stable funding, and adequate consideration of maintenance obligations, and
accompanied by robust procurement procedures.

25. The GOE has set a target for the fiscal deficit of 8-8.5 percent of GDP over the medium
term, which is ambitious but necessary. Achievement of this objective faces a number of risks,
including the need for timely implementation of certain measures, such as the VAT system and
streamlining of energy subsides; the likelihood of delays in the pursuit of further fiscal reforms;
cost over-runs on large public infrastructure investments; and unexpected downturns in the
performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Finally, and critically, improved public sector
governance is needed to reduce the risk of uneven implementation of the proposed measures.

        Energy subsidy reforms

26. Universal energy subsidies are very costly and a major source of distortion in the Egyptian
economy. These subsidies, amounting in FY13 to almost 7 percent of GDP and over 20 percent of
the GOE’s expenditures, exceeded combined spending on health and education, and have recently
been twice the level of public investment. Over half of the subsidies accrue to the top 40 percent of
the population and are damaging to the social contract. In addition, the subsidies favor energy-
intensive industries, and are partly responsible for declining investments across the supply chain,
including oil and gas exploration and production. They also lead to excessive energy consumption
and imports, and have thus contributed to the current energy deficit and supply bottlenecks: in the
past three years, the country has experienced, for the first time in decades, frequent electricity supply
interruptions. Furthermore, energy subsidies have negative spillover effects in the transport and
                                                   7
water sectors. Cheap gasoline and diesel have led to rapid growth in road transport, with consequent
severe air pollution and congestion in large cities like Cairo. In the water sector, cheap diesel
encourages excessive pumping of ground water and irrigation in agriculture along with a bias
towards water-intensive crops, contributing to water depletion. The ratio of water withdrawn to
availability (renewable water resource) is around 100 percent in Egypt. All of these consequences
of energy subsidies are damaging for achieving sustainable growth and poverty reduction.

27. In 2014, the GOE took a long-awaited and highly significant first step to reduce these
subsidies. The GOE introduced comprehensive price increases of 40 – 80 percent for fossil fuels
and 20 percent for electricity and announced the allocation of 27 billion LE of the total 50 billion
LE of fiscal savings (2 percent of projected GDP) to health, education, and social protection
programs, particularly the expansion of the Cash Transfer Program. The recent decline in global
oil prices further reduced the subsidies, which are estimated to drop to about 3.3 percent of GDP
in FY15 (from 6.6 percent in FY13). The GOE announced in August 2015 further fuel and
electricity price increases for FY16 ranging from 3 to 65 percent and a five year trajectory for
eliminating subsidies on electricity tariffs.8 Going forward, continued energy subsidy reform will
be essential for creating fiscal space for higher levels of investments in health, education, and
research in development, as mandated by the new Constitution. At the same time, for the sake of
equity and public acceptance of these reforms, an effective social safety net needs to offset the
impact of increased energy prices on the poor and vulnerable.

         Improved governance

28. Improving governance is critical, both for strengthening the relationship of the state with its
citizens and for achieving sustainable growth and reducing poverty; while the GOE has taken a
number of steps to address governance concerns, much remains to be done. Reforms aimed at
enhancing access to information and citizens’ participation across most areas of public sector activity
would strengthen the bonds between the Government and its citizens, and reduce the sense of
alienation and frustration with the state, and thus the likelihood of civil disturbances. In addition,
empirical studies show a high correlation between good governance and economic performance;
improving governance contributes to the effective delivery of public goods that are necessary for
both businesses and citizens. These also central to the regional strategy on renewing the social
contract which focuses on an efficient and inclusive state and a private sector led economy. The
GOE’s main achievement in this area remains the adoption of a law regulating conflicts of interest
in the public sector. A revised law on civil service is due to be passed following parliamentary
elections. Nevertheless, Egypt still faces large challenges to improving governance: the country
scores poorly on a number of global governance indicators, such as effective enforcement of
Government regulations (World Justice Project, 2012 and Global Integrity Indicators, 2010).

29. The GOE needs to strengthen transparency and accountability, and address systemic flaws
in enforcement of laws, regulations and policies, weak incentives, and an absence of sanctions
that make it difficult for both citizens and businesses to access Government services or hold
public sector employees accountable. Increased transparency and public dissemination of laws
and regulations would help to ensure more even implementation, while increasing the transparency

8
  The DPF supports a planned schedule of electricity tariff adjustments beyond the one implemented in FY15. The
analysis conducted on the direct impacts of these changes found small effects on poverty and welfare. Electricity
represents on average 1.8% of household total consumption expenditure in Egypt, much below the 10 percent expenditure
share typically considered as an indicator of affordability.
                                                          8
of public expenditures on specific services such as social safety nets and education, from the
central level down to the most local level, would increase accountability. Disseminating data, such
as on the health impact and economic cost of environmental degradation, and using these data for
policy discussions and debates could increase citizens’ support for reforms. Introducing and
strengthening mechanisms for citizens’ feedback on service delivery would also enhance
accountability of both public entities and civil servants and restore citizen confidence in the ability
of state to provide quality services. As one example, the absence of a tradition of parent
associations for public schools combined with weak oversight by supervisors means that teachers
in Egypt, as civil servants, are shielded from being fired or otherwise disciplined for poor
performance, with resulting chronic staff absenteeism, low levels of teaching time in the
classroom, and poor student learning outcomes.9

30. The public sector in Egypt is large and thus addressing governance issues is particularly
important. In 2013/14, the public sector accounted for 39 percent of GDP, and, despite a
privatization program in the past decade, public institutions control a major share of assets in
banking and insurance. In spite of its large role, the public sector has not delivered on two things
that Egyptians want the most – good jobs and quality public services. To meet the demands of
Egyptian citizens, therefore, governance reforms are critical.

         SCD Key Driver 1: Promoting private sector led job creation

31. In spite of efforts over the years to improve the regulatory environment and create a more
attractive climate for the private sector, employment growth in the formal private sector has
stagnated. Between 1998 and 2012, the share of the labor force employed in private formal sector
firms was unchanged, while it decreased in the public sector, and increased from about 30 to 40 percent
in the informal sector, mainly in micro-enterprises, with low wages, few or no benefits, and unstable
employment prospects. The situation has been particularly dire for women: because of the difficulties
of working in the informal sector, many educated women have dropped out of the labor force entirely,
while fewer than 2 percent of women aged 15-64 work in the formal private sector. With the recent
surge in population growth rates (para. 20), the large echo generation will place increased pressure on
Egypt’s labor market, and the demand for employment will be even higher than it is today.

32. Egypt’s private sector lacks dynamism: in terms of increases in productivity, entry rates,
and growth of existing firms (especially medium and large firms), Egypt lags significantly
behind comparator countries. Policy distortions and inefficient incentives have inhibited
effective competition. Privileged access to land (and hence to bank loans that use land as
collateral) and other resources, an excessively complex and discretionary system of licensing and
permits that favors well-connected entrepreneurs, and heavily subsidized energy that encouraged
capital-intensive investment have all contributed to sustaining monopolistic market structures in
many sectors, with limited ability of the Egyptian Competition Authority to address these issues.
A stronger private sector that can create jobs and opportunities for MENA’s youth will enhance
livelihoods/economic opportunity and lay the foundations for sustained recovery.

33. GOE has introduced regulatory reforms to improve the environment for private business,
but uneven implementation and lack of a level playing field for private sector firms contribute

9
 Efforts to improve teacher performance since 2007 include: the establishment of the Teachers Cadre (2007), the
development of a career path and promotional system for teachers, along with a 50% increase in basic pay (2007) and
bonuses for each promotional level from (2008). However, teacher performance remains an issue.
                                                           9
to an unfavorable investment climate. The GOE has made numerous reforms to reduce the cost
and difficulty of starting a business on paper, but implementation of the reforms remains an issue.
Waiting times for operating licenses, especially industrial licenses, construction permits, and
customs clearance procedures differ significantly among firms within the same industry and
between cities. In addition, 85 percent of firms in Egypt identify corruption as a serious problem.
These factors impede both entry of new firms and growth of existing firms, and have prevented
the formal private sector from providing productive employment to the growing labor force.

34. The policy priority for Egypt is to unleash the potential of the private sector to create a
large and diverse set of jobs, and to remove regulatory limitations to private participation in key
infrastructure and social sectors. Considerable scope exists for private investors to contribute
capital, technological know-how, and management skills to the development of energy, other
infrastructure, agriculture, information technology, support to start ups, housing, education, and
health. The GOE can catalyze such investments by making public investments in business-
enabling infrastructure and institutions and by undertaking cross-cutting and sector reforms.
Reforms to address the business climate would include creating a predictable and fair regulatory
environment based on clear and equally enforced rules; easier and less discretionary access to land
and construction permits; better contract enforcement; removing unnecessary regulatory
procedures; and simplifying the necessary permits and licenses will renew the social contract
between the state and its citizens. Strengthening the Competition Authority is also key to removing
barriers to competition in all sectors. Improving financial infrastructure through expanding the
coverage of the credit bureau and the creation of collateral registries, enacting the secure lending
framework, and streamlining the bankruptcy framework would benefit SMEs in particular. The
GOE has expressed the political will to take on aspects of this agenda in partnership with the WBG,
but results will require persistent efforts to address the issues and to overcome resistance.

35. The reform to energy subsidies initiated in 2014 and continued more recently is a key step
toward leveling the playing field in the private sector, but further and deeper reforms are needed,
including overall energy policy reforms, and investments to address bottlenecks and improve
energy diversification. In 2013, Egypt ranked 99th worldwide in terms of access to reliable power,
and due to power and gas shortages, industry was reported to be operating at 60 to 70 percent of
capacity.10 The growth in electricity demand in Egypt has exceeded economic growth over the
past decade. If demand continues on its current path, generation capacity would need to more than
double its 2010 level by 2020 to reliably meet this demand. Improving service levels, or at least
preventing their deterioration, is also critical for ensuring that pricing reforms are politically
acceptable. Measures to address these challenges include governance reforms for enhanced
accountability and transparency, promoting private sector participation in particular to meet the
challenge of financing investments in power generation, continuation of reforms in energy pricing
including electricity tariffs and fuel subsidies, exploiting the potential of renewable energy sources
– Egypt has recently made a big push in the area of renewable energy – and incentives for energy
efficiency. In parallel, Egypt is increasing the availability of gas through further exploration,
production, and perhaps imports, as gas remains the primary fuel (82 percent) of power generation.

           SCD Key Driver 2: Enhancing spatial development

36. Improvements in infrastructure could increase the productivity of metropolitan firms, help
to spread economic activity outside of metropolitan Egypt, and enhance workers’ access to

10
     Financial Times, August 3, 2014, Nick Butler
                                                    10
productive jobs. More than 50 percent of formal private sector jobs are located in metropolitan
Egypt, only 5 percent in Upper Egypt. Egypt’s infrastructure was ranked 118th out of 148 countries
(with roads ranked 122nd). Significant losses (up to 40 percent) in the value of produce transported
from Upper Egypt to wholesalers could be reduced with investments in appropriate transport and
logistics. Workers’ commute into metropolitan Egypt could also be facilitated by better
infrastructure and reduced congestion; this would benefit women in particular, who have limited
mobility due to social norms and a strong preference for shorter commutes; infrastructure
bottlenecks likely contribute to the record low labor force participation rate among young women
(although the low rates among women are due to a complex interplay of other factors as well).
Improvements should include improving traffic flow and giving priority to public transport on the
roads; expanding reliable mass transit; and institutional and regulatory measures. Reforming fuel
subsidies will also help reduce traffic on the roads. Trade logistics at ports as well as inland also
need to be strengthened.

37. Land use planning and management in Egypt need a broad vision of urban planning and
simplification of laws and regulations. Streamlining the land use management system and
reducing divisions among the numerous Government agencies in sector regulation will create less
opaque pricing. Increasing the housing supply in cities, which has been limited by rent control
policies and height restrictions, will limit urban sprawl. Simplifying the land and property
registration system will create more secure property rights, and improve the availability of housing
finance, and allowing the private sector to deliver housing should help to lower costs and increase
efficiency.

38. Agricultural productivity and off-farm employment could be enhanced by policy reforms,
better connective infrastructure, more efficient water allocation systems, and improved
agricultural and agro-industrial logistics. Agriculture still employs almost 9 percent of the work-
force, more than any other sector. The majority of farmers own less than 2 feddans (1 feddan =
0.4 hectares, 1.04 acres), which is insufficient to support a family of six without the addition of
non-farm income. Egypt’s irrigation and drainage infrastructure suffers from high salinity and the
water supply system operates with only 50 percent efficiency and 40 percent cost recovery, both
among the lowest in the region and the world. The GOE needs to reform the water allocation
system, and improve the efficiency of the entire irrigation and drainage system, including on-farm
irrigation efficiency. The GOE has drafted a new law to allow more flexibility and less
Government control of farm cooperatives, to be completed after Parliamentary elections; this
should facilitate contract farming and access to credit. The GOE is also reviewing the regulatory
environment to encourage public-private partnerships in agricultural infrastructure and logistics
such as wholesale markets and cold storage, particularly in Upper Egypt. Further reforms to reduce
price distortions for inputs and outputs, allow greater freedom for water user associations (the
branch canal law), and encourage private competition in long-haul transport services might also
help to increase agricultural productivity.

       SCD Key Driver 3: Social Inclusion

39. Egypt has realized major educational achievements in reaching universal primary school
enrollment, increased secondary school enrollment, improved literacy rates, and decreased
gender gaps, but challenges remain. The demand for education will continue to rise due to the
recent bulge in population (para. 20). The education system is characterized by fragmentation in
education policy, financing, and administration, weak governance with few sanctions for poor
teacher performance and no local oversight through parent organizations, discrepancies between
                                                 11
the school supplies allocated by local Governments and what reaches local schools, and
geographical inequality in educational achievement. In spite of the growing number of educated
youth, unemployment is rising among 15-29 year olds, especially for women. Although the main
problem is lack of jobs, the paradox is that employers are not finding youth with either the technical
or soft skills needed, adding to the growing numbers of educated unemployed. This mismatch
between the skills needed by the market and those supplied by the education and training system
can be bridged by reforms to the education system. The GOE’s framework for workforce
development through education is evolving and as yet lacks clarity. The system needs to enhance
the accountability for outcomes, and to have better data to identify priority areas for reform.
Regulatory reform is needed to allow or encourage private investment in vocational and post-
secondary education. The GOE plans to address inequities in public spending by increasing the
number of classrooms by 12 percent, with a particular focus on Upper Egypt, and to scale up
literacy and elderly learning projects, enhance vocational training, and upgrade public universities.
These measures would need to be accompanied by a focus on learning outcomes.

40. Egypt has made major strides in improving health outcomes, including significant
decreases in child and maternal mortality rates – and is likely to meet the targets for the
Millennium Development Goals in these two areas by 2015 – and increased life expectancy, with
more than half of the population having access to health insurance, although reforms targeting
governance of the sector are needed. Health services are fragmented among a number of
organizations and are characterized by significant inefficiencies in the allocation and use of
resources, low Government contribution, and increasing out-of-pocket expenditure. Egypt spends
around 5.1 percent of GDP on health (including private out-of-pocket expenditures), and has one
of the lowest ratios of public health expenditure to total health expenditure (21 percent) in the
region. Better access to family planning services is needed to address the recent unexpected
increase in population growth. The system also has limited citizen’s engagement and a lack of
participation in monitoring the quality of the delivery of health services. Almost 7 percent of
Egyptians are pushed into poverty each year due to catastrophic out of pocket health expenditures.
Although primary health care facilities are fairly distributed in Egypt, in rural areas they suffer
from lack of budgets and of qualified staff.

41. Egypt has a number of social protection programs, but they need to be streamlined and to
provide better protection to the poor. Egypt has a complex social protection system, including
employment services, social insurance (health, pension, and unemployment) and social assistance
(cash transfers) in addition to fuel and food subsidies. Much of the spending on the system goes
to universal subsidies that mainly benefit the rich: subsidies for energy have been as high as 6-8
percent of GDP – although with recent subsidy reforms this is expected to be around 3.3 percent
in FY15 – and accrue disproportionately to the top 40 percent of the population. The Social
Solidarity Pension, Egypt's main cash transfer program, reaches less than 10 percent of the poorest
quintile, and less than a quarter of the program's resources accrue to the poorest quintile. Egypt
needs to improve targeting of beneficiaries, to identify better who is poor, and to improve the
Social Safety Net (SSN) business processes, including enrollment, payments, and grievance and
redress mechanisms.

42. Gender issues are of particular concern. Women’s ability to find productive employment
is affected by a number of factors, including lower education levels, social and cultural barriers,
wage discrimination, and poor infrastructure. Women face a higher effective cost of commuting
due to social norms, safety concerns, and the inflexible work schedules entailed by long commutes;

                                                 12
they also face more constraints in accessing credit and to appropriate skills training. Ensuring
access to services and to employment is particularly critical for women.

        Ensuring environmental sustainability is a long-term challenge

43. Economic expansion in Egypt has been accompanied by increasing demands on scarce
and often degraded natural resources, resulting in worsening air quality, soil degradation,
declining water availability and quality, and hydrocarbon depletion; the recent surge in
population growth is likely to place increased strain on Egypt’s natural resources in the near
future. Environmental degradation negatively affects health as well as prospects for future
economic growth. In 2002 the cost of environmental degradation in Egypt was estimated at 5.6
percent of GDP and is likely much higher today, with pollution to air, water, and soil as three
largest causes of environmental damage.11 Water and soil degradation are primarily rural and
account for more than 55 percent of the cost, while urban air pollution accounts for more than 40
percent. Given the concentration of poverty in rural areas, environment degradation affects mostly
the poor rather than the non-poor. Climate changes will exacerbate an already fragile natural
resource base. 12

44. Air quality in urban area has deteriorated to levels where there are serious concerns about
its impacts on public health, the environment, and the economy. The cost of degradation related
to air pollution in Greater Cairo Metropolitan Area rose dramatically between 1999 and 2009, and
is estimated at 1 percent of GDP, including premature mortality and morbidity due to chronic
bronchitis and respiratory symptoms. The major contributors of air pollution are transport and
open burning of agricultural wastes. Recent fuel subsidy reforms combined with measures to
improve urban public transport will contribute to alleviating air pollution in Greater Cairo. Finding
feasible solutions to the complex issue of agricultural burning remains to be developed and may
require multi-sector solutions.

45. Declining availability of fresh water is due to water pollution, primarily from agricultural
waste and rural sanitation. Deterioration of water quality is adding health and economic burdens
to limited water resources. Fresh water availability has been diminishing in Egypt for the past fifty
years and is now below the water scarcity threshold. Pollution and degradation due to untreated
sewage, industrial effluent, and agricultural runoff (loaded with fertilizers, pesticides, and organic
material) are often discharged into the Nile, while drainage canals are heavily polluted by illegal
dumping of waste and garbage and by inadequate sanitation systems. Groundwater aquifers, used
for both drinking and irrigation, are also polluted because of poor agricultural practices, seepages
from livestock, and rural waste. Waterborne diseases and concerns regarding the safety of foods
produced with Nile ground water, particularly in the Delta, have significant health and economic
impact. Costs related to poor water quality were estimated at 3.2 percent of GDP in 2003.13 To
avoid a severe water resource crisis, the inefficiencies in water use and sources of water pollution
need to be decisively addressed, involving solid waste disposal, rural sanitation, and better urban
planning to reduce urban encroachment.


11
   World Bank, Arab Republic of Egypt Country Environmental Analysis, 2005, cited in SCD, February 2015, page 35.
12
   Addressing water scarcity and climate change will require high-level regional support and fostering policy and
technological innovations including for sustainable urban water management, agricultural water productivity
systems, and enhanced cooperation of transboundary water resources via international water management
agreements.
13
   World Bank, op. cit., page 36.
                                                        13
46. Egypt ranks first in the world in its rate of desertification, and land degradation is also a
serious issue. Urban sprawl and over-intensive agriculture have combined to rapidly decrease the
availability of good quality agriculture land. Better urban planning (para. 37) and improving
agricultural policies (para. 38) can help to address these issues.

47. Although Egypt is currently a relatively low carbon economy, it needs to invest in
renewable energy and improved energy efficiency to reduce its energy emissions and
consumption relative to GDP. Measured in terms of carbon emissions per GDP and energy
consumption per GDP, Egypt is one of the highest in the region and almost double the global
average on both measures, due largely to high energy subsidies. Egypt’s energy price reforms and
an acceleration of investments in renewable energy are helping ensure the sustainability of the
reform process, and due to strict enforcement of controls over fuel leakages and smuggling, the
resource intensity of diesel consumption per unit of GDP has come down from 2014 levels, in spite
of the recent surge in GDP growth. Adaptation needs are estimated to cost about $7.6 billion, with
the bulk of investments in the coastal zone infrastructure. 14

48. Egypt can decrease environmental degradation risks by improving governance,
particularly its institutional framework and enforcement capacity, and by promoting a more
sustainable approach to energy and water use. Although Egypt’s environmental laws are
outdated and need to be revised, the greatest barrier to successful environmental policy lies in the
poor implementation and enforcement of these laws. Lack of data, multiple overlapping
authorities, and inadequate human resources make it simple to evade environmental laws.
Addressing these issues will require support from civil society, and public dissemination of
environmental information and risks may help build this support. In addition, updating the
environmental diagnostic can help identify priorities. In sum, Egypt needs a resilience-based
developmental approach that is based on an understanding of vulnerabilities and risks.

           Prioritizing interventions in the CPF

49. The selection by the CPF of interventions during FY15-19 under the key drivers were those
that met any three of the four filters laid out in the SCD. These four filters were: (i) Improving
governance, through addressing institutional capacity, transparency, and accountability in all
aspects of public investments and service delivery; (ii) having direct rather than indirect impact on
the twin goals of sustainable poverty reduction and improvement in the welfare of the bottom 40
percent of the population; (iii) addressing goals in more than one dimension. For example,
agricultural reforms may affect farmers’ welfare, as well as more efficient water use and the
environment through reducing water and possibly air pollution; (iv) likelihood of achieving quick
wins, which are essential to develop a virtuous cycle of change and strengthen the political support.
The CPF also includes ongoing projects because some results in the next few years from Bank
lending will come primarily from these ongoing operations; however, a few of these legacy
projects do not fit with the SCD priorities. These include, for example, airports and energy
generation. The interventions going forward are consistent with the SCD’s key drivers and meet
the SCD’s filters.




14
     Source: Egypt’s National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction, 2011.


                                                            14
                                IV.      THE GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY15

50. The GOE recently presented its long-term development strategy to the year 2030; its twelve
pillars can be grouped into three main areas: restoring macroeconomic stability; improving
public sector delivery; and fostering social justice and inclusion. The strategy was developed
using a participatory approach, consulting civil society, the private sector, Egyptian youth, and
international development partners. Salient features of the strategy are a focus on the leading role
the private sector is expected to play in economic development, emphasis on the need for greater
transparency and accountability in the public sector, and emphasis on inclusion in the area of social
justice. The following paragraphs describe the main pillars of GOE’s development strategy. As
with all strategies, the key to success will be how well the strategic initiatives are implemented.

        1. Restoring macroeconomic stability and achieving economic growth

51. The GOE is pursuing an ambitious fiscal consolidation plan that aims to bring down the
fiscal deficit to 8-8.5 percent of GDP from 13 percent in FY13 and public debt to 85 percent of
GDP by the end of FY19, from 91 percent of GDP in FY15. This will include, on the revenue
side, broadening the tax base and combating tax evasion and avoidance. On expenditures, the
GOE plans to continue to reduce fuel subsidies while allocating part of the additional resources to
health, education, scientific research, and infrastructure investments. In FY15, the overall fiscal
deficit reached 11.5 percent of GDP, a reduction from FY14, and the FY16 budget is targeting a
fiscal deficit of 9 percent of GDP.16 Achieving fiscal consolidation will require sustained reforms,
however, given high interest payments, constitutional spending targets for health, education, and
scientific research, and an ambitious public investment program.

52. The GOE also has a medium term strategy to address the country’s growing energy needs
through ongoing sector reform. The GOE intends to promote energy security and the long-term
financial sustainability of the energy sector, which will require a sustained reform program and
targeted investments. A new electricity law has been enacted to promote a private sector role for
renewable energy, and independent gas and electricity regulators. The GOE is planning to
diversify the generation mix by targeting 20 percent of energy to come from renewable resources
(including hydro) by 2022. It has issued tenders and a new feed in tariff regulation that aims to
attract private sector investment to develop up to 4,300 MW of new generation power (solar 2,300
and wind 2,000). It will also introduce coal into the grid to relieve demand on natural gas. At the
same time, the GOE expects to import natural gas and power – at least in the short term – to address
the current energy deficit, and will target investments to improve systems reliability and enhanced
service delivery. The GOE will also need to continue to reduce energy subsidies, substantially
improve the cash balances of SOEs, and modernize the governance of the sector. The GOE will
also need to continue to reduce energy subsidies, improve the cash balances of the SOEs, review
the oil and gas sector to address pricing issues from the wellhead to payment arrears, and
modernize the governance of the sector.

53. As part of the plan to address energy needs, the GOE has begun to reduce energy subsidies.
In November 2012 energy prices for energy-intensive industries were increased and a mechanism

15
   Based on GOE’s Sustainable Development Strategy: Egypt’s Vision for the Year 2030 presented at the Egypt Economic
Development Conference in March 2015; the 2103 Roadmap; the GOE’s proposed FY15 budget, and stakeholder
consultations.
16
   World Bank staff estimate an overall fiscal deficit (including grants) of 10.6 percent of GDP in FY16.
                                                        15
was introduced to compensate the Egypt Electricity Holding Company for the increased cost of
electricity. In July 2014 the GOE announced further comprehensive price increases ranging from
41 percent for 92 octane gasoline and 67 percent for diesel fuel, to 77 percent for 80 octane
gasoline, and an average 25 percent increase in the price of electricity. Nevertheless, large
additional price increases will be necessary to eliminate all fuel subsidies: diesel fuel prices would
have to increase four-fold from $0.25 per liter to about $1.0 per liter. The GOE has issued a decree
that would gradually increase prices with the aim of removing all electricity-related subsidies –
except for limited subsidies for poor households – within five years. For now, the price of liquid
petroleum gas (LPG), consumed relatively more heavily by the lower income households, has
remained unchanged until further expansion of natural gas connection to households.

54. The GOE has confirmed the leading role that the private sector should have in restoring
growth and providing sustainable job creation. The GOE is working on three fronts to restore
investor confidence: (i) supporting existing establishments/investors; this includes paying arrears
to construction companies and oil and gas companies; enhancing dispute resolution by settling
disputes with private investors outside courts to restore confidence and avoid costly arbitration
fees; supporting bankrupt companies to enable them to restart operations; and settling tax disputes,
rescheduling due payments, and offering new pieces of land; (ii) improving access to markets and
widening opportunities for the private sector, by exploring the potential for establishing two
economic free zones for Russian and Gulf investors; linking export promotion to value added and
entering new promising markets; allowing private investors to participate in power generation,
renewable energy, mining, and issuing new oil and gas concession agreements, as well as other
industries; and (iii) improving the business legal and regulatory environment through legislative
reforms, focusing in particular on protecting investors, simplifying permits and licensing, easing
access to land and construction permits issuance, simplifying liquidation process, improving
regulatory governance, and improving access of micro and SMEs to finance, including micro-
finance. The GOE is also focused on improving – with private sector participation – energy
supplies (including renewable energy), infrastructure, and the supply of labor with needed skills
for the job market, to meet the needs of private firms.

55. The GOE is targeting real growth of 5 percent in FY16, compared to an estimated real
GDP growth of 4.2 percent in FY15, up from 2 percent annual growth since FY11. This is
expected from increased domestic demand following a rebound in economic activities including
the partial recovery in tourism, resilient remittances, and higher public investments in
transportation, manufacturing, communication, tourism, and housing construction. The GOE is
planning to undertake six mega projects, which include, in the Suez Canal zone: (i) the Suez Canal
Development Project,17 consisting of four new seaports, an industrial zone, a technology valley in
Ismailia, and a program of affordable housing; (ii) doubling the capacity of the Suez Canal; and
(iii) enhancing road networks and connectivity of both Suez Canal and Sinai regions18. Other
mega-projects include construction of 4,800 km of new roads; a land reclamation project covering
4 million feddans; the Northwest construction development project; and development of the golden
mining triangle. Nevertheless, without in-depth assessment of the return on investments, all of
these mega projects carry economic risks as well as potential fiscal risks from contingent liabilities.


17
  To be supported by Reimbursable Advisory Services by the WBG for which a contract has been signed.
18
   The Government is planning to partner with the private sector in implementing these mega projects with the
Government primarily providing the land, basic infrastructure needs, and a conducive regulatory environment with
the private sector taking the lead in implementing, financing and managing these projects.
                                                      16
       2. Improving public sector delivery

56. The Ministry of Planning and Administrative Reform has developed a three-year plan for
administrative reforms to reduce corruption and implement decentralization to improve the
quality and efficiency of public services. The plan aims to: (i) streamline the legal framework of
all public administration units/bodies; (ii) enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of public
administrative bodies and the quality of public services; (iii) enhance the capacity of civil servants;
(iv) reinforce equity and transparency of public services; (v) strengthen accountability and citizen
engagement; and (vi) ensure efficient management of public assets and buildings by establishing
a unified database (Fixed Assets Register). In 2015, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) started to
develop a new Public Financial Management Strategy, to improve the state budget formulation,
execution, and reporting; fiscal risk management; and fiscal transparency and accountability.
These reforms are important and fully supported by the WBG, although additional governance
issues in need of reforms include improved policy formulation and implementation of sector
investments, as well as improving the legal and judicial systems.

       3. Fostering social justice and inclusion

57. GOE plans better targeting of subsidies, expansion of the SSN, expanded expenditure in
health and education, better quality of education, more and better targeting of social services,
and more gender equality. The GOE increased the budget allocation to Cash Transfer Programs,
to expand coverage by 0.8 million households in the country’s poorest areas (from 1.5 million
beneficiaries of Social Pensions at present). GOE is piloting a new cash transfer program (Takaful
and Karama) in selected Upper Egypt villages with the highest poverty rates, and preparing a
targeting methodology and unified national registry to identify the poorer households. The GOE
is also introducing better targeting of foods consumed by the poorer segments of the population,
limiting new food subsidy/ration cards to citizens whose monthly income is below LE 1,500
($210), has increased the number of commodities (from 7 to 20) that can be purchased at reduced
prices through the food ration card and Government outlets, and has introduced a new family smart
card point system that allows citizens to replace unconsumed baladi bread with other commodities,
to encourage households to reduce excessive consumption of the subsidized bread. The GOE is
also addressing leakages in the baladi bread subsidy system by subsidizing the final product
(number of loaves sold), instead of inputs.

58. GOE has announced that over half of the fiscal savings from reduced energy subsidies
will be directed to increasing social sector spending and better-targeted infrastructure
investments. Budgetary health spending is planned to increase to 3 percent of GDP and education
spending to 6 percent of GDP, to comply with the Constitutional mandate on health and education
spending, with around one quarter of investments directed to Upper Egypt governorates in FY15,
targeting the poorest 1,000 villages (out of a total of some 5,000 villages). The GOE is also placing
priority on improving the quality of education and ensuring that education provides skills valued
by the job market. The GOE is making efforts to adopt a more inclusive, transparent, and
geographically balanced capital spending process, although the details of these measures remain
have not been fully disclosed, particularly concerning the increased budget transfers to the
education and health sectors.




                                                  17
              V.      WORLD BANK GROUP PROPOSED PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

A. Lessons from CAS Completion and Learning Review (CLR), Independent Evaluations,
and Stakeholder Consultations

59. Both the Independent Evaluation Group’s (IEG) evaluation of WBG assistance in FY99-
07 and the CLR covering FY06-14 found that the WBG met important objectives with respect to
policy and institutional reforms. In spite of a difficult environment in Egypt both before and since
the revolution, the WBG supported with some success reforms in the financial sector, privatization,
pension system, and private sector development, and had a fruitful dialogue in the health sector.
The WBG was less successful, however, in supporting reduced corruption, education reform, or
improvements to the SSN. Recent sector dialogue on infrastructure and energy sector reforms has
begun to bear fruit.

60. The evaluations found that flexibility as well as a focus on institutional reforms is key to
achieving strategic objectives. For example, in response to the 2011 events the WBG focused on
the countries’ immediate needs, and deployed a multi-sector team to move the dialogue forward
on energy subsidies and sector reforms. IFC provided counter-cyclical and confidence-boosting
support to the private sector, to ensure continuity of projects begun prior to 2011, preserve jobs,
and provide otherwise scarce financing to investors with high risk appetite. MIGA provided
reinsurance to the Overseas Private Investment Corporations for an oil and gas project. At the
same time, the Bank, adhering to its assistance strategy, responded selectively to GOE’s funding
requests. Going forward, the WBG needs to focus its support on GOE-led initiatives that have
core policy or institutional reforms and that also address the key drivers to reducing poverty and
enhancing shared prosperity.

61. Given the importance of the need to improve governance, the WBG program can support
large infrastructure projects provided they are used as a vehicle for institutional reform and
leverages partner resources. Bank engagement in the transport sector has shown that measures
such as management contracts to introduce private sector efficiency can be embedded in
investment lending. In energy, Helwan South Power Project (FY14) incorporates institutional
change in project design, including grievance redress mechanisms and the Household Gas
Connection Project (FY15) leverages almost $200 million of development partner resources and
$480 million from the GOE. Going forward, institution and capacity building should be
systematically embedded in project design and projects must continue to leverage IBRD financing
with resources from the GOE and other development agencies

62. The evaluations also recommended that flexibility be balanced with selectivity and a focus
on results. After 2011, the WBG focused on what it could achieve in an uncertain political
situation and during a limited time, by concentrating on what was already under implementation,
while remaining open to GOE request for support in selected areas such as energy sector and SSN
reforms. Indicators from the most recent strategy document (the ISN) were not all well-specified,
however, or were beyond the scope of the WBG’s support, such as improving economic
management through control of the fiscal deficit and enhancing transparency of GOE operations.
The CPF improves on this approach, with expected results based on ongoing efforts and carefully
selecting indicators.

63. The CLR in particular highlighted the importance of partnerships with both civil society
and Arab development partners, which have grown in Egypt since 2011. Following the 2011
                                                18
events, integrating voice and accountability mechanisms and reaching out to non-Governmental
stakeholders have become key features of WBG support. In the water and energy sectors, for
example, more active involvement of communities has improved project implementation.
Stakeholder consultations reinforce this message, with a call for greater civic participation and
transparency in the delivery of social services. Engagement with civil society will continue to be
critical to the Bank’s reputation, credibility, and effectiveness. In addition, the WBG support is
modest relative to Egypt’s needs, so pro-active partnerships with the development community are
crucial, particularly in social sectors where the GOE is reluctant to borrow from IBRD. Given the
large recent flows from the GCC, proactive engagement with Arab partners will be particularly
important.

64. Risk assessment and risk mitigation will continue to be important for WBG support to
Egypt. In the context of past uncertainty over the GOE’s appetite for reforms, the WBG has done
a good job in its risk assessment and risk mitigation. Prior to 2011, the Bank supported fast-
disbursing loans in areas where there was willingness to reform, such as in the financial and
housing sectors; the closed loans in these areas have been rated satisfactory by IEG. Post-2011,
the WBG encountered a different type of risk associated with political volatility. It took on the
associated challenge through deep engagement with the GOE and civil society and collaboration
with development partners. The WBG should continue its candid assessment of risks and rewards,
including the overarching role of governance.

B. Stakeholder Consultations

65. Priorities as expressed through CPF consultations with citizens, business groups, and
development partners were used as inputs to the CPF. Two phases of stakeholder consultations
were held in Cairo, Alexandria, and Aswan, with participants from the private sector, academia,
and civil society, along with online consultations conducted through an open survey on the World
Bank Egypt website and engagement on social media. The draft CPF was presented to
development partners in October 2015 and their feedback was sought on the proposed WBG
program and opportunities for collaboration.

66. The top priority emerging from the stakeholder consultations in all three locations was the
need to improve learning outcomes, the business climate, and water and sanitation services.
General, technical, and vocational education services, with a focus on improving the quality of
teachers and educational content, and in particular, ensuring education provided skills valued by
the job market was emphasized. All groups also emphasized the importance of developing the
private sector, improving the business climate, and improving infrastructure to facilitate business
development and trade. They found that improving water services, including the quality of water,
and sanitation and drainage services, was a high priority for ensuring economic development of
local areas, and that improving water governance presented a particular challenge.

67. Cross-cutting issues focused on civil society, corruption, gender, disability, inclusion,
administrative reform and governance. Stakeholders focused in particular on the need to improve
governance of education, health, and water management, but related issues included more coherent
regulations and consistent enforcement of regulations governing business dealings. On gender,
the focus was on measures to increase female labor force participation, particularly in the private
sector, although in education, having schools located closer to homes in rural areas was also raised
as being important for ensuring girls’ attendance in school.

                                                19
68. The second stage of follow-up consultations on the draft CPF highlighted concerns about
the limited WBG support for education and the need to ensure adequate focus on governance
and citizen participation in all WBG-supported initiatives; a third stage involved consultations
with development partners. Stakeholders also emphasized the importance of focusing on Upper
Egypt. Partly as a result of these concerns, and following further discussion with the GOE, the
CPF strengthened WBG’s proposed involvement in the education sector. IFC’s consultations with
the private sector found that the business community agreed with the CPF priorities, and also
expressed interest in having the WBG facilitate dialogue between the business community and the
GOE, and in maintaining contact with IFC to explore investment opportunities, including in health,
education, and low-income housing.

C. Overview of World Bank Group Strategy

69. Egypt is at a critical juncture in its development, in a Region experiencing enormous
turmoil, violence, and the worst refugee crisis in decades. Risks of economic instability and
civilian protests remain, while the benefits from achieving peace, stability, and prosperity will
extend well beyond Egypt’s borders. The international community is strongly supportive of
helping the GOE to undertake far-reaching reforms. The WBG remains a committed partner, to
provide direct support and serve as a convening agent for the development partner community,
and will work closely with reform-minded champions in key ministries. WBG support will be
based on: (i) country demand, both GOE requests and priorities expressed by stakeholders; (ii)
priorities and key drivers defined in the SCD to achieve the twin goals of reducing extreme poverty
and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner; and (iii) the WBG’s comparative
advantage. The WBG will also work differently by remaining flexible to respond to the evolving
situation in Egypt and bringing integrated development solutions to Egypt, customized to Egypt’s
specific needs, with world class expertise.

70. The SCD analysis for Egypt provides the contours of WBG’s strategy which closely
adheres to the GOE’s long-term development strategy (paras. 50-58) and will be an important
element of the WBG’s regional strategy for MENA.19 Through a combination of advisory services
and analytics (ASA) and partnerships, the WBG plans to focus on three interconnected areas: (i)
improving governance; (ii) improving opportunities for private sector job creation; and (iii) social
inclusion.20 All three focus areas will help to renew the social contract built on greater citizen
trust; more effective protection of the poor and vulnerable; inclusive and accountable service
delivery; and a stronger private sector that can create jobs and opportunities for youth and women.
See Tables 2 and 3 below for the CPF’s three pillars and WBG’s actual and proposed initiatives
over the FY15-19 period.




19
   The WBG strategy is also reflects the United Nation’s recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals,
particularly Goal 16, Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice
for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
20
   See Footnote 1 and Annex 7 for correspondence between the SCD’s top priority reform areas and key drivers on
the one hand, and the CPF focus areas on the other. One area where the CPF and the SCD differ is in the treatment
of spatial integration: the SCD treats this issue as a separate key driver, while the CPF subsumes the spatial integration
objective partly under the private sector pillar, as key factor in linking workers with employment and hence supporting
job creation, and partly under social inclusion, where spatial integration will support delivery of public services such
as health and education.
                                                           20
                                Table 2. WBG Pillars and Proposed Lending Interventions
                                                     CPF Focus Areas              FY15-19 FY15     FY16     FY17       FY18-FY19
             Project Name                            Private Sector Job Social
                                          Governance                                Est.  Actual            Projected-
                                                         Creation       Inclusion
Inclusive Housing Finance Program P4R                                       x             $500m
Household Gas Connection Project              x               x             x             $500m
Strengthening Social Safety Net Project       x                             x             $400m
Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services P4R     x                             x                      $550m
Equal Access and Simplified Environment
                                              x               x                                    $ 5m
 for Investment (EASE)
Upper Egypt Local Dev. Project                x               x             x                               $500m
Fiscal Stabilization, Sustainable Energy
                                              x               x             x                       $1b         tbd.      tbd.
 and Competitiveness DPF
Integrated Agricultural Development
                                                              x             x                               $500m
 Program in upper Egypt
Education & Skills Modern. Project                            x             x                                             tbd
                                                                                   $6.0b  $ 1.4b   $1.55b          3.05 b 


                  Table 3. WBG Pillars and Proposed Bank Advisory Services and Analytics, FY16-17
                                                                                CPF Focus Areas
                              ASA Name                                           Private Sector
                                                                  Governance                    Social Inclusion
                                                                                  Job Creation
          Poverty Assessment                                                                            x
          Land Acquisition and Institutional Reform                   x                x                x
          Programmatic TA-Education Financing Reform &
                                                                      x                  x                  x
           Impr. Accountability
          Programmatic TA-Energy Dialogue                             x                  x                  x
          Cost of Environmental Degradation                           x                                     x
          TA - Hepatitis C                                                                                  x
          Programmatic TA-Public Financial Management                 x
          Programmatic TA- Public Sector Reforms                      x
          Updated Gender Assessment                                                      x                  x
          TA - Urban Transport                                        x
          TA - Public Investment Management                           x
          TA - National Accounts &Policy Analysis                     x                                     x
          TA - Agriculture Value Chains                                                  x                  x
          TA - Competition and regulatory framework                   x                  x                  x
          TA for Social Safety Nets/Pensions                                                                x

     71.     The Bank’s proposed lending program and proposed ASA are more certain in the early
     years than in the outer years. This is because the planned lending program for the last two
     years of the CPF period (FY18-19) consists of two possible DPLs, which are new for Egypt, and
     their scope and timing are conditional on the Government’s ability to put in place a credible
     program to improve the macro economic situation and address macroeconomic risks, in
     particular to resolve the foreign exchange issue. The education project will also require
     considerable ASA before the scope and timing of the operation can be defined. Similarly, policy
     dialogue with various ministries is evolving, and the GOE’s demand for the Bank’s knowledge
     services may depend on the outcome of current and planned ASA. An updated gender
     assessment is planned that would help inform Bank dialogue as well as future operations. The
     ASA and lending program in the outer years would be reviewed and adjusted as needed at the
     Program and Learning review in FY18.



                                                             21
72. The CPF proposes both marked shifts from past support and gradual shifts over the FY15-19
period within sectors. For shifts in strategy from previous WBG support to Egypt, see Box 1 below.

  Box 1. WBG: Shifts from past support
     Renewing Egypt’s social contract - build greater citizen trust; more effective protection of the poor and
      vulnerable; inclusive and accountable service delivery; and a stronger focus on fostering a better business
      climate for the private sector that can create jobs and opportunities for Egypt’s youth.
     Governance issues will be an integral part of all Bank initiatives, including a focus on policy reforms and
      institution-building, and strengthening the regulatory role of the GOE, and greater voice and accountability at
      sector level
     .Greater focus on Upper Egypt, including five WB projects in FY15-16 that will benefit the poorer population
      but women in particular (Rural Sanitation and Sewerage, Household Gas Connection, Strengthening the SSN,
      Enhancing Agricultural Productivity, and an Upper Egypt Local Development Project).
     Increased emphasis on regional partnerships, including with GCC and regional bilateral development
      partners, and in selected sectors such as energy, water, and education. For instance in the energy sector, the
      WBG is assessing the potential for a regional electricity market, following the construction of an Egypt-Saudi
      interconnector. In cooperation with the Islamic Development Bank, the WBG is launching “Education for
      Competitiveness” (E4C) Initiative (para 136).
     Joint IFC/WB/MIGA efforts aimed in particular at energy, education, and competitiveness.
     Scaling-up and more programmatic support: more than doubling average Bank and IFC support; greater
      focus on programmatic approaches.
     Cleaning up the portfolio through restructuring, closing, and/or cancelations, and more proactive support to
      implementation, including meeting with PIUs to review implementation issues


73.   Shifts over the CPF period within sectors include:

            Competitiveness: support systemic reforms that simplify regulations, increase
            consistent implementation, and eliminate barriers to competition, in particular at the
            sector level; and provide targeted, catalytic, and complementary investments in
            infrastructure and institutions that leverage private sector investment. Many of the
            business environment measures will be particularly helpful to SMEs, thereby favoring
            broader economic inclusion.

           Energy Sector: shift from publicly financed conventional power generation to
            crowding in private sector, including for upstream oil and gas; thermal generation;
            supporting a mix of public and private investments in renewable energy and energy
            efficiency; supporting energy security and long term financial sustainability; improving
            the cash balances of SOEs; creating independent gas and electricity regulators; and
            pursuing opportunities for regional energy markets.

           Health, Nutrition, and Population: moving away from health insurance to health
            quality, with a focus on governance aspects; expand family health services to the
            bottom 40 percent of the population in the poorest 10 governorates; support for
            addressing Hepatitis C.

           Education: new pro-active support for improving the quality and equity of the education
            system, with a strong focus on governance issues.

           Social Protection: moving away from support to fragmented Social Protection
            programs to an integrated Social Protection Systems approach, which would provide
                                                        22
           protection to the poorest and most vulnerable households while improving governance
           of the system in Egypt.

          Agriculture and Water: treated holistically rather than as separate sectors; shift from
           irrigation and drainage infrastructure to enhancing the productivity of labor-intensive
           agriculture to generate jobs, improve the incomes of farmers and rural communities,
           and address food security concerns.

          Sanitation: shift from conventional sanitation projects to a more decentralized
           approach with specific benchmarks for progress in institutional capacity, sustainability,
           and transfer of responsibilities, as well as progress in delivering infrastructure.

          Lagging regions. The Bank is enhancing its focus to the poorest regions, targeting youth
           and women. The new cash transfer program, Takaful and Karama, will benefit 1.5
           million poor households, mostly in poorer governorates in Upper Egypt. The Integrated
           Agricultural Development program and the Upper Egypt Local Development Program
           will target income growth and job opportunities in lagging regions.

          Environment mainstreamed in projects where relevant. This is the case in the
           energy sector, agriculture and rural sanitation projects. The DPF supported energy
           program is also expected to have positive impact on the environment as it supports
           enhancing sustainable energy supply

74. There are important ways in which selectivity will be applied. First, the WBG will focus
on priority areas identified in the SCD. Second, for those areas that promote shared prosperity but
where there is no country demand for WBG support, the WBG will play an advocacy role. Third,
the Bank will refrain from lending in areas that can attract private sector investment, leaving IFC
and MIGA to take a more appropriate lending/investment role in sectors where there is clear
private investor appetite. Fourth, the Bank will focus lending in sectors with strong commitment
to strengthen institutions and increase its accountability to citizens.

75. Strong results are programmed under this CPF. Policy and institutional reforms supported
by development policy and PforR operations will improve governance and prospects for a renewed
social contract. Acceleration of current portfolio implementation and greater proactivity will likely
lead to tangible results. Where the current portfolio does not reflect the priorities or shifts above,
the Bank will exit those areas as these projects close. Results from the new programs financed
under the CPF will be fleshed out in the Performance and Learning Review in FY18.

76. Several issues identified in the SCD as priority areas are not currently targeted in the CPF
for WBG interventions. Some issues, such as the MOF and Central Bank cooperation are entirely
within the GOE’s domain. In yet other areas, the GOE has not requested Bank support, for example
for a national access-to-information policy, an independent anti-corruption agency, and a conflict of
interest monitoring body. In these areas the Bank will continue its advocacy role. In addition, some
knowledge gaps were identified in the SCD that are not in the CPF’s carefully prioritized planned
ASA for FY16-17 for example on water and input constraints faced by farmers, on capacity of local
authorities to manage funds, benchmarking of school and teacher performance, and benchmarking




                                                 23
of health facility performance. Future ASA will be undertaken after careful consideration of the
existing stock of ASA in these areas and by leveraging work by development partners. 21

        1. Objectives of Lending and Non-Lending Activities in supporting CPF key drivers

               CPF Focus Area 1: Improved governance

77. Governance in Egypt lies at the heart of the reform program for the country. Improving
governance will involve renewing the social contract between the GOE and the citizens and it
touches on all aspects of reforms proposed under the CPF. It concerns not only the reforms to
improve efficiency and transparency of the central administrative functions, but beyond that, it is
also key to improving macroeconomic and sectoral performance (Box 2). Improving fiscal
management, for example, is not only a technical issue of balancing the budget, but touches on
different interests within the society, as it involves controlling the public wage bill, increasing tax
revenues, and affecting access to foreign exchange. Energy reform will necessarily affect the


 Box 2. A Simple Framework for Improved Governance
 The Bank’s focus area on governance will entail work on three broad dimensions: promoting transparency and
 efficiency, supporting inclusive institutions, and promoting citizen engagement and voice.
 1.      Promoting transparency and efficiency is essential to
 enhance the accountability of the state. This would cover areas
 such as budget transparency and fiscal management, but also
 public administration reforms, in particular the promotion of good
 policies and institutions to support inclusive growth. This also has
 to do with improving sector governance, such as that in energy, to
 help promote investments and greater efficiency in the sector.
 2.      Strengthening inclusive institutions is about promoting
 institutions that work for the poor. This can come through several
 measures such as the Bank-supported new model of decentralized
 service delivery of rural sanitation or the support working with
 development partners (AFD in this case to help finance gas
 connections for poor households or moving from a system of
 universal subsidies to a targeted social safety net system.
 3.      Promoting citizen involvement and feedback loops will be critical to strengthen governance. These could
 come from broader consultations in the discovery, design and delivery of public programs and/or Bank Group
 interventions. Deliberately making the space in these programs for feedback mechanisms, including for redress of
 grievances, are important elements to strengthen a framework for improved governance.
 These areas are necessarily interconnected and also overlap with the other two focus areas of the CPF. For instance,
 both social inclusion and private sector development would be helped by improved governance; improvements in
 education outcomes will depend in large measure on strengthening accountability around the service delivery
 mechanism. Similarly, improving the business climate to foster job growth is fundamentally about simplifying
 regulations, reducing the costs of compliance, ensuring effective implementation to ensure a level playing field,
 and strengthening corporate governance to ensure greater efficiency and transparency in the private sector.




21This work includes, Unicef's annual or biannual (sometimes) reports on childhood and maternal health, CAPMAS
(national statistical body) annual report, National Health accounts (previously supported by USAID, but now by
WHO) which are produced every few years (3-5 years) and World Bank’s in depth analysis of service delivery in
Brixi, Hana; Lust, Ellen; Woolcock, Michael. 2015. Trust, Voice, and Incentives: Learning from Local Success
Stories in Service Delivery in the Middle East and North Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://www.openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21607.
                                          24
governance of the sector (regulatory agencies; opening to private investments) as well as the
governance of the state-owned energy enterprises.

             Objective 1.1 Improved fiscal management

78. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Restoring macroeconomic stability
is a prerequisite for growth, for private investments and the creation of job opportunities, and for
protecting the poor from rising food prices and consequent increases in poverty rates and fiscal
consolidation is a key element for achieving macroeconomic stability. For Egypt this means
reducing public expenditures and improving their efficiency, and enhancing Government revenues
through broadening the tax base and improving tax collections, thus contributing to the regional
strategy pillar of renewing the social contract.

79. Country Development Goals. The GOE has initiated important reforms (paras. 53-55) and
plans to take further steps. These include (i) continued energy subsidy reform by further increases
to energy prices; (ii) passage and implementation of the VAT and other tax measures; (iii) further
control of public sector wage bill and hiring; (iv) identifying spending cuts on non-priority items
to offset increases in health and education expenditures; (v) improving fiscal and monetary policy
coordination to improve deficit financing; (vi) improving public debt management and developing
the primary and secondary markets for Government securities; (vii) developing a PIM system to
address, inter alia, possible cost over-runs of ongoing public infrastructure works; and (viii)
promotion of a competitive and sound financial system.

80. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. A proposed programmatic Development Policy
Financing (DPF) has been requested by the GOE. Its main components would be: (i) advancing
fiscal consolidation, through higher revenue collection, moderating the growth in the wage bill,
and strengthening debt management; (ii) ensure sustainable energy supply through private sector
engagement; and (iii) enhance the business environment by facilitating investment laws,
simplifying industrial licensing requirements and increasing competition. The Bank will also
support the GOE through ASA and policy dialogue on these issues. In addition, the Bank will
continue its macroeconomic monitoring, which involves quarterly reporting and dissemination to
key stakeholders of macroeconomic assessments.

             Objective 1.2 Improved fiscal transparency

81. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy: Improving Public Financial
Management (PFM) and Procurement Institutions will allow the GOE to reduce poverty and boost
shared prosperity through effective budget and procurement management systems, relevance and
quality of information available for decision making, internal controls to prevent and detect
leakages, and assurance and accountability mechanisms over the use of public funds. Reforms in
PFM will be particularly important to ensure effective service delivery in the context of the GOE’s
planned large capital investment program (requiring strong public investment, procurement and
contract management practices), social safety reform, management of a considerable wage bill,
and increased role of sub-national Governments in service delivery (requiring effective resource
allocation and accountability arrangements). These reforms will also support economic recovery
and strengthen trust between government and its citizens towards a renewed social contract.

82. Country Development Goals: As stated in its new medium-term macroeconomic framework
and strategic plan, the GOE is in the process of advancing a comprehensive PFM program with

                                                25
the objective of maximizing efficient use of resources for the intended priorities. The MOF has
requested the Bank to help assess progress and develop a coherent PFM strategy with well-
prioritized and sequenced actions. The GOE has also made progress in fiscal transparency, making
the approved budget publicly available since 2010, publishing and disseminating a citizens’ budget
in 2014 and 2015. The new constitution included provisions to strengthen independence and
transparency of the supreme audit institution.

83. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The Bank is supporting the MOF with the development
of a clear road map for PFM reform. With TA from the Bank, the MOF recently finalized the
Manual of Procedures of the Internal Financial Control, clarifying and standardizing the financial
controls for each category of expenditure. Specific areas of engagement discussed with the GOE
include:

          Support for PFM Strategy Design and Implementation: The Bank is providing
           technical support to the MOF in the design of the PFM Strategic Action Plan, which
           covers essential PFM elements including budget planning, program-based budgeting,
           financial controls and audit.

          Financial Controls and Internal Audit: The Bank will provide the MOF with TA for
           continued implementation support to the financial control manual, starting with the
           design of training activities, followed by discussion on rationalization of business
           processes is envisaged. TA is also planned to gradually develop modern internal audit
           practices.

          Fiscal Transparency: The Bank is supporting the discussion and dissemination of
           budget documentation.      The Bank will continue to review and provide
           recommendations to develop and improve the content, analysis and publication of fiscal
           documents.

          Public investment management system: The Bank will work with the Ministry of
           Planning and Administrative Reform and the MOF in the assessment of the Public
           Investment System, a roadmap for reform and follow-on support.

          Procurement reform and policy dialogue: In response to a request from the MOF, the
           Bank will support modernization of the public procurement law and its executive
           regulations, as well as assessing the use of framework agreements for commonly used
           commodities to bring about signification savings in procurement.

          Oversight and Accountability institution. In 2013, after years of disengagement, the
           Bank reestablished dialogue with the Accountability State Authority (ASA). Initial
           interventions included a technical review of the ASA draft law and capacity building
           events on Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) legal frameworks and stakeholder
           communications. The Bank will continue to support ASA awareness and knowledge
           sharing on good practices including the SAI performance measure framework that
           would better inform ASA’s own strategy as well as other development partners’
           support.




                                               26
             Objective 1.3 Establish evidence base for performance-based public
              administration

84. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy: An effective public administrative
system is a prerequisite for effective public investment and service delivery programs targeting the
poor and vulnerable. It is also a key element in Egypt’s economic recovery and for the renewal of
the social contract.

85. Country Development Goals: As part of its three-year plan aimed at widespread
administrative reform, the GOE is committed to improving the effectiveness and efficiency, as
well as the accountability of the civil service. For example, in March 2015, it issued Law 18/2015
on Civil Service, replacing Law 47 of 1978 regulating the recruitment, dismissal, promotion of
civil servants, as well as performance-related salary-increases, leave options, and bonuses. The
new law is a central element in the ambitious action plan of the Ministry of Planning and
Administrative Reform to introduce performance measurement criteria and for meritocratic
recruitment and promotion of staff. The action plan also includes actions to reduce graft and steps
towards improving the responsiveness and quality of public services. These measures should
contribute to greater accountability in service delivery and more efficient PIM in the medium to
long term.

86. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. Since 2013, the Bank has been supporting these reforms
through TA, supporting the introduction of EU quality standards for the public administration,
policy advice for drafting the civil service law, and the automation of the delivery of administrative
services at the provincial level. Going forward, targeted support to the reform program will include
TA on improving civil service accountability and performance, including actions to: (a)
implement the individual performance management framework, linking pay to performance; and
(b) build capacity for assessing and improving institutional performance starting with entities that
deliver administrative services at the national level. The pilot is undertaken in partnership with
the Ministry of Personnel and Administrative Reform and the Central Agency for Organization
and Administration.

             Objective 1.4 Strengthened citizen engagement in service delivery

87. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy: Strengthening the accountability of
the state to its citizens is essential for achieving sustainable growth and reducing poverty. Good
governance has been linked in empirical studies to strong economic performance, through the
effective delivery of public goods necessary for both businesses and citizens. In Egypt, many
obstacles to job-creating growth and quality public services, such as the capture of industries by
political elites or the absence of teachers and doctors in public schools and clinics, are due to the
failure of citizens to hold policymakers and service providers accountable. Reforms aimed at
enhancing access to information and citizens’ participation in social service delivery would not
only accelerate shared prosperity, but would also reduce the sense of alienation and frustration
with the state, and thus the likelihood of civil disturbances, also central to the MENA strategy
pillars of economic recovery and renewing the social contract.

88. Country Development Goals: The GOE’s Sustainable Development Strategy is focused on
economic development, improving governance, and social justice with an emphasis on the need
for greater transparency and accountability in the public sector.


                                                 27
89. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The focus on strengthening accountability of the state
for improving public services will entail a combination of project, sector, and country-level
approaches. During project preparation and implementation, the Bank will work with country
counterparts and partners to consider how a project might help advance governance (institutional
capacity, transparency, accountability, participation, and anti-corruption), how governance risks
may affect the achievement of project development objectives, and how to mitigate them. At the
sector level, the WBG will integrate governance considerations in its strategic engagement. This
will include the identification of key governance issues affecting sectors or sub-sectors to inform
not only project design but also policy dialogue. Where feasible, the WBG will support priority
activities aimed at addressing these challenges as part of its overall support to the sector. Finally,
at the country level, the WBG will regularly review experiences in governance mainstreaming,
and adjust course as necessary in its knowledge and financing work, including through the CPF’s
Performance and Learning Review.

90. The IFC has provided TA to improve corporate governance in the private sector, supported
the creation of the Egyptian Institute of Directors, helped in drafting the corporate governance
code for listed companies, and reviewed the corporate governance code for state-owned
enterprises. Going forward, the WBG solutions to strengthen accountability will include providing
citizens with information and enabling them to provide feedback on service delivery, and using
the feedback to hold the service provider accountable. As an example, interventions that replace
fuel subsidies with targeted cash transfers will not only improve equity, but it will make utilities
responsive to consumers. Finally, working with and strengthening civil society organizations that
deliver basic services effectively or advocate for the poor and voiceless would be a step in the right
direction. See Box 3 for examples from proposed CPF support.

 Box 3. Bringing citizen engagement and renewing the social contract into WBG operations
 Examples from WBG support proposed under the CPF:
  Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program aims to increase transparency in the fiscal transfer system
     and enhance institutional accountability of rural sanitation services. The program will put in place a new
     system of performance-based capital grants to water sanitation companies based on annual performance
     assessments, using indicators of operation and maintenance of systems, as well as beneficiary satisfaction;
     including women will be a key element of the citizen engagement process. This supports the renewal of the
     social contract by generating greater trust in institutions by ensuring that local service providers answer to their
     customers.
    Strengthening Social Safety Nets Project provides cash transfers to the most vulnerable. It will use a live
     M&E system aimed at deepening the accountability of the program. The operation features a grievance redress
     mechanism and beneficiary satisfaction surveys, and is working with NGOs and community leaders on
     implementation and monitoring.
    Inclusive Housing Finance Program aims to enhance transparency by a public awareness campaign targeted
     at potential beneficiaries; public dissemination of housing sector data; publication of financial audits of the
     program and to enhance accountability through beneficiary screening mechanisms; fiduciary strengthening;
     grievance redress mechanisms; and client satisfaction surveys.
    Upper Egypt Local Development Program will aim at improving both access and quality of basic services.
     The Program will seek to strengthen accountability in service delivery modalities, especially strengthening the
     role of governorates and districts and improving local participation in service delivery priority setting and
     monitoring.




                                                           28
             Objective 1.5 Strengthened energy sector governance

91. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. At the intersection of public sector
governance and macroeconomic management, two priority areas for reform in Egypt that need to
underpin efforts to reduce poverty and enhance shared prosperity, are reforms in the energy sector –
both energy subsidies and sector governance. These have the potential to dramatically improve
Egypt’s fiscal situation and reduce significant distortions in other sectors with multiple benefits:
improved incentives for more labor-intensive investments, greater efficiency and productivity in the
private sector and thus expanded job opportunities, bringing energy demand in line with supply,
encouraging more sustainable growth and more funding for social programs.

92. Country Development Goals. The GOE has expressed its commitment to reduce energy
subsidies and strengthen energy sector governance. It has committed to a five-year plan for reducing
energy subsidies from 6.6 percent of GDP in 2013/14 to 0.5 percent of GDP by 2018/19, with the
remaining subsidies covering only LPG and electricity consumption of the poorest households. To
improve governance in the power sector, a new Electricity Law approved in July 2015 paves the way
for substantial reforms of the electricity sector. The law envisages the separation of the Egypt
Electricity and Transmission Company as a Transmission System’s operator, independent of
generation and distribution sectors. The new Gas Law is expected to be approved with its supporting
Executive Regulations in 2016 which would create a new independent gas regulator in 2016, open the
market for private suppliers to supply to eligible consumers, and establish a new regulatory agency,
which is expected to improve transparency in the sector by providing on-line public access to all
regulations and approval procedures.

93. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The Bank, through multi-sector teams, has been providing
just-in-time TA for extensive analysis of the distributional impact of changes in energy prices and
accompanying safety net reforms through an energy/SSN project financed by the MENA Transition
Fund and plans to continue support in this area. The Bank will also continue to support GOE in the
implementation of its 2015-2020 strategy for the energy sector with focus on security, sustainability,
and governance, in part through the proposed DPF (para. 80). The DPF will support actions to ensure
sustainable energy supply through a combination of continuing to reduce energy subsidies, improving
governance in the power and gas sectors, opening the gas sector to private investments, establishing
an independent gas sector regulator, and enabling private sector investments in renewable and cleaner
forms of energy. Through its support for sustainable energy supply, the DPF is thus expected to have
a positive impact on the environment.

94. In addition, regional energy initiatives will be pursued in order to further strengthen regional
cooperation. In particular, the WBG will focus on developing electricity and gas regional and sub-
regional markets. The WBG is supporting an assessment of the potential for the development of a
regional gas market, with Egypt as a gas hub, and the opportunities to be provided by the EU-Med Gas
Platform. In addition, the WBG is assessing the potential for a regional electricity market, following
the construction of an Egypt-Saudi interconnector.

             CPF Focus Area 2: Improved opportunities for private sector job creation

             Objective 2.1: Improved regulatory environment for private investment

95. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Egypt’s private sector is characterized by
a complex and inefficient regulatory business environment that has hindered business development.

                                                 29
This in turn has limited jobs growth, particularly for the poor and unconnected, and undermined shared
prosperity. Sustained private sector led growth forms a critical part of renewing the social contract.

96. Country Development Goals. In the GOE Sustainable Development Strategy for 2030, the
private sector is to play a key role in enhancing economic competitiveness and job growth. Export-
oriented sector diversification based on competitive and comparative advantages are key GOE
objectives, as well as increasing the rate of industrial development, moving towards technology-driven
industries, and promoting SME linkages to large industries.

97. WBG Solutions – Expected Results of Current Operations. The WBG portfolio in this area has
focused on regulatory reforms alongside specific innovative sector interventions. The recently
approved EASE Investment in Egypt project builds on previous advisory work on licensing and
permitting. Expected results are an improved regulatory framework for investment, especially in
business entry, industrial licensing, and industrial land allocation. Support to the Egyptian Competition
Authority has begun with capacity building. The WBG is also providing advisory services to review
the amended Investment Law and provide recommendations for further enhancing the investment
framework. The WBG is also working with the Ministry of Industry and Foreign Trade to promote
innovation and entrepreneurship in the renewable energy and energy efficiency sector, as well as with
the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology to reform the ICT sector investment
policy, attract foreign investment and promote innovation in the ICT sector. On the investment front,
despite a weak business environment since the revolution, IFC has been able to grow its investment
portfolio across diverse sectors.

98. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The WBG’s support will continue to be structured around:
(i) support for reforms that address fundamental constraints to business entry and competition that have
been favoring connected incumbents for decades – such as industrial licensing mentioned above,
access to land, discretionary issuance of permits, investment approvals, and the broader competition
framework; and (ii) investments to unlock constraints to private investment and entrepreneurship and
promote broad-based growth to catalyze competitiveness in specific industries and regions (including
lagging regions). This will be implemented through the Business Environment pillar of the DPF (para.
80), the EASE Investment in Egypt project, the proposed Upper Egypt Local Development Program,
and the proposed Integrated Agricultural Development Program. Both the Upper Egypt Local
Development Program and Agriculture Development Program will aim at strengthen business
environment and deepening value chain linkages to encourage private investments that support local
economic development and job creation. Furthermore, technical assistance on this reform agenda will
be provided to the GOE and regional governorates, including proposed TA to the Egyptian
Competition Authority that will focus on anti-trust enforcement. The Bank will also continue to use
the PPIAF assistance in Egypt for preparatory work to enable private sector participation in
infrastructure and service delivery.22 Subject to improvements in the investment climate, IFC will
continue to invest across key sectors in Egypt, especially those that have an export-oriented focus, are
in high value added sectors, and have high impact on job creation/preservation. MIGA will seek to
support foreign investments in export-oriented and high value added manufacturing and services
through its political risk insurance guarantees.




22
  PPIAF support includes PPP work in the irrigation, waste-water, power, wind and the roads sector as well as a diagnostic
on PPPs in Egypt.
                                                           30
              Objective 2.2: Improved energy generation capacity and energy efficiency

99. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Egypt is a fully electrified country with
more than 99 percent of households connected to the electricity grid. Consequently, the power sector
has a direct impact on practically every household, business, school, and hospital in the country.
Availability of reliable energy supply has been identified as a major constraint by the private sector in
expanding businesses and therefore job creation. The brisk energy demand growth is expected to
continue for the foreseeable future and investments in the supply side of the power sector and efficiency
enhancing measures will have to expand significantly to meet the demand and reduce frequent power
cuts. These measures will enhance economic recovery and strengthen the private sector.

100. Country Development Goals. The GOE is focused on improving the supply of energy and on
enhancing energy security through securing fuels from either domestic or imported sources, shifting a
significant portion of that supply to renewable sources, and diversification through imported coal. The
GOE has set an ambitious goal of reaching 20 percent of energy from renewable sources (including
hydro) by 2022. The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan focuses on reducing electricity
consumption in particular through efficient lighting, mandatory building codes, and standards and
labeling. The policy and regulatory framework for private participation in the energy sector has been
set with the (Public-Private Partnership) PPP Law in 2010 and a Renewable Energy Investment law in
late 2014. A draft Energy Law in front of Parliament would gradually liberalize the entire power
sector, allowing private investment in distribution and supply. This would complement efforts by the
GOE to promote the long-term financial sustainability of the energy sector, which would also have a
positive impact on Egypt’s fiscal balance.

101. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current and Proposed Operations. The Bank is
financing four projects to support additional gas-fired conventional power supply. Substantial parallel
loans have been secured, totaling almost US$2 billion.23 At the same time, IFC and MIGA are
engaging potential private developers, including for an ongoing PPP transaction for a gas fired power
plant. The Wind Power Development Project supports diversification of energy sources by supporting
the expansion of transmission infrastructure to connect wind power generation in the Gulf of Suez
region with the national grid, and by providing TA for the first wind power project to be financed by
the private sector. The aim is to support GOE’s effort to eliminate power cuts by FY17 and to promote
financial sustainability of the sector by FY19 through the increased participation of the private sector
in new energy generation, including the construction of 5,450 MW of generation capacity of
conventional energy and 5,250MW of renewable energy by the private sector, and enhancing systems
reliability, in particular through 1,006 km of efficient transmission infrastructure. As noted above
(para. 80), the DPF is also supporting governance and continued subsidy reforms in the energy sector
to increase private sector investments and enhance regulatory oversight. Based on the actions proposed
in the DPF, it is estimated that Green House Gas emissions will be reduced by about 25 percent in
2019 compared to a scenario of no reforms proposed under the DPF.

102. IFC is engaging leading enterprises to demonstrate the attractiveness of investments in energy
efficiency through advisory services and investments. Since 2011, IFC has been supporting the
development of private oil and gas companies in Egypt by investing in six projects in the oil and gas
exploration and production sub-sector and in one refinery project. In light of increasing payment

23
  The partners are: the Islamic Development Bank ($450 m), the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development
($400 m), the Kuwait Fund ($214 m) and the OPEC Fund ($70 m). The AfDB also supports these efforts ($550 m),
as does the EIB ($307 m).
                                                    31
delays by Egypt’s power and gas utilities in recent years, IFC has been called upon by its clients to
provide long-term capital for ongoing projects. MIGA has supported a project in the oil and gas sector
through reinsurance to Overseas Private Investment Corporation and issued a guarantee in FY15 for a
refinery project. Through a joint intervention, MIGA and IFC are supporting an investment in the
refining facility that produces cleaner refined fuel products and aims at alleviating fuel shortages while
improving air quality. In addition, the project plans to implement environmental upgrades (e.g. soil
decontamination) to the industrial complex site where it is located, as well as to the adjacent Cairo Oil
Refining Company from where it receives the atmospheric residue for processing, thus improving local
air quality in neighboring communities.

103. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The Bank and IFC will develop business plans for joint
implementation in the energy sector. The WBG will work with the GOE on the enabling environment,
including development of appropriate sector policies (pricing, role of regulator), reform of the legal
and regulatory environment (IPP framework), and the use of credit enhancement instruments needed
to attract private investors. The WBG will support the assessment of the potential and opportunities
for regional cooperation in developing gas and electricity markets (para. 94). In coordination with the
Bank, IFC will continue to advise public authorities on the implementation of potential PPPs in the
electricity generation sector. IFC and MIGA will also support the upcoming pipeline of gas-fired
thermal and renewable energy private sector generation projects under the feed in tariff framework,
competitively bid transactions, IPP’s, or through privately negotiated transactions through financing
and helping to mobilize external funding sources. The WBG will continue to support FDI in the oil
and gas sub-sector, focusing on tier II (medium size) companies entering or expanding in the market.
Finally, WBG will support sustainable energy finance by providing loans and risk sharing facilities to
financial institutions. MIGA is open to providing political risk insurance guarantees to foreign
investors in potential PPP projects. With regard to financial sustainability, the aim is to support a shift
towards financial cost recovery for both power and petroleum sectors by the end of the CPF period, in
support of the GOE’s objective to eliminate subsidies.

104. The Bank will support the establishment of a Clean Energy Facility, which is an innovative
financing mechanism to provide financial support for the scale-up of renewable energy and energy
efficiency projects on a commercial basis, and to reduce project risks. The WBG will also finance
transmission and distribution infrastructure to enhance the reliability of the grid. MIGA is looking to
use its political risk insurance guarantees to support eligible investors in renewable energy projects.
During the CPF period, the Bank also plans credit enhancement instruments for Build Own Operate
programs for wind power generation in the Gulf of Suez area. The WBG and other development
partners (KfW and GIZ, Islamic Development Bank, EIB, and USAID) will continue to engage with
the GOE to pilot energy efficiency, energy planning and monitoring, and more community-based
management. The WBG will support private sector investment in supply side energy efficiency
improvements and improved efficiency in transmission and distribution sectors. MIGA will
complement these efforts by paying particular attention to the energy efficiency dimension of all
projects in Egypt seeking guarantees.

              Objective 2.3: Enhanced capacity and safety of key transport infrastructure

105. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. The transportation sector is key to Egypt’s
economic growth and the country’s integration, both internally and globally, as it supports shared
prosperity through economic exchange and improved spatial development. Transport infrastructure
bottlenecks and lack of safety currently serve as key constraints to trade, mobility, job creation and
service delivery across Egypt, specifically affecting the more impoverished areas of the Nile Delta and
                                                    32
Upper Egypt. Meanwhile the air transport sector is directly connected to the tourism sector, itself a
major source of job creation for the poor.

106. Country Development Goals. The GOE aims to strengthen the transport and logistics chains
through a variety of measures with the goal of spurring mobility and economic activity, helping
increase the very low labor force participation rates of Egyptian women, and facilitating agricultural
development.

107. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The Bank has active projects in
both the air and rail transport sectors, which are aimed at enhancing the capacity and the quality of
services of the Cairo International Airport, and improving railway services, respectively. The Bank is
assisting with strategic planning to strengthen the institutional capacity of the airports sector and
financing capacity enhancement of the airport, boosting capacity to 25 million passengers a year and
supporting the tourism sector in the process. Regarding the railways sector, the Bank is financing
infrastructure investments to improve the safety, efficiency, and reliability of railway services for the
poor, and is attending to sectoral governance issues by undertaking studies to support the preparation
of a Safety Management System for the Egyptian railways operating agency.

108. WBG Solutions – Going forward. The WBG will seek to scale up measures to attract the private
sector for infrastructure investments in the transportation sector. The Bank and IFC will also work
together to determine the feasibility of PPP schemes with MIGA offering its political risk insurance
guarantees to eligible private sector investors and lenders. Bank will continue to engage in policy
dialogue in the transport sector. IFC will explore options for supporting upcoming private port
concessions through financing and helping to mobilize external funding sources and explore
opportunities in the airport sector. In the Upper Egypt region, where poor connectivity is a major
constraint to address poverty, improve household incomes and enable private investments, WBG will
support improved connectivity, both transport and ICT related, via the proposed Upper Egypt Local
Development Program.

              Objective 2.4: Enhanced access to improved agriculture and irrigation services

109. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. As highlighted in the SCD, Egypt’s
agricultural sector continues to account for a significant share of employment and is the major source
of income for the bottom 40 percent who are largely in rural areas and Upper Egypt; therefore,
providing access to improved agriculture and irrigation services will have an immediate impact on the
livelihoods of many poor rural households. Low agricultural productivity, lack of off-farm
opportunities, and inefficient water use are key constraints to improving livelihoods of rural farmers
and supporting agribusiness-led growth of the rural economy. Adequately addressing these issues will
require greater private sector participation and regional cooperation.

110. Country Development Goals. The GOE has long recognized the importance of the rural sector
for reducing rural poverty and its Sustainable Development Strategy for 2030 reaffirms its commitment
to provide support to farmers to improve agricultural productivity and value added in the traditional
farming areas (the Old Lands, mainly in the Nile Valley and Delta), as well as to develop reclaimed
farmlands (the New Lands) to increase employment opportunities.

111. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The Bank has a large portfolio
focused on improving the irrigation and drainage infrastructure at all levels, and establishing Water
Users Associations (WUAs) to take over responsibilities for allocating irrigation water among

                                                   33
members. By FY19 improved irrigation and drainage services, land management and production, and
marketing support will have been provided to over one million beneficiaries, improved on-farm
irrigation services will benefit more than 140,000 small-scale farmers, and close to 21,000 WUAs will
be registered. The impact and sustainability of these outcomes will depend, however, on a more
comprehensive approach to provide farmers and WUAs with incentives to use water more effectively.
In particular, without improvements to the current system of water allocation and utilization in the Old
Lands, the GOE's objectives for large expansion of the New Lands will be constrained to use of
groundwater at much higher costs. WBG’s interventions expect to advance legal and regulatory
reforms to support logistical and distributional services for agriculture and agri-businesses. IFC’s Risk
Sharing Facility in support of importers of food crops will enhance food security with financing of 3
million metric tons of agri-commodities. IFC invested in the agri-business sector to help it expand and
diversify thereby increasing farmers’ capacity to harvest local crops.

112. WBG Solutions –Going Forward. The GOE has requested support for an Integrated
Agricultural Development Program focused on the poorer governorates in Upper Egypt, impoverished
areas close to the Nile and transport corridors. Specifically, the project is expected to focus on (i)
institution building and capacity enhancement; (ii) sustainable water and land development; (iii)
modern agribusiness and related infrastructure; and (iv) knowledge and innovation systems. The Bank
will also continue to provide TA support to the implementation of the recently prepared Branch Canal
Law. The Bank will undertake analytical work on agricultural policies to reduce agricultural pollution,
and it will review water-pricing mechanisms to better align the use of water resources with Egypt’s
growth, employment, and poverty eradication objectives. The Bank is mobilizing global experts to
provide inputs on strengthening allocation and management of land and water resources and
development of supply chains which link small farmers to agribusiness, to be followed up with
financing, leveraging resources of Arab and other partners. Finally, the Bank is seeking to strengthen
the regional approach to water issues through the establishment of the MENA Water Security Initiative,
which would focus on developing cutting edge strategies to water scarcity, across agriculture, urban,
and environmental areas, building on current efforts in the Region. IFC is ready to support private
investment in warehousing, cold chain, and distribution infrastructure. IFC is also targeting
investments in Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) sectors, particularly expansion of production
capacity and the supply chain. FMCG sectors are known to have a robust domestic supply chain (both
upstream and downstream), and therefore a strong employment multiplier effect. MIGA is open to
supporting eligible foreign investors in agribusiness seeking political risk insurance guarantees.

              Objective 2.5: Enhanced access to finance for medium, small scale, and micro-
               enterprises (MSMEs)

113. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Promoting financial inclusion is one of
the key pillars of the WBG engagements in Egypt, where Egypt is one of the priority countries selected
for Achieving Universal Access by 2020. MSMEs have played a dominant and increasing role in
creating jobs in Egypt, particularly for the poor, yet access to finance is a significant constraint in
enabling MSMEs to grow and generate employment opportunities. MSMEs account for roughly 85
percent of all non-agriculture job creation and are critical for low-income households to smooth
consumption and respond to financial shocks. However, over half of informal micro-enterprises and
small manufacturing firms report access to finance as a major factor constraining growth. Women
entrepreneurs face more challenges in accessing finance than men, particularly with respect to the use
of assets as collateral. This is in the larger context of banks increasingly financing the public sector:


                                                   34
private credit as a percent of GPD has dropped dramatically, from almost 50 percent in 2006 to only
27 percent in 2014.

114. Country Development Goals. The GOE’s recent strategy statements include support to SMEs,
including technical and vocational training, and a focus on rural finance. The GOE has a long-standing
program of credit to SMEs implemented through the Social Fund for Development. In addition, the
Cabinet recently approved a microfinance law that allows commercial companies to engage in
microfinance and allows NGOs to establish and own shares in microfinance companies. This may
encourage expansion of private sector microfinance institutions (MFI) and improve the performance
and governance of these institutions. Moreover, the CBE is developing a financial inclusion strategy,
which includes streamlining operations for MSE lending, and strengthening credit guarantee schemes.

115. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The Bank finances two active
lines of credit focused on MSMEs, particularly firms headed by youth and women, and in underserved
regions, and are expected to provide a range of innovative financial services to 90,000 micro-finance
and small enterprise clients, including 35,000 women. Advisory support is also being provided for the
development of financial infrastructure through building a viable secured transactions framework.
IFC’s advisory program supports three Egyptian MFIs in risk management, product development,
strategic planning, and capacity building as well as provides training in SME banking to relevant
private-sector bank staff in partnership with the Egyptian Banking Institute. IFC has also supported
MSMEs in Egypt through its trade finance instrument as well as agri-commodity financing through a
risk-sharing facility under the Global Warehouse Program with a regional bank. Overall, the WBG
expects its strategic bank and MFI advisory partners to double their outreach to MSMEs by 2020.

116. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The Bank will work with the GOE on opportunities to further
improve financial inclusion in Egypt particularly in underserved areas. IFC will continue to provide
advisory support for financial infrastructure development through drafting and enacting the secured
transactions law and the creation of a moveable collateral registry. IFC will also continue to provide
advisory services to private banks and MFIs; support access to finance through its international trade
finance program (the GTFP); develop SME-specific instruments for banks and help increase their SME
outreach through risk-sharing facilities or long-term loans. If the opportunity arises, IFC will partner
with regional/GCC banks through equity investments to establish their presence and expand their
operations in Egypt. CPF Focus Area 3: Social Inclusion

             Objective 3.1: Improved access to short-term income opportunities for the poor and
              increased coverage of the Social Safety Net system

117. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Strengthened social safety nets constitute
the primary mechanism to protect citizens from falling into extreme poverty, while also enhancing
access to a variety of human development opportunities for the poor. Egypt needs to enhance the
governance the social safety net systems, by improving targeting of beneficiaries, to identify better
who is poor, and to improve the Social Safety Net (SSN) business processes, including enrollment,
payments, and grievance and redress mechanisms.

118. Country Development Goals. In its Sustainable Development Strategy for 2030, the GOE
confirmed its commitment to the expansion of the SSN program to reach an additional 0.5 million
households in FY15, and to expand it to an additional 1 million households in FY16-17 through a
newly established and better-targeted cash transfer program – Takaful and Karama. In addition, the
GOE has been generating jobs for the poor through a labor-intensive job creation program and is
                                                  35
creating an equity fund, Ayady, with private partners, to seed investment projects across governorates
to create employment opportunities. As the GOE reforms the SSN program and subsidies in the
medium-term, a strong cash transfer program is also needed to alleviate the immediate effects of
poverty and provide social protection in the short-term.

119. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The WB, in partnership with the
EU, is working to support programs to alleviate the immediate effects of poverty through creation of
short-term employment and the provision of basic infrastructure and community services in poor areas.
The Emergency Labor Intensive Investment Project is expected to reach 240,000 people, of which at
least 40 percent are female, 70 percent are from Upper Egypt, and 60 percent are youth. In the medium
term, to address targeting issues and the SSN programs, the WB is currently helping the GOE build
the first version of the Unified National Registry (UNR). The Energy-SSN Transition Fund is expected
to establish a version of the UNR, and to develop the poverty targeting methodology and design
features of the new cash transfer program. In addition, the Bank is supporting the GOE’s new cash
transfer program, Takaful and Karama, meant to help move away from generalized subsidies to
targeted transfers that can better protect the poorest against adverse policy impacts. It will benefit 1.5
million poor households; results will be disaggregated by gender. The first wave of the program,
benefitting 500,000 households, will be rolled out in the 19 poorest districts of Egypt. During the
project’s life, Takaful and Karama will cover about ten percent of the population and 37 percent of the
poor. Benefitting family co-responsibilities include school attendance, visits to health clinics,
maintaining child growth monitoring records, and attending nutrition awareness sessions. The project
will provide conditional and unconditional cash transfers under the Takaful and Karama program, as
well as improve SSN targeting and efficient delivery systems critical for ensuring that transfers reach
deserving families.

120. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The WB plans to support an operation designed to address
social inclusion by targeting the poorer areas of the country, specifically in Upper Egypt. The design
of the Upper Egypt Local Development Project will be informed by the gender focused ASA which
highlighted the challenges of labor market participation and opportunities for women.24 A multi-sector
WB team is engaged with the Minister of Local Development, the Ministry of Trade & Industry, select
Governorates of Upper Egypt and other stakeholders to develop a transformational program aimed at
improving access to and quality of basic services, upgrading economic infrastructure and connectivity,
and improving the regulatory, fiscal and institutional environment for enhanced service delivery and
enterprise development. It is bringing best international practices on lagging regions in middle-income
countries to bear on the design of this critical operation.

               Objective 3.2: Increased access to quality healthcare services

121. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Reforms to better reach poorer
households with good quality health services directly address the key driver of inclusion and the goal
of enhancing shared prosperity. Although primary health care facilities are fairly distributed all over
Egypt, in rural areas they suffer from lack of budgets and qualified staff. In addition, although there
have been significant improvements in health indicators in Egypt, the governance of health service
delivery needs to address weak civil service incentives, organizational fragmentation, inefficiencies in

24
   “Narrowing the Gap: Improving Labor Market Opportunities for Women in Egypt” World Bank. 2011, which has
also informed the CPF approach in other areas such as education, sanitation, and the on-going labor-intensive works
project. “Mapping Gendered Pathways to Inclusion: Shaping Youth Policy in Upper Egypt”, 2013, MENA
development report. Washington, DC. World Bank.
                                                        36
the allocation and use of resources, low Government contribution, increasing out-of-pocket
expenditure, limited citizen’s engagement, and a lack of participation in monitoring the quality of the
delivery of health services.

122. Country Development Goals. Egypt’s vision, as expressed in its Sustainable Development
Strategy for 2030, is to achieve universal health coverage for an essential package of health services
by: (i) improving the health of disadvantaged groups through the support of health programs in lagging
regions; (ii) increasing financial protection for disadvantaged groups through expanding healthcare
coverage for the poor and workers in the informal sector; and (iii) improving the quality of healthcare
in public facilities, enhancing system responsiveness, and improving citizen engagement for an
accountable and sustainable health system.

123. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The ongoing Health Care
Quality Improvement project targets the poorest 1,000 villages by accrediting family health facilities
that meet national healthcare quality standards. The results are expected to be an additional 400
targeted family healthcare facilities receiving accreditation certification by 2017 with improved
services in at least 700 facilities. As a complement to these efforts, the Bank’s ongoing Emergency
Labor Intensive Investment Project provides cash for female health workers to provide access to
maternal and child health services and family planning services. In addition, the Bank is supporting
the GOE with technical assistance on its responsiveness to prevent, diagnose, treat, and assess the fiscal
impact of viral Hepatitis C, and to coordinate with other donors. IFC has investments in two hospitals
and provided PPP advisory support to Alexandria hospitals to enhance access by the urban poor.

124. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. The Bank will focus on expanding family health services
that target the bottom 40 percent of the population in the poorest governorates in Upper Egypt. A
potential Healthcare Support Project in the outer years of the CPF would: (i) expand equitable access
to family health services; (ii) improve health system response to neonatal and obstetric cases; and (iii)
improve patient and blood safety. It would also strengthen health governance and accountability
through: (i) establishment of independent user feedback mechanisms to monitor satisfaction,
utilization, and performance; and (ii) automation of medical records to build the foundation for patient
accountability. To monitor accountability, the percentage of registered grievances that are addressed
and the percentage of client satisfaction with family health series will be tracked.

              Objective 3.3: Increased access to housing for low-income households

125. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. The provision of affordable housing will
directly contribute to achieving the twin goals through addressing several key constraints to growth
and well-being for the poor. Currently, housing subsidies are large and untargeted and are delivered
non-transparently through dysfunctional institutional mechanisms. Providing better targeted
affordable housing will therefore have a direct and immediate effect on poverty by increasing the
percentage of income available for non-housing costs and by reducing transportation costs and
increasing proximity to employment opportunities, markets and services. Enhancing the affordability
of housing for the poor segments of the society will also enhance financial inclusion.

126. Country Development Goals. To reach its low-income housing goals, the GOE adopted a
National Housing Strategy, and introduced a series of legal, regulatory, and institutional reforms to
address a wide range of constraints to improved access to affordable housing. These include a reform
of the housing subsidy system to make it more transparent and better targeted at qualified beneficiaries,
improved real estate and property registration, regularizing informal areas to allow for delivery of
                                                   37
water, sanitation, and electricity, strengthening building codes, and improving mortgage financing.
The GOE created the Social Housing Fund (SHF) and plans to provide institutional and financial
support to undertake a national program with the goal of providing one million social housing units.
The SHF will consolidate and expand existing housing programs and create new ones to fill the housing
gap for the most underserved segments of the population, for both rental housing and ownership. In
addition, the SHF will address major policy issues that hinder private investment in the housing sector.

127. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The Bank’s on-going program
aims to support reforms in housing subsidies – thus also helping to reduce the fiscal deficit – to increase
efficiency and more effective targeting of the poor, and to enhance transparency. The Inclusive
Housing Program PforR is aimed at reforming the institutional structure of the sector, and providing
effective targeting mechanisms for reaching the poorest. The operation also offers incentives to private
companies to develop low-income housing and to bring private rental landlords into the low-income
housing sector. The operation supports greater transparency through: a national public awareness
campaign, dissemination of data, and independent audits of housing programs; greater accountability
through beneficiary screening, penalties for fraud, and a grievance redress mechanism; and citizen
participation through a beneficiary feedback mechanism involving regular consultations with
beneficiaries and civil society organizations. Key expected results include approximately 575,000
households to gain access to affordable housing through the program during the CPF period, at least
50 percent of whom are poor; results will be disaggregated by gender; a more efficient mortgage
finance subsidy mechanism; improved social fund housing capacity; and provision of financial
incentives to owners of vacant or unfinished units in both formal and informal neighborhoods to
improve these units and bring them to market.

              Objective 3.4: Increased access to improved sanitation and sewerage services in
               rural areas

128. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Access to improved sanitation services
is uneven across geographical areas and socio-economic groups, and affects the living conditions and
health of millions of Egyptians. Only 12 percent of the population of rural areas has access to improved
sanitation and 42 million people are underserved. Lack of access to proper sanitation services coupled
with low levels of good hygiene practices lead to the spread of water related diseases, significantly
affecting children's health and nutrition.

129. Country Development Goals. The GOE has an ambitious program of investments in water
supply, wastewater treatment, and sanitation, which will improve water quality, particularly for the
bottom 40 percent of the population.

130. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The Bank is providing support
to expand the network of sanitation infrastructure in rural areas in the Nile Delta and Upper Egypt. As
a result of the ongoing projects, it is expected that an additional 1.65 million users in rural areas will
have access to improved wastewater collection and treatment services. The Bank is also supporting a
reduction in the urban-rural divide in Egypt through a rural sanitation PforR to improve sanitation
services in rural areas. The National Rural Sanitation Program (NRSP) aims to ensure rapid delivery
of urgently needed sanitation services to rural households in three priority governorates in the Delta
Region (where the high water tables make contamination a particular health risk). At the same time,
the program builds in incentives for the governorate-level Water and Sanitation Companies to improve
their performance in terms of client engagement and accountability, financial sustainability and
technical efficiency – reforms which had largely been stalled in Egypt and which lie at the heart of an
                                                    38
approach of “fixing the institutions that fix the pipes, rather than just fixing the pipes.” IFC is prepared
to provide PPP advisory services to the GOE if requested to promote projects to the private sector in
waste-water treatment and desalination; is engaging with potential developers for financing the Abou
Rawash waste water treatment plant; and will explore options to finance private sector investments in
the water and waste water treatment sectors. While tariffs have been gradually increased for water
services, they remain well below cost recovery levels, and would need to be reviewed.

              Objective 3.5: Increased household access to natural gas

131. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Increasing household access to natural
gas will contribute to advancing the Twin Goals by extending natural gas service delivery to
disadvantaged and poor areas and increasing the disposable incomes of consumers. During the last
three years, shortages of gas supply (LPG) have emerged across the country, directly impacting the
poor, as they lack access to reliable and safe energy for cooking. The distribution network is informal
and inefficient, and it is often the women who must navigate this network, deal with persistent
shortages, and pay informal market prices, often with exorbitant rents.

132. Country Development Goals. The GOE’s objective is to move from the current system of LPG
to grid-connected natural gas, which would also allow the GOE to reduce their costs related to LPG
subsidies and provide more reliable and safer access of LPG to households. The GOE plans to connect
1.8 million households to natural gas networks, especially urban poor households, for cooking
purposes.

133. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. The Bank through it Household
Gas Connections project is providing households with access to natural gas for cooking, building on
the existing grid in greater Cairo, with 75 percent of the investment targeted to neighborhoods that
have poverty rates above the national average. As it is typically women who are charged with cooking,
they comprise the vast majority of the beneficiaries. It will also expand the grid in new areas with high
population density, where 40 percent of the neighborhoods have poverty rates above the national
average and 300,000 additional poor households are expected to receive connections. The project
includes support on reducing gas connection cost for poor households. Of the 11 governorates targeted
by the Bank, three are among the poorest in Upper Egypt. The move away from LPG will result in
Government budgetary savings from subsidies of approximately US$200 million a year. The Bank is
also supporting the development of a financing management plan and reporting systems for SOEs as
a step towards restructuring the debt and implementation of a financial sustainability plan. Technical
Assistance for Gas Sector Regulatory Development is also being provided.

              Objective 3.6: Improved education sector governance

134. Link to WBG Twin Goals and the Regional Strategy. Access to primary, secondary, and tertiary
education enhances human capital and facilitates the ability to take advantage of opportunities, thereby
reducing extreme poverty and increasing shared prosperity. Considerable challenges remain in terms
of improving governance of the system and learning outcomes for the country. Inequities in both
quantity and quality of education are largely due to limitations in the governance of the education
system, characterized by fragmentation in policy, financing, and administration, weak incentives for
civil servants (teachers) and absence of local citizen (parental) participation, and insufficient data
throughout the system down to the local school level. There is also an immediate need to focus on
skills development to address the issue of unemployment among youth and women.


                                                    39
135. Country Development Goals. In both the GOE’s Sustainable Development Strategy for 2030
and for many stakeholders, broader access and improved quality of education are top priorities. The
Strategy for 2030 identified a number of ambitious key performance indicators for achievements in all
levels of education. In addition, the GOE has announced two new initiatives, Beaidak (co-financed by
the UAE) and Forsa, both of which will provide training and skills tailored to the demands of the
private sector labor market. The constitutional amendment of 2014 has set increased spending targets
for education, and the authorities have stressed the need to improve the quality of education outcomes
and equip youth with the skills required by Egypt’s job market, to improve their economic
opportunities.

136. WBG Solutions – Expected Results from Current Operations. A Bank-supported project that
focused on expanding access to early childhood education in disadvantaged areas closed satisfactorily
in June 2014. The Bank has also recently delivered two key analytical documents: the Bank-OECD
report and the SABER WfD; both provide rigorous diagnoses of education and workforce development
challenges and actionable recommendations. The WBG’s E4E Initiative for Arab Youth is working
with the Information Technology Industry Development Agency (ITIDA), the executive arm of
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT), to identify and bridge the gap
between the skills needed by the ICT sector and those supplied by the education and training system.
Building on the existing E4E Initiative for Arab Youth, the WBG is also launching, in cooperation
with the Islamic Development Bank, the “Education for Competitiveness” (E4C) Initiative, which is a
global initiative whose first phase is focused on a regional approach in MENA, and which spans all
levels of education, from early childhood education to skills development and higher education. The
E4C initiative aims at promoting regional policy dialogue towards regional education targets, raise
awareness of the challenges in the education sector, strengthen accountability, and encourage increased
mobilization of resources to address the challenges.

137. WBG Solutions – Going Forward. Proposed WBG contributions in this area aim to address
inequities in quantity and quality of education stemming from fragmentation of policy-making and
lack of clarity in financing and management roles and responsibilities. The Bank is starting project
preparation for an education project in FY17. This is a new area of dialogue and considerable
preparatory work is needed before a common vision of a transformational project can be supported.

D. Implementing the Country Partnership Framework

138. The WBG support will be implemented using a combination of knowledge services, financial
support, and partnerships. The WBG is moving towards more than doubling its program compared
to the recent past, to a total of about $8 billion over FY15-19 – of which an indicative amount of about
$6 billion is requested by the authorities to come from IBRD (the volume and pace of IBRD lending
will depend on the implementation of the program including the ability to address macroeconomic
risks, choice of instruments and economic performance in the course of the CPF period, continued
GOE interest in IBRD financing, and IBRD’s lending capacity and demands from other borrowers)
and about $2 billion from IFC. IFC expects to commit about $250 million in FY16, rising to an average
of around $400-$500 million per annum in outer years, Similarly, the actual investments by IFC and
guarantees by MIGA during the CPF period will depend on improvements in macroeconomic stability
and progress in investment climate reforms that would boost investor confidence and facilitate greater
private sector participation. The Bank and IFC have identified three areas of collaboration during CPF
implementation and will develop joint implementation plans across the energy sector (Box 4).


                                                  40
Box 4. Areas of WBG Collaboration in Egypt
Bank and IFC teams have identified three key areas of collaboration during CPF implementation, assuming continued
commitment from the GOE to implement reforms: energy, youth skills development, and investment
climate/competitiveness, the latter two areas involve leveraging the Global Practices (GPs).
   Energy: While the Bank maintains its dialogue with the GOE on the sector reform and pricing revisions
    throughout the energy value chain, IFC will continue to provide advice on reforms needed to implement potential
    IPPs and PPPs in electricity generation. The WBG will identify avenues to (i) contribute to an overall energy
    strategy which addresses Egypt’s energy crisis; (ii) support private participation in new generation facilities,
    including shifting fuel mix toward renewables; (iii) support reforms in electricity distribution; (iv) identify
    incentives for energy efficiency; (v) provide direct support to industries and (vi) facilitate greater market uptake
    of renewable energy and energy efficiency through financial intermediaries. See paras 93 and 94 above for areas
    of potential institution-specific engagements.
   Skills development: As part of the Trade and Competiveness and Education GPs, IFC and Bank teams will work
    with GOE, employers, and post-secondary education/training providers, both public and private, to identify skills
    gaps, especially in growth sectors, and address these gaps by improving quality assurance and competency
    frameworks, regulatory frameworks governing investment and operation of education entities, availability of labor
    market information, and enhanced access to finance for students, in addition to a potential skills and competitiveness
    loan targeting specific industrial clusters. The focus will be on incentives and performance contracts, along with
    more comprehensive programming that includes employment services, internships, and on-the-job training. IFC
    will continue to look for investment opportunities to support skills development by the private sector across all
    levels of the education spectrum. The benefits of skills development will accrue to women and youth.
   Competitiveness: The Trade and Competitiveness joint GP will also focus on regulatory governance, investment
    processes, licensing and permits (including industrial licenses, construction permits, and access to land), clusters
    development, deeper value chain integration, and competition policy. Competition policy support may involve
    industry and sector specific support, in particular to remove barriers to competition in certain infrastructure
    sectors (with the relevant GPs).


139. For monitoring and evaluation, the Bank will continue to incorporate user oversight and
input, through transparent processes for community participation, open data systems to foster
more efficient citizen/beneficiary feedback, and effective program/project level grievance
redress systems to channel citizen mechanisms. The existing Egypt portfolio has mainstreamed
consultations to include a broad range of non-state actors. Citizen engagement has been
incorporated in the energy sector in the Household Natural Gas Connections Project through
strengthening customer service centers as well as a radio program to raise awareness about services
and safety-related issues. The Health Care Quality Improvement Project will introduce
independent user feedback mechanisms including customer satisfaction and grievance redress
mechanisms, supporting district level councils for patient’s rights, and mainstreaming automation
of medical records.

140. The Bank’s current portfolio in Egypt, with a net commitment of US$6.47 billion and
accounts for 41 percent of MENA active commitments. As of October, 2015, the active WBG
portfolio consists of 18 IBRD projects, 4 GEF operations, and 6 large Recipient Executed Trust
Funds. The portfolio almost doubled in FY10 with the approval of large commitments in response
to the financial crisis; commitments have been on the rise since then. The increase in lending,
mainly for infrastructure projects with large lumpy contracts and typically a two-year delay in
disbursements, depressed the disbursement ratio from 25 percent in FY09 to 14 percent in FY10,
while the aftermath of the January 2011 Revolution caused a further drop, to 7 percent in FY11.
Since FY12, the disbursement rate recovered to 23 percent at end-FY15 (Table 4 shows the
historical data).



                                                           41
                             Table 4. Egypt Portfolio at a glance from FY09-FY15
                                               FY09      FY10      FY11      FY12     FY13      FY14      FY15
        Portfolio and disbursements
         Active projects (#)                    15        22        23        22       25        26        26
         Net commitments ($m)                1,794     3,400     3,894    4,072     4,615     4,908     5,921
         Undisbursed balances($m)            1,542     2,884     3,205    3,242     3,380     3,308     3,584
         Disbursements in FY ($m)              113       298       173       378      448       372       750
         Disbursements ratio (%)                25%       14%        7%       10%      14%       11%       23%
         Slow disbursements (%)                  7%        5%        5%                 9%       12%       21%
        Portfolio riskiness
         Actual problem projects (#)             3         1         2         5        5         5         8
         Actual problem projects (%)            20%        5%       10%       25%      23%       20%       30%
         Projects at risk (%)                   27%        5%       10%       25%      23%       20%       29%
         Commit at risk (%)                     16%        4%        1%       10%       9%       20%       17%
         Proactive index (%)                    50%       67%      100%       50%      20%       60%      100%
         Realism index (%)                     100%                100%      100%     100%
         Effectiveness Delay (%)                33%       20%       20%       25%      14%       12%       13%
        Note: No of projects, disbursements and commitments include small RETFs <$5m, all other indicators
        excludes small RETFs. . The projects that closed during the FY and the amounts disbursed on these projects
        are not reflected in the table.


141. Trust Funds are an important component of the Bank’s support to Egypt. The Bank acts
as a platform for development partners and GOE to work cooperatively to support experimental
approaches, capacity building, and cutting-edge technical advice, while development partner
support, largely through country-specific trust funds, allows the Bank to leverage IBRD financing
of projects and programs and scale up coverage. As of October 2015, 58 trust funds support Egypt,
of which 39 are Bank-executed, and 19 Recipient-executed, totaling $306.9 million, focused on
agriculture and water, social protection, transport and ICT, and finance and private sector
development. The largest is the Wind Power Trust Fund, amounting to $150 million, followed by
the EU trust fund of €67.6 million ($85.8 m in October 2015) supporting social protection;
together, the two trust funds account for 75 percent of the trust fund portfolio.

142. To address portfolio implementation issues, the Bank and GOE have developed a Portfolio
Improvement Plan (PIP), with the objectives of reducing delays in effectiveness and portfolio
riskiness, increasing disbursement ratios, and thereby improving results. The principles of the
interventions are: (i) rapid restructuring, as needed; (ii) pro-active cancellations for non-
performing projects; (iii) no or limited extensions for problem projects unless there is a clear
restructuring plan; (iv) no new projects approved in sectors with non-performing projects going
forward; if performance improves significantly, lessons learnt reflected in the design of new
projects; and (v) focus on increasing implementation capacity including in procurement, financial
management, and safeguards.

143. The PIP focuses on two types of projects: those in sectors not aligned with CPF priorities;
and those in sectors aligned with CPF priorities that are not disbursing. Projects in sectors not
aligned with CPF priorities will be closed as scheduled within the next four years. These include
the power generation projects, Helwan South, Giza North, and Ain Sokhna, and the Airport
Project. These sectors all have a clear role for the private sector and IFC will seek opportunities
to invest in them, as appropriate. For projects in sectors aligned with CPF priorities that are not
disbursing, no new projects will be approved unless performance of on-going projects improves
significantly. For these projects, the Bank will undertake restructurings as needed, with on-time
closures.


                                                           42
144. To improve implementation capacity, the Bank will focus on the areas of public
procurement, financial controls, supreme audit institution development, and safeguards, an
engagement that will be broadened and deepened during the CPF period. Extra due diligence
will be exercised for procurement in high-value, highly complex transactions, and entry points will
be identified during project design. Advance procurement and TA as well as active engagement
with the GOE in modernizing procurement practices with the use of e-procurement and e-
disbursements to improve disbursements will also be needed. In addition, extra effort will be made
towards strengthening institutional capacity and compliance with safeguards to mitigate safeguard
issues during project preparation and implementation, in particular with respect to land acquisition
management, which has been a challenge facing all infrastructure projects.

145. Efforts to date have resulted in some significant portfolio improvements, although more
progress is needed. The disbursement ratio increased from 11 percent in FY14 to 23 percent in
FY15, and the share of effectiveness delays decreasing from 20 percent in FY11 to 13 percent in
FY15 (Table 4). Proactivity improved from 20 percent in FY13 to 60 percent in FY14 and 100
percent in FY15, and is significantly higher than the Regional and Bank averages (of around 65
percent). Nevertheless, more focused and strategic effort is needed at project, sector, and program
levels, including continued regular portfolio reviews, to have a well-performing portfolio. Specific
enabling mechanisms will need to be agreed upon with GOE to maintain progress with regard to
effectiveness delays after the election of Parliament.

146. For IFC, Egypt is the MENA region’s largest portfolio, amounting to around $1 billion,
almost half of which is in equity investments, across 36 companies, diversified in the financial
markets, infrastructure, oil and gas, agribusiness, manufacturing, and health care sectors (see
Annex 5 for details). IFC’s investments are complemented by a strong advisory program. IFC’s
Egypt program has increased since 2011 due to its support to the private sector when other
financing sources dried up. IFC’s portfolio has been performing relatively well given the
difficulties in the operating environment post-January 2011. IFC took a pro-active approach to
portfolio management including stress-testing all exposures, helping clients to restructure their
balance sheet, and cancelling selectively undisbursed commitments in agreement with clients.
With the exception of three investments underperforming pre-January 2011, the portfolio is current
with no delay in repayments to date. IFC will continue to monitor its portfolio actively with strong
portfolio and results measurement teams based in Egypt and other regional offices.

147. MIGA’s diversified portfolio in Egypt, a member since 1988, is the second largest in
MENA, with a gross exposure of $210 m as of the first quarter of FY15, in three active
guarantees in the oil and gas and manufacturing sectors. MIGA’s ongoing support to foreign
investors in Egypt has been during periods when the political risk insurance industry’s capacity
for Egypt had been constrained, sending a strong signal that MIGA is open for business in the
country.

148. Going forward, a focus on Parliamentary approval of loans, procurement, and land
acquisition issues is key to improve the implementation of Bank projects. Proposals include: (i)
early engagement with Parliamentary officials to ensure speedy ratification of loans; (ii) advance
procurement and TA as well as active engagement with the GOE in modernizing procurement
practices with the use of e-procurement and e-disbursements to improve disbursements; and (iii)
strengthening institutional capacity and compliance with safeguards to mitigate safeguard issues
during project preparation and implementation. These actions along with continued proactive
portfolio management will be needed to significantly improve the performance of the portfolio.
                                                43
                        VI.    MANAGING RISKS TO THE CPF PROGRAM

149. The risks discussed below are limited to those
                                                          Table 5. Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool
that would directly affect the WBG program, rather                            (SORT)
than general risks that could affect the larger                                                     Rating
economy or social fabric. They are summarized in                     Risk Categories
                                                                                                (H, S, M or L)
Table 5.                                                 1. Political                                 H
                                                         2. Governance                                H
150. Political: The risk is assessed as high. A          3. Macroeconomic                             H
number of decisions, including the approval of laws
                                                         4. Social                                    H
and regulations that are prerequisites for CPF
                                                         5. Sector strategies and policies            H
operational engagement, still need to be taken.
                                                         6. Institutional capacity for
Further political risks relate to the exclusion from        implementation and sustainability
                                                                                                      S
power and the public sphere, after July 2013, of parts
                                                         7. Fiduciary                                 S
of the electorate, and the possibility of resulting
                                                         8. Environment and social                    S
political backlash that could bring changes to the
                                                         9. Stakeholders                             M
current Government and affect the dialogue and
commitments between the GOE and WBG.                     Overall                                      H

Sporadic violence in the Sinai, if not contained, is
also a source of political risk.

151. Governance: The risk is assessed as high. Given the extent of governance issues (paras.
28-30), the GOE may find it difficult to introduce and enforce significant reforms. The success
of the Bank’s focus on sector-level governance issues through investment projects could also be
undermined by weak implementation of governance reforms, such as effective enforcement of
laws, at the central level. In particular, new laws to level the playing field, policies to stimulate
agricultural productivity, and more transparency and accountability for results in the education and
health sectors could threaten entrenched interests or be ineffective because of weak sanctions for
service providers who fail to perform to standards. On a positive note, however, President El-Sisi
and the GOE have implemented and are continuing to implement substantial reforms that had been
postponed for years for fear of popular uprising, which indicates the resolve of the current regime
to address key economic challenges. To guard against this risk, the WBG could step back from
supporting areas that lack good laws and policies, and carefully monitor the situation, while
keeping the dialogue going with the GOE.

152. Macroeconomic: The risk is assessed as high. President El-Sisi and his Cabinet have been
implementing key structural reforms since mid-2014 including: reducing energy subsidies,
introducing tax reforms, and moderating the growth in wage bill. Although these measures are
significant and should improve macroeconomic indicators and investor confidence level in the
short term, the risk of emerging or continuing external and/or domestic imbalances is high. While
exceptional Gulf inflows especially in FY14 helped support the external accounts, foreign
reserves started declining since the beginning of FY16, due to large debt repayments, the
unfavorable external environment, as well as CBE’s ongoing injection of foreign exchange to
meet import needs and foreign currency demand backlogs. The recent crash of Russian airline
would increase pressures on external accounts. The macro situation remains fragile also because
of potential slippage in implementing key reforms such as the VAT, containing the public sector
wage bill, and energy subsidy reforms, as well as vulnerability to regional instability and potential
external shocks. The GOE’s efforts to stimulate the economy by increasing investment spending
involve contingent liabilities and the plans to increase spending on health and education to meet
                                                 44
constitutional pledges may improve social stability but can also add to the macro risks if other
measures to contain the fiscal deficit are delayed. Bank operations, particularly approval of
subsequent DPFs, could be affected by any slowdown in the pace of implementation of structural
reforms. In addition, the absence of a speedy resolution of the shortage of foreign currency will
adversely impact investor confidence as well as both IFC’s and MIGA’s operations and ability to
attract foreign investments into Egypt during the CPF period. The WBG will monitor weekly the
macroeconomic situation in close coordination with the IMF.

153. Social: The risks are assessed as high. With high unemployment, lower standards of living,
and high food inflation, the risk of social disruption is real. Egypt experienced a backlash when
an escalating succession of labor and trade union strikes (doctors, taxi drivers, factory workers)
rocked the country in early 2014, threatening to coalesce into an all-out crisis; it was defused only
when the cabinet resigned in February 2014, eight months after its formation. How rapidly such
discontent unfolded then is a reflection of the high expectations of the Egyptian people after July
2013 and their growing impatience with the perceived slow pace of reforms. This risk could be
compounded by the adverse impact of further fuel subsidy cuts. The social protection mechanisms
to cover the entire marginalized and poor groups of the population have advanced through better
targeting and efficient programs, such as the introduction of new cash transfer programs and the
overhaul of the food subsidy system. However, the policies and institutions for expanding the
reach of social protection need to match with the pace of reforms envisaged in the DPF program,
especially on energy subsidies, fiscal revenue expansion and wage control. To mitigate these
risks, the Bank will support the Government on a comprehensive communication strategy on its
reform program, and require the institutionalization of a grievance redress mechanism and a
citizen outreach program to build greater acceptability of reforms within society.

154. Sector strategies and policies: The risk is assessed as high in the sectors targeted for WBG
engagement – financial inclusion, energy, transport, agriculture, water, health, and safety nets.
Risks include the level of ambition of shifting to a market approach in the energy sector, with few
successful global examples of the pace envisaged, the inability or unwillingness of the GOE and
sector ministries to address the absence of an energy efficiency institutional framework, lack of
availability of gas for energy sector projects, lack of clarity regarding the institutional structure
and governance arrangements for managing urban transport, systemic issues related to land
acquisition in energy/transport/water projects, fragmentation of health agencies in the provision,
financing, and regulation, the absence of a unified national registry for social safety nets linking
relevant databases, and the inefficiency of irrigation water under the current centrally administered
system of water allocation. The Bank is considering ways to mitigate these risks in new operations
and restructuring on-going operations in water supply and sanitation, health, and energy. IFC and
MIGA will assess these sector risks when considering supporting domestic and foreign investors
in these sectors. The GOE is well aware of most of these constraints and some are currently being
addressed.

155. Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability: The risk is assessed as
substantial. The institutional capacity of implementing agencies in social sectors, environment,
procurement, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation remains weak. There is also
uncertainty regarding the implementing agencies’ capacity to sustain the outcomes of the
operations, which would adversely affect the achievement of the development objectives of
projects financed under the CPF. The GOE recognizes this issue and is engaged in wide-reaching


                                                 45
administrative reforms. The WBG will support the GOE’s efforts by combining operational
engagements with substantial TA.

156. Fiduciary: The country-level fiduciary risks are assessed as substantial. The use of funds
may not achieve sufficient value for money with integrity, due to deviations from transparency
and fairness resulting from weak practices and unclear accountability. While the PFM
arrangements have been deemed adequate for budget support operations, concerns remain over
stagnation in key areas of PFM reform. 25 The Bank is engaged in dialogue and technical assistance
in the areas of financial controls, public procurement, and Supreme Audit Institution development,
an engagement that will be broadened and deepened during the CPF period. Extra due diligence
will be exercised for procurement in high value, highly complex transactions. New PforR
operations may increase the fiduciary risk associated with novel use of program systems in certain
sectors. Action plan recommendations will be made, with some tied to Disbursement Linked
Indicators, such as for internal audit and control arrangements, and complaints resolution
mechanisms.

157. Environmental and social: The risk is assessed as substantial. The interventions under the
CPF could have multi-dimensional environmental and social concerns. Egypt has a history of
weak institutional arrangements in implementing environmental and social management plans, and
for Resettlement Action Plans in particular, the risk exists that not all parties will be compensated
or resettled in a satisfactory manner. To mitigate this risk, capacity-building will be provided to
GOE and implementing agencies for the preparation, implementation, and supervision of specific
safeguard instruments, and will also cover the use of citizen engagement, grievance redress
mechanisms, and resettlement/compensation monitoring. The WBG will monitor this risk in
collaboration with the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency, and will continue to provide
technical guidance on environmental and social issues on case-by-case basis.

158. Stakeholder: The risk is assessed as moderate. The risk that stakeholders will oppose
specific CPF operations is considered low, following extensive stakeholder consultations.
Nevertheless, some risk stems from the potential disconnect between the priorities that emerged
in stakeholder consultations and Bank program. For example, education emerged as a top priority
in stakeholder consultations, and although the Bank is currently in dialogue with GOE on how to
achieve good quality education, the support provided in the education and skills modernization
project will not materialize before FY18. Significant risk exists that the Bank may not fully meet
stakeholder demands for voice, accountability, and transparency for infrastructure projects; the
Bank is mitigating this risk by supporting measures for social inclusion (through consultation, fully
functioning grievance redress mechanisms to promote citizen involvement, and ensuring
safeguards standards are followed), communicating lessons learnt, bringing in champions from
other countries working on safeguards, and carrying out intensive training on safeguards. IFC and
MIGA will continue to closely assess risks related to integrity due diligence and politically
exposed persons for each of its engagements in Egypt.




25
 In Bank-financed projects, as of end-FY14, 75 percent of operations (representing 86 percent of commitments) had
moderate FM risk, taking into consideration existing mitigating measures.
                                                       46
                                       ANNEX 1: CPF RESULTS FRAMEWORK

         Focus Area 1: Improved Governance
         Aligned with GOE 3 Year plan for administrative reforms to reduce corruption and implement
         decentralization to improve the quality and efficiency of public services


            WBG            CPF Focus Areas             CPF Objectives                           Country Challenges
            Goals

                                                                                            Fiscal consolidation is key for 
                                                                                          achieving pro‐poor growth,and in 
                                                          CPF Objective 1.1:             the Egyptian context this means (i) 
                                                           Improved fiscal                   incerasing revenues and (ii) 
                                                            management                      reducing public expenditures, 
                                                                                           improving their efficiency, and 
                                                                                          enhancing government revenues.




                                                                                        Reforms in expenditures, auditing, 
                                                          CPF Objective 1.2:            and public financial management 
                                                           Improved fiscal               are needed for effective service 
                                                            transparency                  delivery in the contecxt of the 
                                                                                           GOE's  investment program.




                         Focus Area 1: Improved           CPF Objective 1.3:                    Egypt needs to reform 
                              Governance                Establish evidence base           implementation capacity and an  
                                                        for performance‐based              overly complex organization of 
Reduced Poverty                                          public administration            the central state administration 
     and                                                                                    for effective service delivery.
   Increased            Focus Area 2: Improved 
     Shared             Opportunities for Private 
   Prosperity             Sector Job Creation
in a Sustainable                                          CPF Objective 1.4:
                                                                                            Many obstacles to job creating 
      Way                                                Strengthened citizen             growth and quality public services 
                                                        engagement in service             are due to the inability of citizens  
                          Focus Area 3:  Social                delivery                     to hold the state accountable.
                               Inclusion



                                                                                                Energy subsidies play a 
                                                          CPF Objective 1.5:              distortionary role in the economy. 
                                                                                          Reform of the subsidy scheme and 
                                                         Strengthened energy                improved sector governance is 
                                                          sector governance                needed to improve Egypt's fiscal 
                                                                                          situation and remove distortions.
              Focus Area 1:  Improved Governance 

    CPF Objective 1.1:   Improved fiscal management 
Challenges:                                                           Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ Fiscal consolidation is a key impediment for achieving               ‐ A Development Policy Financing on Fiscal 
       macroeconomic stability.                                               Stabilization, Sustainable Energy, and 
   ‐ Public expenditures need to be reduced and made                          Competitiveness 
       more efficient. 
   ‐ Government revenues need to increase through 
       broadening the tax base. 
    CPF Indicators (2018)            Supplementary Progress               WBG Program 
                                     Indicators (2016) 
1.1.1 Single unified tax rate for    Primary Balance:                 New:
all goods and services               Balance:  3.6% of GDP in 2015    DPF on Fiscal Stabilization, Sustainable Energy and 
Baseline: No (2015)                  Target (2016): 2.4% of GDP       Competitiveness 
Target: Yes (2018) 
 
1.1.2 Established tax credit 
system for direct and indirect 
inputs 
Baseline: No (2015) 
Target: Yes (2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
          




                                                                 48
        Focus Area 1:  Improved Governance  
         
    CPF Objective 1.2:   Improved fiscal transparency  
Challenges:                                                             Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ High public sector wages and limited control on its                    ‐ A Development Policy Financing on Fiscal 
       increasing path                                                          Stabilization, Sustainable Energy, and 
   ‐ Lack of audit function in the Ministry of Finance                          Competitiveness 
   ‐ Public Financial Management (PFM) institutional                        ‐ Technical assistance and policy dialogue on 
       weaknesses and system performance shortcomings                           PFM Strategy design and implementation, 
       that affect fiscal policy implementation, service                        modernization of Financial Controls and 
       delivery, and accountability.                                            Internal Audit, Public Investment Management 
   ‐ Absence of strategic direction to guide PFM reform                         (PIM) system assessment and reform, and 
                                                                                Public Procurement modernization.  
                                                                            ‐ Knowledge dissemination and awareness 
                                                                                raising on public finance Transparency and 
                                                                                Accountability.
                                                                            ‐ A Development Policy Financing on Fiscal 
                                                                                Stabilization, Sustainable Energy, and 
                                                                                Competitiveness 
    CPF Indicators (2018)           Supplementary Progress                  WBG Program 
                                    Indicators (2016) 
1.2.1 Established internal audit    MOF adopts a new PFM Strategy       New:
function in the Ministry of                                             DPF on Fiscal Stabilization, Sustainable Energy and 
Finance                             MOPAR adopts a PIM Reform           Competitiveness (IBRD) 
Baseline: No (2015)                 Roadmap                              
Target: Yes (2018)                                                      ASA:  
                                                                        Public Financial Management and Public Investment (IBRD 
1.2.2 Reduced central               Simplified ex‐ante financial        TA) 
Government wage and salaries        controls :                          Public Sector Reforms (IBRD TA) 
bill to nominal GDP                 Baseline: New manual issued 
Baseline: 8.2% (2015)               Target: Processes simplified and 
Target: 7.5% (2018)                 aligned with GFMIS 
                                     
1.2.3 Publish medium term debt      Public Investment Projects Data 
management strategy                 Bank  
Baseline: No (2015)                 Baseline: Not operational 
Target : Yes (2018)                 Target: Project databank 
                                    operational, including well‐
                                    classified investment projects 
                                    aligned with the development 
                                    strategy 
                                     
 
 
         
                                             




                                                                 49
          
         Focus Area 1:  Improved Governance  

    CPF Objective 1.3:   Established evidence base for performance‐based public administration  
Challenges:                                                         Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ Many  Government  entities  have  overlapping,                     ‐ Introduce  and  mainstream  the  European 
       duplicating  mandates  and  functions  resulting  in                 Union’s  institutional  performance  management 
       competition,  and  lack  of  cooperation  and                        framework (CAF) at the national level.  
       coordination;                                                    ‐ Implement  actions  to  simplify  the  number  of 
   ‐ Too  many  conflicting,  sometimes  contradictory  layers              administrative  procedures,  starting  at  the 
       and  pieces  of  legislation  (laws,  decrees,  decisions,           municipal  level  (construction  permits, 
       ordinances)  resulting  in  confusion  and  uncertainty  by          commercial permits, etc.) 
       both civil servants and citizens;                                ‐ Implement the provisions in law 18/2015 on 
   ‐ Absence  of  institutional  performance  management                    the civil service about performance‐based 
       framework,  and  absence  of  a  culture  of  performance            salary increase for individual civil servants 
       in the public administration;  
   ‐ Individual  performance  management,  is  in  practice, 
       based on seniority not on performance, merit, or skills. 
   ‐ Civil service is bloated, inward‐looking, inefficient, 
       and lacks motivation and responsiveness.   
   CPF Indicators (2018)          Supplementary Progress                WBG Program 
                                  Indicators (2016) 
1.3.1 Number of Government            Ministry of Planning, Monitoring
entities adopting and applying        and Administrative Reform           ASA: 
the EU institutional performance      receives accreditation from EU‐     Public Financial Management and Public Investment (IBRD 
management framework                  EIPA as sole provider of            TA) 
Baseline: 0 (2015)                    institutional performance           Public Sector Reforms (IBRD TA) 
Target : 15 (2018)                    certificates of compliance with 
                                      CAF 
 
1.3.2 Percentage of civil servants    100 mid‐level public officials 
receiving highest individual          trained by EIPA on institutional 
performance rate, following           performance management  
implementation of Law 18/2015                   
Baseline: 99.5% (2015) 
Target: 75% (2018)                    Simplified business process for 
                                      municipal administrative service 
                                      delivery adopted in 10 Cairo 
                                      municipalities and in 15 
                                      Alexandria municipalities 




          
              
                                                




                                                                    50
             Focus Area 1:  Improved Governance 

    CPF Objective 1.4:   Strengthened citizen engagement in service delivery 
Challenges:                                                            Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ Limited ability of citizens to hold policy‐makers and                 ‐ Sector level: projects and programs financed by 
       public sector entities accountable for the                              the Bank integrate suitable arrangements for 
       effectiveness and quality of service delivery.                          citizen engagement, for instance: (i) 
                                                                               consultations, (ii) providing citizens with 
                                                                               information on service delivery and enabling 
                                                                               them to provide feedback that is acted upon, 
                                                                               through grievance redress and other 
                                                                               mechanisms; (iii) results‐based incentives that 
                                                                               respond to client demand, (iv) information and 
                                                                               awareness campaigns on service delivery 
                                                                               standards, and (v) participation of non‐state 
                                                                               actors in implementation or monitoring. 

    CPF Indicators (2018)           Supplementary Progress                 WBG Program 
                                    Indicators (2016) 
1.4.1 Percentage of resolved        Transparency and accountability    New:
complaints in housing office:       mechanism established in the       Measures to enhance sector governance and citizen 
Baseline:0 (2015)                   housing sector.                    engagement incorporated in project and PforR operations 
Target: 90% (2018)                  Baseline:0 (2015)                  Upper Egypt Local Development Program (IBRD) 
1.4.2 Satisfaction survey           Target: 1 (2018)                    
undertaken in sanitation sector.                                       ASA: 
Baseline:0 (2015)                   Grievance redress mechanisms       Mainstreaming Beneficiary Feedback in Select Sectors (MENA 
Target: 1 (2018)                    functioning in the sanitation      MDTF TA)
1.4.3 Percentage of grievances      sector. 
addressed in stipulated             Baseline:0 (2015) 
timeframe in the Takaful and        Target: 1 % (2018) 
Karama cash transfer program         
Baseline:0 (2015)                    
Target: 70% (2018) 
 
 
 
 
              




                                                                51
         Focus Area 1:  Improved Governance 
             
    CPF Objective 1.5:   Strengthened energy sector governance 
Challenges:                                                      Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ Energy subsidies have a distortionary effect on the             ‐ Just‐in time TA for extensive analysis of the 
       economy.                                                          distribution impact of changes in energy prices 
   ‐ Improved sector governance is needed improved                       and safety net reforms. 
       effectiveness and efficiency.                                 ‐ A Development Policy Financing on Fiscal 
                                                                         Stabilization, Sustainable Energy, and 
                                                                         Competitiveness 
                                                                     ‐ Promote the development of regional and sub‐
                                                                         regional gas and electricity markets 

    CPF Indicators (2018)         Supplementary Progress             WBG Program 
                                  Indicators (2016) 
1.5.1 Reduction of energy                                        New:
subsidies as proportion of GDP                                   DPF on Fiscal Stabilization, Sustainable Energy and 
Baseline: 6.6%                                                   Competitiveness (IBRD) 
Target: 3.3% 
 
1.5.2 Increase in the average 
electricity tariff 
Baseline: 0.226 LE/kWh  
Target:  0.451 LE/kWh  




                                          




                                                            52
            
                  
                     Focus Area 2:  Improved Opportunities for Private Sector Job Creation  
               Aligned with GOE economic program pillar 2 ‘promoting economic rebound and job creation’ 
                

               WBG            CPF Focus Areas                       CPF Objectives              Country Challenges
               Goals

                                                                                                  Egypt’s private sector is 
                                                                                              characterized by an absence of 
                                                                  CPF Objective 2.1:           dynamism, where industrial 
                                                                Improved regulatory          policy has allowed monopolies to 
                                                               environment for private          flourish, and a complex and 
                                                                     investment               inefficient regulatory business 
                                                                                                 environment has hindered 
                                                                                                   business development.  


                                                                                             Due to power shortages , industry 
                                                                 CPF Objective 2.2:           is operating at 60‐70% capacity. 
                                                                  Increased  energy          More energy and a more effective 
                                                               generation capacity and        distribution systems is urgently 
                                                                   energy efficiency         needed to ensure reliable supply 
                              Focus Area 1:  Improved                                          to households and businesses.
                                    Governance

                                                                  CPF Objective 2.3:           Transportation infrastructure 
  Reduced                                                       Enhanced capacity and             bottlenecks serve as key 
 Poverty and                                                    safety of key transport      constraints to  trade, mobility, job 
  Increased                  Focus Area 2: Improved               infrastructure and          creation, service delivery across 
    Shared                   Opportunities for Private                  services             Egypt, specifically affecting spatial 
  Prosperity                   Sector Job Creation                                               development in the more  
                                                                                                    impoverished areas.
in a Sustainable 
      Way
                                                                                               Low agricultural productivity, lack 
                                                                  CPF Objective 2.4:             of  off‐farm opportunities and 
                                                                                                  inefficient water use are key 
                           Focus Area 3:  Social Inclusion       Enhanced access to                 constraints to  improving 
                                                                improved agriculture            livelihoods of rural farmers and 
                                                                and irrigation services            supporting agribusiness led 
                                                                                                  growth of the rural economy.


                                                                                              MSMEs have played a dominant 
                                                                  CPF Objective 2.5:         role in providing jobs, particularly 
                                                                                             for the poor. Access to finance is a 
                                                                  Enhanced access to          significant constraint in enabling 
                                                                  finance for MSMEs             MSMEs to grow and generate 
                                                                                                 employment opportunities.




                                                                  53
             Focus Area 2:  Improved Opportunities for Private Sector Job Creation  

    CPF Objective 2.1:   Improved regulatory environment for private investment 
Challenges:                                                     Solutions supported by the WBG: 
  ‐ Lack of dynamism in the formal private sector in terms of      ‐ Systemic  reforms  that  simplify  regulations,  reduce 
     business entry , growth, and innovation                         disparate  treatment  in  their  implementation  and 
  ‐ Policy  distortions  and  a  weak  competition  framework        eliminate  barriers  to  competition,  in  particular  at 
     constraint  competition  and  skew  investment  towards         the sector level. 
     large, capital‐intensive firms that do not create jobs.       ‐ Reforming  processes  for  incoming  investment, 
  ‐ Complexity  of  the  regulatory  environment,  unequal           industrial  licensing,  permits,  industrial  land 
     access  to  regulatory  services,  and  weak  insolvency        allocation, and the competition framework. 
     framework creates uncertainty for businesses and inhibits     ‐ Integrated  industry  and  region  specific  approaches 
     entry and exit.                                                 to  promote  competitiveness  and  job  growth 
  ‐ Poor value chain linkages and access to markets, including       through  investments  in  infrastructure,  institutions, 
     in terms of spatial integration between Lower and  Upper        capacities,  and  skills  and  targeted  regulatory  and 
     Egypt.                                                          economic  governance  reforms  in  key  sectors 
  ‐ Low  youth  employability  (especially  among  university        (including  ICT  and  agribusiness)  and  regions 
     graduates) due to skills mismatch impacting firm growth.        (including lagging regions).   
 
   CPF Indicators (2018)              Supplementary Progress        WBG Program 
                                      Indicators (2016) 
2.1.1 Number of firms benefiting    Business‐related regulations          Ongoing
from business regulation            made accessible online to the         Subnational Doing Business in Alexandria (WB/ IFC) 
Baseline: 0 (2015)                  public.                               Suez Canal Industrial Zone Development RAS (WB/IFC) 
Target : TBD (measured 3‐yrs                                              E4E ICT Sector Egypt – Labor Market information System and 
post completion)                    Government has approved               Quality Assurance Framework (WB/ IFC) 
                                    simplified industrial licensing       IFC investments in manufacturing/services/ chemicals (IFC)
2.1.2 Average Duration of           procedures.                            
Business Licensing Process                                                New 
Baseline: 320 Days (2015)           Commercial Mediation continues        Upper Egypt Local Development Program Integrated 
Target: 75 days (2018)              to resolve disputes and generate      Agriculture Development Program (IBRD) 
                                    private sector savings.               Equal Access and Simplified Environment (EASE) for 
                                    Mediation law presented to the        Investment in Egypt operation (TF) 
                                    parliament for approval by 2016.      Expected IFC investments in manufacturing/ services/ export‐
                                                                          oriented and high‐value‐added sectors (IFC) 
                                    Industrial Licensing System           Political risk insurance guarantees (MIGA) 
                                    Deployed in 10 subnational            DPF on Fiscal Stabilization, Sustainable Energy and 
                                    Branches (2018)                       Competitiveness (IBRD) 
                                                                           
                                    Number of trained youth in            ASA: 
                                    select sectors (ICT) increased by     Competitiveness and competition programmatic technical 
                                    14,000 (2018)                         assistance (WB/ IFC) 
                                                                          ICT investment policy and promotion (IFC) 
                                                                          Regional ASA (including Egypt) on privilege‐resistant 
                                                                          economic policies (WB/ IFC) 




                                                                 54
             Focus Area 2:  Improved Opportunities for Private Sector Job Creation  
    CPF Objective 2.2:  Increased energy generation capacity and energy efficiency  
Challenges:                                                 Solutions supported by the WBG:  
   ‐ Investments in energy generation have not kept up          ‐ Increase supply and reliability of electricity to 
       with sustained demand for electricity leading to             meet demand, including through private sector 
       frequent power shortages                                     participation as well as PPPs.  
   ‐ Generation capacity would need to more than double         ‐ Innovative financing models including a 
       by 2020 to reliably meet demand of households and            competitive bidding approach for supply of 
       businesses                                                   power from large scale renewable energy 
   ‐ Insufficient fuel supply has prevented utilization of          (including wind) for specific pre‐determined 
       existing power generation capacity                           sites on a Build, Own, Operate (BOO) basis. 
   ‐ There is significant untapped potential for renewable      ‐ Overall energy policy reform as well as 
       energy development and energy efficiency solutions.          strengthening of energy efficiency institutional 
                                                                    framework 
                                                                ‐  Invest in new and improving  transmission lines 
                                                                    that will facilitate the evacuation of power to 
                                                                    households 
   CPF Indicators (2018)           Supplementary Progress       WBG Program 
                                   Indicators (2016)             
2.2.1  Capacity of power       Preparation of a long term          Ongoing Portfolio:
generation constructed         strategy for fuel –to‐power by      Ain Sokhna Power Project (IBRD‐$600m)  
                               2016                                Wind Power Development Project (IBRD‐$70m) 
Conventional                                                       Giza North Power Project (IBRD‐$840m) 
Baseline: 0 (2014)             1,006 km of transmission lines      Helwan South Power Project (IBRD‐$585m) 
Target: 5500 MW (2018)         constructed by 2016 (Bank: 280      Transition Fund Energy/Social Safety Nets Sector reform 
                               km; IFC: 726 km)                    (IBRD TF) 
Renewable                                                          Several IFC Investments and one MIGA guarantee in Oil and 
Baseline: 0 (2014)             Power plants constructed at Giza    Gas 
Target: 250 MW (2018)          North by 2016, Ain Sokhna by         
                               2017, and Helwan by 2018            New: 
                                                                   Dairut IPP (IFC) 
                               Completion of transmission          Privately negotiated or competitively bid IPPs (gas generation 
                               infrastructure capable of           and renewable energy) (IFC) 
                               evacuating 3,000 MW of wind         Investing in sustainable energy finance projects directly and 
                               power by 2018                       through partner FIs (WB/IFC) 
                                                                   Investing in thermal and renewable projects under the feed 
                               Procedures for wind power           in tariff framework (IFC) 
                               integration by system operator      Investment in Oil and Gas (IFC) 
                               developed by 2016                    
                                                                   ASA: 
                               Establishment of Energy             Policy note on PPPs (IFC) 
                               Efficiency Unit at Ministry of      Policy note on energy efficiency (IBRD and IFC) 
                               Electricity & Renewable Energy      TA on Climate Efficient Industries (IFC) 
                               by 2016 




                                                           55
            Focus Area 2:  Improved Opportunities for Private Sector Job Creation  
    CPF Objective 2.3:   Enhanced capacity and safety of key transport infrastructure and services 
Challenges:                                                      Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ Transport infrastructure bottlenecks stand as key               ‐ Strategic improvements to key transport 
       constraints to trade, mobility, job creation and service          infrastructure, including airport and railway 
       delivery.                                                     ‐ Strengthen capacity of key stakeholders in 
   ‐ Poor transportation and connectivity hinders spatial                strategic sector planning 
       development, particularly in the more impoverished            ‐ Improve safety, efficiency, and reliability of 
       areas of the Nile Delta and Upper Egypt.                          railway services.
                                                                     ‐ Improve connectivity (transport and ICT) in 
                                                                         lagging regions.
   CPF Indicators (2018)        Supplementary Progress               WBG Program 
                                Indicators (2016) 
2.3.1 Passengers that can be      A plan for the institutional         Ongoing:
served through TB2 terminal at    development of the Greater           Cairo Airport Development– TB2 (IBRD‐$280m) 
Cairo Airport in one day          Cairo Transport Regulatory           Egypt National Railways Restructuring (IBRD‐$600m) 
(number)                          Agency (GCTRA) has been               
Baseline:    21,000 (2013)        formally adopted by GCTRA’s          New: 
Target:       25,000 (2016)       supervisory board by the end of      Potential investment in transport sector (including ports and 
                                  2015.                                airports when feasible) (IFC)   
2.3.2  Average number of                                               Upper Egypt Local Development Program (IBRD) 
fatalities due to railway                                               
                                  A new airport terminal 
accidents on the ENR network                                                         (i) ASA: 
                                  completed in Cairo and certified 
(number per billion passenger–
                                  as reaching level B of IATA level 
km)                                                                    TA on Urban Transport (IBRD)
                                  of service by 2016  
Baseline: .595 (2014) 
Target:  0.3 (2018)                
                                  60% of strategic 
                                  recommendations of the air 
                                  transport studies/plans 
                                  implemented by 2016 
                                   
                                  Modernized signaling system on 
                                  Cairo‐Alexandria line 
                                  operational by 2019 
                                   
                                  Studies to support the 
                                  restructuring of Egypt National 
                                  Railways completed by 2019 




                                                                56
             Focus Area 2:  Improved Opportunities for Private Sector Job Creation  
    CPF Objective 2.4:   Enhanced access to improved agriculture and irrigation services  
Challenges:                                                             Solutions supported by the WBG: 
   ‐ Current system of water allocation and utilization is               ‐ Improve irrigation and drainage infrastructure and 
       not efficient                                                         establish Water User Associations to take over 
   ‐ Low agricultural productivity and lack of off‐farm                      responsibilities for allocating irrigation water 
       opportunities                                                         among members  
   ‐ Egypt's logistics sector adds significant cost and time             ‐ Institutional modernization in areas such as 
       in the trade operations, especially for agribusiness                  farmer business management, agribusiness 
       exporters                                                             development, crop procurement  
   ‐ Significant gaps in supply‐chain logistics which limit              ‐ Create a more conducive operating environment 
       farmers distribution networks                                         for domestic and international logistics service 
                                                                             providers agribusiness space 
                                                                         ‐ Promote MENA Water Security Initiative to 
                                                                             develop innovative solutions and share knowledge 
                                                                             on addressing water scarcity challenges 
    CPF Indicators (2018)               Supplementary Progress              WBG Program 
                                        Indicators (2016) 
2.4.1  Water users provided with    Operational water user              Ongoing:
new/improved irrigation and         associations reach more than        Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management (IBRD‐
drainage services (number)          1500 by 2016 (up from  494 in       $200m) 
Baseline: 1,073,000 (2014)          2014)                               National Drainage (IBRD $80m) 
Target: 1,400,000 (2018)                                                Farm Level Irrigation and Modernization (IBRD $100m) 
                                    Area provided with improved         Enhanced Water Resources Management  (TF $6.7m) 
2.4.2 Higher value horticulture     irrigation and drainage services    Investment in Wadi Group, a major agribusiness player in 
crops grown (number)                increase from 450,000 ha in         Egypt (IFC $25m) 
Baseline:0 (2015)                   2014 to 675,000 ha in 2016          Risk‐sharing facility with regional bank for agri‐commodities 
Target: 12,000 (2018)                                                   (IFC $20m) 
                                    15 new technologies                  
                                    demonstrated in the project         New: 
                                    areas by 2016                       Integrated Agriculture Development Program (IBRD)  
                                                                        Potential IFC investments in agribusiness (IFC) and Fast 
                                    Agreement on alternative model      Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) sectors 
                                    for PPPs in irrigation               
                                    management                          ASA: 
                                                                        Land Acquisition and Institutional Reform 




                                                                 57
            Focus Area 2:  Improved Opportunities for Private Sector Job Creation  

    CPF Objective 2.5:   Enhanced access to finance for medium, small and micro‐enterprises (MSMEs) 
Challenges:                                                  Solutions supported by the WBG: 
   ‐ MSMEs lack access to external financing for both            ‐ Lines of credit for MSMEs.  
       working and investment capital                            ‐ Reforms to streamline and improve the 
   ‐ MSMEs lack capacity to prepare business plans and               regulatory and legal framework, including a 
       loan applications, have opaque or non‐existent                secured transaction law and a moveable assets 
       financial statements, and insufficient collateral             registry. 
   ‐ MSMEs face non‐financial issues, including                  ‐ Mobilize investments in the financial sector to 
       cumbersome legal and regulatory framework as well             help increase access to finance for MSMEs. 
       as a highly bureaucratic system                           ‐ Target underserved segments of society, 
   ‐ A large majority of Egyptian women lack access to               including women rural areas. 
       the formal financial sector.                              ‐ Provision of advisory services to banks and 
   ‐                                                                 MFIs to better serve MSME clients 
                                                                 ‐  
   CPF Indicators (2018)             Supplementary Progress      WBG Program 
                                     Indicators (2016) 
2.5.1 MSME portfolio of          Development of a strategy to       Ongoing Portfolio:
Financial Institutions           expand access to finance,          Enhancing Access to Finance for MSEs Project (IBRD‐$300m)  
participating in WBG financed    especially in the underserved      Promoting Innovation for Inclusive Financial Access Project 
interventions                    regions (such as Upper Egypt)      (IBRD‐$300m) 
Baseline: $3.2 billion (2014)    by 2019                             
     a) Bank: $1.9 bln                                              New with firm request received: 
     b) IFC: $1.3 bln            A developed NBFI regulator and     Inclusive Regulations for Microfinance (IBRD Transition Fund) 
Target: $14.5 billion (2019)     a more sound Egyptian              Potential debt/ equity investments in finance institutions to 
      a) Bank: $12.5 bln         Financial Supervisory Authority    support MSMEs including with GTFP support (IFC) 
      b)  IFC:  $2.0 bln         (EFSA)                             Regional MENA MSME Facility (joint World Bank/IFC) 
                                                                     
2.5.2  Women served through                                         ASA:  
the line of credits                                                 Microfinance (IFC TA) 
Baseline:    2,963 (2014)                                           SME banking through IFC Business Edge/ Toolkit (IFC TA)  
Target:       35,000 (2018)                                         Corporate Governance (IFC TA) 
                                                                    SME banking (IFC TA) 
     




                                                              58
             Focus Area 3:  Social Inclusion 
             Aligned with GOE economic program pillar 3 ‘enhancing social protection and social service delivery’


     WBG                  CPF Focus Areas                  CPF Objectives               Country Challenges
     Goals
                                                                                          The system of social safety net programs is 
                                                            CPF Objective 3.1: 
                                                                                           complex, fragmented and the targeting 
                                                           Improved access to  
                                                                                            mechanisms have been inefficient and 
                                                           short‐term income 
                                                                                        ineffective in alleviating poverty. The number 
                                                          opportunities for the 
                                                                                            of beneficiaries remains far below the 
                                                           poor and increased 
                                                                                            estimated poverty headcount, and the 
                                                          coverage of the Social 
                                                                                         amount of cash benefits well below what is 
                            Focus Area 1:                   Safety Net System
                                                                                           needed to lift recipients out of poverty.
                              Improved 
                             Governance                                                    Access to Healthcare remains extremely 
                                                                                          varied across the country, quality of care is 
  Reduced                                                  CPF Objective 3.2:           uneven, particularly in rural areas, with many 
 Poverty and                                              Increased access to           facilities poorly equipped, maintained, staffed 
                            Focus Area 2:                  quality health care                     and lacking basic drugs and 
  Increased                   Improved                           services                supplies.Widespread dissatisfaction with the 
    Shared                Opportunities for                                               poor quality of health services is leading to 
  Prosperity              Private Sector Job                                               low utilization rates of public providers.
in a Sustainable               Creation
      Way                                                                              Access to affordable housing in Egypt remains 
                                                                                       a major challenge for low‐ and middle‐income 
                                                           CPF Objective 3.3:            households as archaic rent‐control policies 
                         Focus Area 3:  Social            Increased access to             have led to the rapid growth of informal 
                              Inclusion                 housing for low‐income         housing production. The housing shortage and 
                                                              households                  corresponding lack of financial access is 
                                                                                            particularly acute for the 10 million 
                                                                                                    impoverished youth. 

                                                                                        Waterborne diseases  have significant health 
                                                           CPF Objective 3.4:  
                                                                                         and economic impacts.   Nile river drainage 
                                                          Enhanced access to 
                                                                                          canals are heavily polluted by inadequate 
                                                         sanitation and sewage 
                                                                                        sanitation, dumping of garbage and outdated 
                                                         services in rural areas
                                                                                                  water treatment systems

                                                                                          Households lack access to reliable and safe 
                                                                                            energy for cooking. Significant capital 
                                                          CPF Objective 3.5:             investments are also required to finance the 
                                                         Increased household           growing expansion of distribution networks that 
                                                         access to natural gas               is rapidly taking place under a robust 
                                                                                         Government program to increase household 
                                                                                              access to the natural gas networks.

                                                                                         Challenges remain in terms of poor learning 
                                                                                            outcomes which are linked to lack of 
                                                          CPF Objective 3.6:
                                                                                       governance. According to international student 
                                                          Improve education 
                                                                                        assessment data, education outcomes are not 
                                                          sector governance
                                                                                         only low on average but also exhibit a wide 
                                                                                       disparity by region and socio‐economic status.




                                                                  59
             Focus Area 3:  Social Inclusion 

    CPF Objective 3.1:  Improved access to short‐term income opportunities for the poor and increased coverage of 
    the Social Safety Net System 
Challenges:                                                             Solutions supported by the WBG: 
   ‐ Social Safety Net programs are complex and                             ‐ Labor Intensive Public Works which aim to 
       fragmented, leading to inefficiencies and weak                           create short‐term employment and to provide 
       targeting of the poor.                                                   basic infrastructure.   
   ‐ The number of beneficiaries remains far below the                      ‐ Support for the creation of a platform for a 
       estimated poverty headcount, and the amount of                           targeted social safety net system. 
       cash benefits well below what is needed to lift many                 ‐ Improve the understanding of the distributional 
       of the recipients out of poverty.                                        impact of current subsidies and the potential 
   ‐ Reforms to the social safety nets are needed to                            impact of proposed changes in energy prices. 
       mitigate adverse impacts of energy subsidy reform.                   ‐ Strengthen communication efforts for energy 
                                                                                pricing reform and ensure transparency of the 
                                                                                process. 
    CPF Indicators (2018)               Supplementary Progress              WBG Program 
                                        Indicators (2016) 
3.1.1 Beneficiaries of Active       1,380 Labor Intensive Public        Ongoing 
Labor Intensive Public Works        Works Sub‐projects under            Emergency Labor‐Intensive Investment Project (IBRD $200m) 
program (number)                    implementation                      Emergency Employment Investment Project (IBRD EU‐TF 
Baseline: 0 (2014)                                                      $94m) 
Target: 240,000                     Action plan in place by 2016 to     Transition Fund Grant to support implementation of unified 
     a) 40 percent are female       adopt the unified registry under    registry and Technical Working Group on Cash Transfer 
     b) 70 percent are from         coordination of MOAD                Program (IBRD TF) 
        Upper Egypt                                                     Social Safety Nets Project (IBRD $400m) 
     c) 60 percent are youth        A baseline survey of                 
                                    beneficiaries to identify           ASA: 
3.1.2 Households registered in      undercoverage of poor and           Social Safety Nets/ Pensions TA (IBRD MDTF) 
unified SSN registry (number)       vulnerable in existing programs      
Baseline: 0 (2014)                  completed by 2016 
Target: 10 million (by 2016)         
                                    A communication strategy for 
3.1.3 Poor households benefiting    fuel subsidy reform including 
from the new Cash Transfer          public consultation is prepared 
Program (number)                    by December 2015 
Baseline: 0 (2014)                   
Target: 1.5 million                 An energy pricing and fuel 
                                    switching strategy, including 
                                    action plan to mitigate the 
                                    impact of subsidy removal is 
                                    developed by Dec. 2016. 




                                                                  60
        Focus Area 3: Social Inclusion

    CPF Objective 3.2:  Increased access to quality health care services  
Challenges:                                                          Solutions supported by the WBG: 
   ‐ Access to healthcare remains extremely varied across                ‐ Expand family health services that target the 
       the country.                                                          bottom 40%. 
   ‐ Healthcare quality is uneven, particularly across                   ‐ Promote the establishment of PPPs for the 
       income groups and in rural areas, with many facilities                delivery of family health services, especially in 
       poorly equipped, maintained, staffed and often                        poor urban slums.   
       lacking in basic drugs and supplies.  
        
   CPF Indicators (2018)            Supplementary Progress               WBG Program 
                                    Indicators (2016) 
3.2.1 Targeted family healthcare    Targeted family healthcare       Ongoing:
facilities in the poorest ten       facilities in the poorest ten    Healthcare Quality Improvement Project (IBRD $75m) 
Governorates receiving              Governorates that have           Two portfolio investments in Magrabi Egypt & Dar Al Fouad 
accreditation certification         submitted Quality Improvement    (IFC $29m) 
Baseline: 0 (2014)                  and Maintenance Plans by 2016    IFC supported Public‐Private Partnerships in Alexandria 
Target: 400 (2017)                  BL: 0 (2014)                     Hospitals (IFC) 
                                    Target: 1,000 (2016)              
3.2.2 People with access to a                                         
basic package of health, 
nutrition or population services 
Baseline: 0 (2015) 
Target: 1,000,000 (2017)   
 

                                             




                                                               61
        Focus Area 3: Social Inclusion

    CPF Objective 3.3:  Increased access to housing for low‐income households 
Challenges:                                                            Solutions supported by the WBG: 
   ‐ Inability of low‐ and middle‐income households to                     ‐ Establish a new Social Housing Fund to be the 
       have access to affordable housing.                                      unified organization responsible for the social 
   ‐ The social housing sector is fragmented and its                           housing programs in Egypt 
       programs are poorly managed and coordinated                         ‐ Establish a transparent and economically 
   ‐ Lack of comprehensive and long‐term housing policy                        efficient demand‐side subsidy system to 
       to guide housing programs and ensure that all                           facilitate access to new and existing housing for 
       segments of society are addressed                                       low‐income households. 
                                                                           ‐ Reform the current supply‐side housing subsidy 
                                                                               system for the low and middle income sectors. 
    CPF Indicators (2018)             Supplementary Progress               WBG Program 
                                      Indicators (2016) 
3.3.1 Number of targeted          Number of targeted households            Ongoing:
households accessing ownership    residing in “new” units with             Inclusive Housing Finance Program (IBRD $500m) 
and rental housing units with     support from the program              
support from the Program          Baseline: 0 (2014) 
(number)                          Target: 110,000 (2016)  
Total                              
Baseline: 0 (2015)Target:         Number of targeted households 
575,000 (2019)                    residing in “previously existing” 
                                  units with support from the 
Of which in the bottom 20% of     Program 
the income distribution           Baseline: 0 
Baseline: 0 (2015)                Target:  20,000  (2016) 
Target: 50% (2019)                 
                                  Housing M&E system 
Of which female‐headed            functioning and informing the 
households                        Multi‐Year Plan and Annual 
Baseline: 0 (2015)                Targets 
Target: 20% (2019)                Baseline: No (2014) 
                                  Target: Yes (2016) 
 
 




                                                                 62
         Focus Area 3: Social Inclusion

    CPF Objective 3.4:   Increased access to  sanitation and sewage services in rural areas 
Challenges:                                                       Solutions supported by WBG: 
   ‐ While at least 85 percent of rural households have               ‐ Provide populations in targeted Governorates 
       some type of sanitary facility (usually a septic tank),            with increased access to improved sanitation 
       only a limited percentage of villages have facilities for          and sewerage services 
       safe collection, conveyance, and treatment of                  ‐ Strengthen the institutional framework for 
       wastewater.                                                        addressing sanitation issues in rural areas 
   ‐ Wastewater is discharged (usually without treatment)             ‐ Build effective sector institutions to deliver 
       to agricultural drains and sometimes to canals causing             waste services leveraging public resources, 
       a grave threat to public health.                                   attracting private sector and finding a role for 
   ‐ The Egyptian water and wastewater sector has                         the informal sector  
       operated under a regime of restricted pricing policies, 
       limited investment programs, and under‐financing of 
       operational activities. 
    ‐     
    CPF Indicators (2018)              Supplementary Progress              WBG Program 
                                       Indicators (2016) 
3.4.2 Users in rural areas with    45 decentralized Wastewater         Ongoing:
access to improved sanitation      Treatment Systems implemented       Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infrastructure 1 & 2 
and sewerage services              in rural areas by 2016              (IBRD $120m and $200m) 
Baseline: 0 (2014)                                                     Rural Sanitation (IBRD $550m) 
Target:  2,483,000, (2019)         Share of households contributing     
                                   to operation and maintenance of     New: 
                                   decentralized systems reaches       Potential IFC investments in PPP support/investment in 
                                   25% by 2016 up from 0% in 2014      waste‐water services (IFC) 
                                                                        
                                   Revised National Strategy for        
                                   Rural Sanitation adopted (2017) 
                                    
                                   New National Tariff Structure to 
                                   allow for sustainable cost 
                                   recovery prepared and   
                                   approved (FY17) 




                                                               63
        Focus Area 3: Social Inclusion
            
    CPF Objective 3.5:  Increased household access to natural gas 
Challenges:                                                    Solutions supported by the WBG:  
   ‐ Households lack access to reliable and safe energy for        ‐ Investment in household gas expansion, 
       cooking, with gas (LPG) shortages emerging over the             targeting areas where cooking gas is currently 
       last three years.                                               in short supply or where households have to 
   ‐ Women are particularly affected by gas shortages, as              pay exorbitant prices. 
       they must navigate this inefficient network, deal with      ‐ Reform in the sector, particularly related to 
       persistent shortages, and pay informal market prices,           sector regulation and utility customer 
       often with exorbitant rents.                                    responsiveness. 
   ‐ Fuel subsidies including those associated with LPG gas        ‐ Support a reduction in Government costs 
       for household use are an important source of the                related to fuel subsidies through fuel switching 
       large fiscal deficit.                                           from LPG to natural gas. 
   CPF Indicators (2018)             Supplementary Progress        WBG Program 
                                     Indicators (2016) 
3.5.1 Households connected to      4,500 km of new household gas         Ongoing:
the natural gas networks under     distribution networks installed in    Household Natural Gas Connections Projects  (IBRD $500m) 
program                            target areas by 2016                  Transition Fund Energy/Social Safety Nets Sector reform 
Baseline:  0 (2014)                                                      (IBRD TF) 
Target: 1.5 million (2019)         Financial management plan and         Apache Energy‐oil and gas (MIGA) 
                                   reporting systems in place for         
3.5.2 Double the number of poor    targeted state owned                  ASA: 
households connected to natural    enterprises.                          Programmatic TA‐Energy Dialogue (IBRD) 
gas networks                       by 2016.                               
Baseline: 300,000 (2014)            
Target: 600,000 (2019)             Government annual savings 
                                   from reduction in LPG imports 
3.5.2 Female project               due to decreased LPG 
beneficiaries from Household       consumption in the targeted 
Gas Connections Project            project areas. (LE) 
Baseline: 0                        Baseline:    0 (2014) 
Target; 50% (2019)                 Target:      LE298 million (2018) 
         




                                                                 64
        Focus Area 3: Social Inclusion
    CPF Objective 3.6:  Improved education sector governance 
Challenges:                                                  Solutions supported by the WBG:  
   ‐ The education system is characterized by inequities in      ‐ Programmatic TA to inform a proposed IBRD 
       quantity and quality of education.                            operation addressing higher education 
   ‐ There is fragmentation of policy‐making and lack of             financing and quality assurance. 
       clarity in financing and management roles and             ‐ Promote regional initiatives aimed at improving 
       responsibilities.                                             the quality and accountability of the 
   ‐ There is a scarcity of skilled workers.                         educational system ( the E4C initiative) 
   CPF Indicators (2018)            Supplementary Progress       WBG Program 
                                    Indicators (2016) 
3.6.1                                SABER – EMIS completed (2016)        New:
A rigorous diagnosis and                                                  Education Skills Modernization Project (IBRD) 
actionable improvement in the        SABER EMIS would provide              
education governance is in place     rigorous diagnosis and areas for     New: 
Baseline:0 (2015)                    actionable improvement               Programmatic TA on: 
Target: 1 (2018)                     towards improved information         i) Educational sector budget Reform 
                                     sharing and accountability at the    ii) EMIS; 
                                     school level.                        iii) Teacher policy reform 
                                                                          iv) Higher  education:  university  financing  and  quality 
3.6.2  Issuance of Higher            Policy notes to support the                    assurance 
Education Law and Higher             finalization of the higher            
Education Strategy in                education strategy and higher 
compliance with international        education law (2016); 
good practice                         
Baseline:0 (2015)                    Action Plan for the Education 
Target: 1 (2018)                     Development Fund – driven by 
                                     the governance assessment 
                                     (2016) 
                                      
                                     Manual of procedures towards 
                                     improved accountability in 
                                     school‐level budget setting 
                                      
                                      
              




                                                                  65
ANNEX 2: COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW




                     ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

          COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW FY06-14




                           OCTOBER 10, 2015

            PREPARED BY ALIYA HUSAIN AND BUSHRA MOHAMMAD




                                  66
                                        INTRODUCTION


This Completion and Learning Review (CLR) is a self-evaluation by the World Bank Group
(WBG) of the joint Egypt Country Assistance Strategy (FY06-11) and Interim Strategy Note
(FY12-14). This CLR: i) evaluates CAS and ISN performance in achieving WBG expected
outcomes; ii) assesses WBG performance in the design and implementation of the program; iii)
discusses program alignment with the WBG’s strategic goals of eliminating extreme poverty and
boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner; and, iv) draws lessons to inform the scope and
structure of the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) under preparation.

The World Bank and IFC presented a joint CAS in May 2005 for the period FY06-09 to the
Board of Executive Directors. The CAS objectives were developed against a backdrop of
improving growth and investment rates and were closely aligned with the priorities of the
Government’s economic reform program. The overall CAS objectives were to: i) facilitate private
sector development; ii) enhance the provision of public services; and iii) promote equity. Under
these pillars, selectivity was exercised by giving priority to sectors for which there was clear
Government commitment and which had greatest potential to promote private sector-led
growth. A joint CAS Progress Report was subsequently presented to the Board in June 2008 and
extended the CAS period from FY09 to FY11 to synchronize the strategy with the elections in the
country.

Preliminary work on a new country strategy was initiated in early FY11 but was halted by
the unprecedented events of the Arab Spring in 2011. Since no new strategy had been
developed by that stage, no CAS Completion Report was prepared either. Given the profound
political and economic uncertainty in Egypt, IBRD and IFC instead moved rapidly to present a
joint Interim Strategy Note (ISN) in June 2012 outlining an indicative program of support for the
period from June 2012 through December 2013. Although initiated in a very different context
compared to the CAS, the ISN pillars of economic management, jobs and inclusion were broadly
similar with the exception that a serious deterioration of the macro-fiscal situation in the immediate
post-revolutionary period warranted a stronger and more explicit emphasis on macroeconomic
management.

This CLR assesses progress made during both the CAS and ISN but does so against the
outcomes identified in the ISN Results Framework. The rationale for this approach is based on
two factors: i) the ISN pillars were largely derived from the existing CAS results framework but
updated to reflect the altered operating context; ii) the sectoral interventions identified under the
CAS and ISN were substantially the same (although some newly relevant outcome indicators were
added) as the focus of the ISN was to sustain the performance of the ongoing portfolio rather than
initiating new lending during the short (18-month) ISN implementation period.

Overall progress in achieving CAS and ISN objectives is rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory. Despite the overall Moderately Unsatisfactory rating, it should be noted that there
were areas of substantial progress including in private sector development, the financial sector,
air/water quality, and gender. Out of 13 CAS/ISN objectives, four were fully achieved, one was
mostly achieved, seven were partially achieved and one was not achieved.26

Overall World Bank Group performance in                         Table 1: Summary of Ratings 27
designing and implementing its strategy is Pillar 1: Economic Management                       MU
rated good. The program of lending and non- 1.1 Reduce fiscal deficit                          PA
lending activities supported by the WBG was 1.2 Increasing transparency                        PA
relevant and addressed priorities of the Pillar 2: Jobs                                        MS
Governments in power during this tenure. Prior to     2.1 Private Sector Development            A
                                                      2.2 Financial Sector Development          A
the 2011 revolution, the program was anchored in 2.3 Infrastructure
the      Mubarak       Government’s       National (Energy/Transport/Telecom)                  PA
Development Agenda which consolidated and 2.4 Education                                        MA
deepened pro-growth reforms in the context of a 2.5 Trade                                      PA
deteriorating global environment (as a result of Pillar 3: Inclusion                           MU
the food and financial crises). After the 3.1 Water/Sanitation                                 PA
                                                      3.2 Air and Water Quality                 A
revolution, the program needed to be adjusted.
                                                      3.3 Health                               NA
The Bank Group promptly responded to the needs 3.4 Social Safety Nets                          PA
of its clients and focused increased resources on 3.5 Upper Egypt                              PA
key sectors. The CAS Progress Report and the 3.6 Gender                                         A
subsequent ISN correctly identified the risks to Key
CAS outcomes and the appropriate mitigation not achieved                                       NA
measures. The CAS Progress Report supported a         partially achieved                       PA
                                                      mostly achieved                          MA
mid-course adjustment, namely scaling up the achieved                                           A
Bank Group’s support in the financial sector and
infrastructure in the midst of strong economic performance at that time. In terms of efficacy, this
support has yielded some good results notably in the financial sector, private sector development,
air/water quality, and gender. However, results were not achieved in some key areas, including in
the health sector. Also, the political turmoil did affect Bank Group’s engagement, for example,
expected progress on the energy subsidy issue was hampered by the political situation. The WBG
collaboration during the strategy period was particularly important and saw IFC emerge as one of
the leading IFIs in the area of private sector development28. IBRD-MIGA interaction has also
been strengthened with MIGA providing inputs to both strategies under review.

After the revolution, the Bank Group readjusted its engagement with the ISN in line with
Government priorities. The Bank Group needed to build credibility with the new authorities
and stakeholders who had led the revolution. The ISN lending program was modest, anchored in
a Bank-financed Emergency Labor Intensive project (approved in June 2012) which was focused
on job creation. While lending program was modest, a key focus during this period was
dissemination of knowledge and advisory services and the initiation of substantial dialogue in key
areas, including gender, governance, energy subsidies, financial sector reforms, and transport. The



26
   A detailed analysis of achievement by objective can be found in Attachment 1.
27
   The document refers to pillars from the ISN. However, all the specific results which are referenced encompass both the
CAS and ISN.
28
   IFC total commitments between FY11-14 reached around US$1 billion, of which US$340 million was mobilized
from other lenders.


                                                          68
Bank also instituted the beneficiary feedback mechanisms to better respond to stakeholders’ needs
and demands.

OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES

Pillar 1: Economic Management. This pillar is rated moderately unsatisfactory because of little
progress in reducing the fiscal deficit and in increasing transparency of public sector management.

              The outcome of effective implementation of the Government’s plan to gradually
               reduce fiscal deficit was partially achieved. The Government was unable to rein in
               public expenditures, including subsidies, and implement much needed tax reforms
               during most of the CAS period. As a result, the fiscal deficit worsened during this
               period. In FY10, the deficit was at 8.1 percent of GDP and in FY13, it was at 13.7
               percent of GDP, and slightly improved to 12.8 percent in FY14. The ISN lending
               program envisaged a DPL on governance and safety net reforms on the back of an IMF
               program, but the IMF program did not transpire because of Government inability and
               unwillingness to tackle the energy subsidy reform. The Bank was able to advance the
               dialogue with the authorities on fiscal sustainability, notably on the energy subsidy.
               Egypt has now launched an ambitious energy subsidy reform initiative aimed at
               liberalizing energy prices over the coming 5-10 years. The initial steps were taken in
               2012-2013, mainly to raise prices for energy-intensive sectors.
              The outcome of increasing transparency as measured by governance scorecards
               issued by major independent observatories was partially achieved. While there
               were some improvements in perceptions of transparency, the reforms undertaken
               during this period did not go far enough in increasing transparency. Over the past six
               years, Egypt has provided more budget information to the public, and its score
               improved from 19 in 2006 to 49 in 2010 in the Open Budget Index.29 Egypt’s 2010
               score indicated that the Government provided the public with limited information on
               the central Government’s budget and financial activities. The Government also made
               progress with the drafting of several laws aimed at increasing transparency over the
               ISN period. These included draft legislation on Conflict of Interest; Access to
               Information; Anti-corruption Agency; Whistleblower; Witness Protection;
               Procurement; Central Auditing Organization; Income and Asset Disclosure; and
               Consumer Protection. The Bank successfully mobilized grant funding for technical
               support to the drafting of these laws. However, reforms such as resuming publication
               of a citizen’s budget, issuing a budget framework paper, and publishing audits of state-
               owned enterprises (SOEs) did not occur during this period.
Pillar 2: Jobs. This pillar is rated as moderately satisfactory with notable progress in private sector
development and the financial sector. The Bank Group sought to address the following key
constraints: a difficult regulatory environment and investment climate; low access to finance; gaps
in access to sustainable energy and transport services; telecommunication costs; and skills
mismatch. Given the employment creation potential for construction and services sectors, IFC’s
commitments included a US$100 million facility to support the operations of the largest Egyptian
construction group as a means for channeling funds to other players including sub-contractors, as

29
     Open Budget Index 2010, International Budget Partnership, www.internationalbudget.org


                                                        69
well as US$6 million equity invested in Egypt’s pioneering electronic payment services company
to expand its network across the country. Achievement of outcomes pertaining to these challenges
is discussed in the following paragraphs.

          The three outcomes related to creating an enabling environment for private sector
           investment, namely improved Doing Business rankings, successful completion of
           regulatory reforms, and expansion of private sector through launch of public-
           private partnerships (PPPs) were achieved. There was improvement in overall
           “Doing Business” rankings through 2014 (see Figure 1). As a follow on to the “Doing
           Business”, IFC partnered with the Ministry of Investment and Ministry of Local
           Development to conduct an extensive sub-national “Doing Business” survey that
           expanded the benchmarking of four “Doing Business” topics—starting a business,
           dealing with construction permits, registering property, and enforcing contracts - to 14
           additional cities beyond Cairo and analyzed the challenges of trading across borders
           through five strategic ports. The Bank and IFC support to the regulatory reform agenda
           yielded results including streamlining of procedures and other reforms in
           reconciliation. The IFC also worked to launch several PPPs, including in health,
           education, and sanitation. While IFC was successful in introducing a number of key
           reforms in the areas mentioned, the reform momentum slowed down considerably
           following the financial crisis in 2008 and even further after the post-January 2011
           revolution. This was due to the uncertain political and policy environment.

                                                        Figure 1 
                                  Egypt:  Evolution of Doing Business Rankings during 
                                                     CAS/ISN Period 

                           200
                           150
                           100
                            50
                             0
                                 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014


          The six outcomes pertaining to World Bank Group support to improving financial
           sector competitiveness and efficiency were also achieved. The IFC and the Bank
           both provided substantial support to this sector during this period in the form of lending
           and technical assistance. The key achievements include:

           o A strategy to expand access to the poorest was achieved through Government’s
             strengthening of the micro-, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and the
             Social Fund for Development which allow for mechanisms to reach targeted
             populations. These activities were supported by both the IFC and the Bank. IFC
             specifically provided technical support to non-Governmental multilateral financial
             institutions in Egypt to (i) diversify offerings of lending products; and (ii) improve
             risk management.



                                                 70
             o The Central Bank has strengthened corporate governance in the banking system
               and the Government has amended the Central Bank, Money, and Banking Law to
               improve its internal governance. IFC in cooperation with several business
               associations held corporate governance workshops to train MSMEs on best
               practices to help improve performance.

             o There is increased private sector ownership of the banking sector. Reforms initiated
               since 2005 have helped increase competition in the financial sector. These reforms
               were undertaken with active lending and advisory support from the Bank and IFC,
               including through the MSME Technical Assistance Facility that is being jointly
               implemented by both institutions.

            The outcome of expanded and improved infrastructure was partially achieved.
             Details are provided below by sector. 

             o    The outcomes related to improving power infrastructure, namely expansion of
                  power generation capacity by 27,000 MW, expansion of natural gas by 300,000
                  households, and reform of energy subsidies, were mostly achieved. The outcome
                  of expansion of power generation capacity was partially achieved. Although the
                  numerical target was not met, the Bank made substantial progress in helping the
                  country expand its generation capacity. The fast track power generation program
                  (2,100 MW) was one of the main drivers for bringing installed capacity to a total
                  of 29,000 MW. From FY06 to FY14, the World Bank financed four gas-fired
                  generation plants (El Tebbin30, Ain Sokhna, Giza North and Helwan South) and
                  supported a program of renewables. IFC hassupported the Egyptian power program
                  through the development of the 2,250 MW gas-fired Dairut independent power
                  project as the Lead Transaction Advisor. Progress on the transaction has been slow
                  particularly after the revolution due to a number of issues, including the need to
                  provide a sovereign guarantee, sizing of the plant, and fuel supply among others.
                  The Bank has supported the Government of Egypt’s effort to expand household
                  access to natural gas in the Greater Cairo Area through the US$75 million Natural
                  Gas Connection Project. This project has successfully financed gas connection to
                  365,637 households (exceeding the target of expanding access to gas for 300,000
                  households), or 15 percent of connected households. IFC’s investments in the oil
                  and gas sector in Egypt and regionally have also helped the country meet its
                  domestic demand for gas, particularly the industrial sector. On energy subsidies, as
                  noted earlier, there was an increase in electricity tariffs for a group of energy
                  intensive industries, and tariff reforms for consumers were also implemented. The
                  Bank provided substantial policy advice in this area.  

             o In the transport sector, results were partially achieved with respect to the outcomes
               - increased airport capacity; improved financial viability of railways; increased
               financing for road maintenance; and improved urban transport. Airport capacity

30
   In a recent IEG review, the El Tebbin project outcome was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The Bank team
recommended a Moderately Satisfactory rating because of efficient operation of the plant prior to a fire incident and the
ongoing successful efforts at repair. Moreover, two of the three TA components which would lead to improving energy
efficiency of the industrial sector, would translate into financial benefits for Egypt's power sector.


                                                          71
                  will improve from 3.5 to 7.5 million passengers per annum. Rehabilitation and
                  expansion of an existing terminal (T2) in Cairo airport was slower than envisaged
                  at the time of project approval but has since advanced. An air transport
                  liberalization study was carried out as well and implementation of its
                  recommendations is ongoing. The Bank also supported the Government in setting
                  up management contracts for the airports. Reorganization of the Egyptian National
                  Railways (ENR) is ongoing in line with the ISN objectives; and modernization of
                  signaling on Cairo Assiut line is also under implementation. The financial viability
                  of the ENR was improving but was set back by the political instability. The Bank
                  is discussing railways reform with the authorities to improve governance and
                  efficiency of railways management. In line with the CAS/ISN goal, the Government
                  has adopted a road asset management strategy aiming, among others, to improve
                  road maintenance. The Greater Cairo Urban Transport Authority is established on
                  paper and the Bank is providing support to the Government to make it fully
                  operational.

             o In telecommunications, information is not readily available on cost reduction which
               was the expected outcome, so results were not achieved. The Bank involvement
               was framed under an elaborate Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) program
               that did not pertain specifically to costs decrease, but rather to capacity building on
               statistics, legal and broadband policy. Notably, the Bank delivered two RAS on
               “Strategic Options for Broadband Policy” and “Broadband Development: Socio-
               economic Assessment”. These two activities were used by the Government to
               formulate the eMisr Strategy, a comprehensive sector development strategy to
               provide access to broadband to 8 million Egyptian households.

            The two education outcomes: i) successful scale up of pilot schemes for improving
             the quality and relevance of education, and ii) improved curriculum for secondary
             education were mostly achieved. The first outcome, successful testing and an
             eventual scaling-up of pilot schemes for improving quality/relevance of: (i) higher
             education, (ii) skills development, and (iii) early childhood development was achieved.
             Important contributions to the modernization of higher education in Egypt were made
             by the Bank by helping to establish the National Quality Assurance Commission and
             quality assurance units in all universities; as well as the Competitive Fund for the
             Improvement of Higher Education. On skills upgrading, the IBRD-financed Skills
             Development Project developed a funding mechanism that supported training for in-
             service and prospective workers through a cost-shared and competitive approach. In
             addition, a SABER-WfD31 technical assistance was provided to facilitate next steps for
             policy dialogue in skills development. For early childhood education (ECE) the main
             achievement was the expansion of access by supporting NGOs, as well as public
             schools; the preparation and design of new standards and curriculum for ECE; and the
             development of new learning materials to support the implementation of the new
             standards. Achievements in relation to the second outcome of improving the curriculum

31
  SABER WfD help countries evaluate the skills development policy options for improvement. Following the launch of the
World Bank’s Education Sector Strategy 2020, the Bank has embarked on the System Assessment and Benchmarking for
Education Results (SABER) Initiative to support implementation of the strategy.


                                                         72
           for secondary education were mixed. Although the Ministry of Education approved
           the new curriculum framework for secondary education, it was unable to translate the
           framework into a well-developed new curriculum document due to a lack of
           cooperation between education institutions and the business community. In order to
           support private sector development in the education space, IFC committed a US$15
           million investment to Cairo Investment and Real Estate Development S.A.E., a leading
           K-12 education institution for their expansion plan across governorates.

          The outcome of successful development of schemes for improving linkages
           between suppliers and external markets was partially achieved, mainly through
           IFC interventions. During the CAS period, the Bank and IFC provided knowledge
           support in improving Egypt’s competitiveness, notably through the dialogue on “Doing
           Business” indicators. However, this dialogue has not been sustained post-2011 due to
           the political turmoil. IFC used its Business Edge (a face-to-face management capacity
           building program) advisory instrument to train 7,434 individuals (of which 20 percent
           were women) between July 2005 and December 2013. Of these, 1,721 persons were
           from 130 different SMEs, part of the value chain of four large lead firms in the ICT,
           Fast Moving Consumer Goods, Pharmaceutical, and Telecommunications sectors.
           These value chain interventions helped to strengthen the overall value chain and to
           improve the relationship with the lead firm, resulting in increased sales of firms.

Pillar 3: Inclusion. The Bank Group’s efforts aimed at ensuring broader access by disadvantaged
segments of the population - women, youth, lagging geographical regions - to infrastructure and
social services. This pillar is rated moderately unsatisfactory with notable progress in water and
air pollution abatement and expanding credit access to women. Progress in achieving the outcomes
is discussed below.

          The outcome of successful testing of pilot schemes for expanding sanitation into
           rural areas, increased efficiency and beneficiary participation in drainage and
           developing PPPs was partally achieved as a result of progress on the irrigation
           and drainage side in particular. There have been improved irrigation and drainage
           services to over 300,000 farmers as a result of Bank-financed Integrated Irrigation
           Improvement and Management Project and National Drainage Project II that have also
           yielded results of more beneficiary participation. On sanitation, results were more
           mixed. The goal of expansion of networked sanitation infrastructure into the rural areas
           is progressing under the Bank-financed Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage
           Infrastructure Projects (ISSIP1 and ISSIP2 accompanied by a Sanitation Trust Fund)
           but was delayed due to delay in detailed designs, bidding processes and environmental
           and social impact assessment; local communities’ obstructions; and land acquisition
           issues. IFC has successfully advised the Government on its first wastewater PPP
           transaction in the country via the implementation of the New Cairo Wastewater project.
           The project attracted US$120 million of private investment and reached financial close
           in 2010 and is now fully operational.  

          The CAS/ISN environmental outcome - successful scale up for pollution
           abatement and wastewater management - was achieved. This outcome was met as
           part of the Bank-financed Egypt Pollution Abatement Project (EPAP) I. The


                                               73
    subsequent Bank-financed EPAP II contributed to the improvements of emissions
    notably from cement sector and brick factories, both among the most polluting sectors.
    The Bank has also been involved in other sectors that would lead to the improvement
    of the air quality, such as the Natural Gas Connections Project, the taxi scrapping
    program, and the Cairo Congestion Study. One innovation of the Bank’s engagement
    in environment is that EPAP II was implemented using the Country Environmental
    System in 2006. Various actions were taken such as issuing revised environmental
    impact assessment guidelines, stipulating a provision that severe penalties are
    promulgated for establishments constructed/ operated without EIA, and issuing new
    sectoral EIA guidelines for thermal power plants and manufacturing of petrochemicals,
    textiles, cement, and fertilizers. These activities were supported by the technical
    assistance (TA) component of EPAP II.

   The outcome of expanded healthcare access was not achieved. The main vehicle
    for the strategy in the health sector was the Bank-financed Health Insurance
    Development Project. Although approved in FY10, the project was not implemented
    by the new Government at the time as it was not in line with its priorities. The Health
    Insurance Systems Development Project has been redesigned to better target the
    poorest 1,000 villages in Egypt by accrediting family health facilities that meet the
    national healthcare quality standards. IFC has financed four private sector-managed
    health facilities, three of which are now fully operational.

   The outcome of increasing investments to Upper Egypt was partially achieved,
    principally through lending although some notable analytical work focusing on
    Upper Egypt was disseminated. A project dedicated to Upper Egypt envisaged in the
    ISN did not materialize due to continued political instability in the country. However, the
    Bank-financed Labor Intensive Investment Project, also envisaged in the ISN and
    targeting Upper Egypt, was approved in FY12. Equally important was the Bank’s ability
    to leverage EU grant funding for this project to the tune of Euro 70 million which
    increased funds allocated to Upper Egypt and made borrowing more concessional to the
    Government. The Bank also focused on strengthening the analytical base for policy and
    investment decisions affecting Upper Egypt. In 2013, the Bank published “Mapping
    Gendered Pathways to Inclusion: Shaping Youth Policy in Upper Egypt”. This study
    provided an analysis of the conditions of young men and women aged 15–29 residing in
    the region of Upper Egypt and their perceptions regarding the various factors that
    facilitate or limit their socioeconomic inclusion. The Bank-financed Natural Gas
    Connections project and a follow on project approved in FY14 are targeting underserved
    areas, including those in Upper Egypt.

   The outcome of strengthening social safety nets through the definition and
    implementation of a sound plan to move towards a more transparent and
    sustainable system and new pension regulations reflecting international best
    practice was partially achieved. As noted earlier, the Governance and Social Safety
    Nets DPL which would have anchored a reform effort in this area did not materialize.
    The Bank has maintained a sustained dialogue to consolidate and strengthen Egypt’s
    social protection system. One of the main achievements of the Bank support in this area
    has been support to the development of a poverty map for better targeting of social safety


                                          74
           net interventions. The Bank also supported the design of a comprehensive social
           insurance reform through a multi-year technical assistance program. In June 2010, the
           Egyptian Parliament approved a new Social Insurance and Pensions Law that introduced
           a systemic reform which was expected to constitute a landmark in the Middle East region.
           The new system was to become effective in January 2012, but the implementation was
           delayed after the revolution, and in early 2013 the Government decided to cancel the law.
           The Bank provided technical assistance through a multiyear program developed in two
           phases. The decision of the Government to cancel the Social Insurance Law delays the
           solution to critical shortcomings of the current pension system, notably concerning the
           fiscal implications of projected deficits in the existing schemes (in spite of a high tax
           wedge on labor), the lack of coverage of a significant number of Egyptian workers, the
           high volatility of the real value of pensions due to the practice of “ad hoc” arbitrary
           indexation, and the inadequate targeting of non-contributory pensions. The Government
           has expressed concerns with these issues and a new reform (with a different approach) is
           under study, but the scope, content, and potential impact of such reform still remain
           unclear.

          Both outcomes on gender - which were contributing to informed advocacy on
           gender and a specialized financing aimed at women - were fully achieved. There was
           active and sustained dialogue on gender issues in the country. The 2010 Gender
           Assessment which examined the gender dimension of the Egyptian labor market was
           disseminated in the country and attracted a lot of attention from stakeholders. The
           findings of this report have fed into a Bank study of the Egyptian labor market. Intense
           policy dialogue on gender resulted in a number of gender-informed operations in Egypt,
           focused on increasing female employment through business development training and
           access to finance, including the 2012 Egypt Development Marketplace that aimed to
           support agribusiness and handicrafts projects across Egypt, with a special focus on Upper
           (southern) Egypt. Under the Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small
           Enterprises (MSE) Project, the strong impact on women is evident in the increase in the
           number of female-owned MSEs from about 4,500 in June 2012 to 20,000 in June 2013.
           IFC has sought to address issues of gender disparities through its Business Edge and
           access to finance advisory programs as highlighted above.

                              BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

The program designed in the 2005 CAS was responsive to the needs on the ground and the
ISN was flexible. In view of the improved context with the economic reforms initiated in 2004,
the CAS and CAS Progress Report envisioned scaled up support for Egypt. This scaled up support
did occur as Bank commitments more than doubled from FY06 to FY14. Similarly, IFC’s
investment portfolio tripled during this period. IFC played a strong countercyclical role and was
instrumental in mobilizing outside investors into Egypt over the FY11-14 period, something it had
not done at such scale during previous CAS periods. The Bank Group changed course with the
ISN following the political turmoil in Egypt. This was a difficult time for the Bank Group
engagement because of the lack of a coherent Government vision during this period. One issue
for the ISN was whether the flexibility was balanced with firmness to ensure credibility. The lack
of a consistent Government policy framework during the post-revolutionary period prevented the
Bank from being able to make progress with an agenda. So while there was a course correction


                                                75
vis a vis the ISN, in reality, the focus during the post-revolutionary period was on implementation
of the ongoing portfolio. The design of the lending program in the context of uncertainty was
flexible, building on the ongoing operations while moving to new priority areas in a modest way.
The results framework of the ISN was modest, exhibiting realism, and it built on the CAS Progress
Report’s results framework focusing on outcomes from the ongoing operations.

The Bank and IFC conducted consultations with Government officials and other
stakeholders in a time of political transition (see Attachment V for details on outcomes of ISN
consultations). During the post-revolutionary period, the World Bank Group reached out to
various stakeholder groups (including the private sector) and new agents of change and future
reform champions, with the objective of seeking viewpoints on key issues and priorities for a new
Egypt emerging from political transition. The consultations (both formal and informal) sought to
address how best the Bank Group could support Egypt in this new environment. Overall, these
early engagements and multi-stakeholder consultative meetings were helpful in informing the ISN
about (i) what the development priorities are for Egypt; and (ii) where stakeholders see the World
Bank Group playing a role. The key issues raised during consultations, including work on safety
nets, support for SMEs, education quality, and natural gas are very much part of current
engagement.
              Table 2: IEG recommendations and Corresponding Bank Interventions
         IEG Recommendation                 Select Bank Interventions
         Targeting Social Safety Nets        Transition Fund Project on Safety Nets;
                                             Emergency Labor Intensive Project;
                                             Inequality of Opportunity Study
         Analysis on Macroeconomic Issues    Dialogue on Energy Subsidies;
         and Income Disparities              Inequality Study
         Financial Sector Reforms and        Financial Sector DPLs (I,II,III)
         Combatting Corruption               Affordable Mortgage DPL
                                             MSME Project
                                             TA on Governance
         Infrastructure and Energy           Helwan South Power Project
         Institutional Reform                Airports Project
                                             Railways Project

The ISN took on board recommendations from 2009 IEG’s Country Assistance Evaluation
(CAE). Notably, the CAE recommended that future Bank strategy should reflect Egypt's middle-
income status by including a flexible lending program and an emphasis on knowledge services. It also
recommended that the Bank further strengthen the recent successful partnership by: (i) identifying
direct and indirect interventions that could help reduce income disparities through improving the
targeting of social safety nets; (ii) focusing analytic work on macroeconomic analysis and income
disparities, and improving its dissemination; (iii) pursuing further financial sector reforms and
promoting reforms that indirectly combat corruption (public financial management, simplification of
taxation and business procedures, and an information act); and (iv) emphasizing sectoral strategies and
policy and institutional reforms in infrastructure and energy. All these are areas where the Bank Group
is actively engaged (see Table 2 for examples).




                                                   76
                          Table 3: CAS/ISN Proposed Operations of Which Delivered
                 Proposed Bank Operations                              Delivered Bank Operations
   FY                         Activity                      Project                                 Commit
   06   West Delta Irrigation Infrastructure             West Delta Water Conserv. & Irrig. Rehab    145
        El Tebbin Power                                  El Tebbin Power                             259.6
        Mortgage Finance                                 Mortgage Finance                            37.1
        Ports Sector Development
   07   Urban/Alexandria Growth Pole                     Alexandria Development                      100
        Integrated Governorates Development
        Social Funds IV
        Education Enhancement II
        Pollution Abatement II                           Second Pollution Abatement                  20
        Solar Thermal
        Financial Sector Restructuring Loan              Financial Sector Reform DPL                 500
   08   Transport/Road Asset Management
        Integrated Governorates II
        Railways                                         Railways Restructuring                      270
        Delta Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infr    Integrated Sanitation & Sewerage Infr       120
        Financial Sector Loan II                         Financial Sector DPL II                     500
   09   Additional Financing for Mortgage                Affordable Mortgage Finance DPL             300
        Low Income Social Housing
        Ain Sokhna Power Project                         Ain Sokhna Power                            600
        Railways Restructuring                           Egypt National Railways Restructuring       330
        National Drainage (AF)                           National Drainage II Add. Financing         30
   10   Facilitating Access to Finance                   EG-Enhancing Access to Finance for SMEs     300
        Gas Infrastructure                               Natural Gas Connections                     75
        Airports II                                      Airports Dev Additional Financing           40
        Roads Assets Management
        Post-Basic Education Reform
        Social Protection DPL
        Health Insurance System Development              EG-Health Insurance Systems Development     75
        Upper Egypt Integrated Development
   11   Power III                                        EG-Giza North Power Project                 600
        Clean Technology for Energy                      EG-Wind Power Development                   70
        Urban Transport Infrastructure
        Solid Waste
        Agriculture/Poultry Industry Recovery            EG-Farm-level Irrigation Modernization      100
   12   Giza North (AF)                                  EG-Giza North Additional Financing          240
        Emergency Labor Intensive                        EG Emergency Labor Intensive Investment     200
   13   Helwan South Power Project                       EG - Helwan South Power Project             585.4
        Kom Ombo Solar
        Urban Transport Infrastructure Project


The Bank emphasized the appropriate procurement and financial management mechanisms to
improve implementation progress and disbursement rates and build country capacity. The Bank
is supporting the Government to prepare procurement documentation in advance of approval of
projects, streamlining the funds flow process by increasing use of e-disbursement, improving
implementation readiness of projects, and providing support upstream for environmental and social
safeguards. The Bank’s extensive engagement in infrastructure has helped drive the development of
state of the art implementation arrangements, including with respect to financial management,
procurement, and monitoring and evaluation in energy, water, and transport among others. This has
also attracted donors to pool resources with the Bank (e.g. Helwan South) and will be important in the
effective absorption of Bank and other donor resources going forward, including the funds from Gulf
countries.



                                                        77
The Bank and IFC mobilized lending and non-lending services to support the program in the
CAS and in the ISN. Bank lending during FY06-FY12 averaged US$934 million annually, and
lending volume foreseen in the ISN was largely met (see Table 3). The Bank undertook Analytical and
Advisory Activities (ASA) in a number of areas, including poverty assessment, inequality studies,
education, and economic geography analysis. The Upper Egypt Study and the inequality study will
inform the new Bank Group’s CPF which is expected to focus on inequality issues and spatial
disparities within the country. The Bank leveraged low lending volumes in critical sectors with
enhanced knowledge advice through ASA, for example in education, where ASA led to development
of new approaches to university entrance and secondary education graduation exams. IFC also
exceeded its historical investment trends under previous CAS periods. IFC has committed a total of
US$2.2 billion (including mobilization of US$392 million) during the CAS and ISN period (FY06-
FY14). Of this, US$1.8 billion was during FY06-FY12 and the balance during the ISN period.

World Bank portfolio performance. Although the Bank has made particular efforts to improve
portfolio performance. Portfolio performance was weak during much of the period, as
demonstrated by delays in effectiveness, portfolio riskiness, and modest disbursement ratios. The
political turmoil during some of this period also contributed to delays. Although effectiveness
delays and disbursement ratios improved during the period, the share of problem projects
continued to be high (see Table 4). Egyptian counterparts and the Bank held quarterly portfolio
performance review meetings and focused on restructuring and cancellations of non-performing
projects, and capacity building for procurement to resolve implementation bottlenecks. Lessons
from active portfolio management have also infused new projects to ensure adequate preparation
and better results on the ground.
                                Table 4. Egypt Portfolio at a glance, FY09-FY14
                                              FY09       FY10        FY11       FY12       FY13        FY14
        Portfolio and disbursements
        Active projects (#)                        15         22         23          22         25         26
        Net commitments ($m)                    1,794      3,400      3,894       4,072      4,615      4,908
        Undisbursed balances($m)                1,542      2,884      3,205       3,242      3,380      3,308
        Disbursements in FY ($m)                  113        298        173         378        448        372
        Disbursements ratio (%)                  25%        14%         7%         10%        14%        11%
        Slow disbursements (%)                    7%         5%         5%                     9%        12%
        Portfolio riskiness
        Actual problem projects (#)                  3          1           2          5          5           5
        Actual problem projects (%)              20%          5%       10%         25%        23%        20%
        Projects at risk (%)                      27%         5%       10%        25%         23%          20%
        Commit at risk (%)                        16%         4%         1%       10%          9%          20%
        Proactive index (%)                       50%       67%       100%        50%         20%          60%
        Realism index (%)                        100%                 100%       100%       100%
        Effectiveness Dly (%)                     33%       20%        20%        25%         14%          12%
        Note: No of projects, disbursements and commitments include small RETFs <$5m, all other indicators
        excludes small RETFs.


   IFC portfolio performance. IFC took a proactive approach to portfolio management
   including stress-testing all exposures, helping clients to restructure their balance sheet and
   cancelling selectively undisbursed commitments in agreement with clients. As of June 30,
   2014, total portfolio stood at US$977 million with less than US$163 million (almost 17 percent


                                                         78
of total) undisbursed. With the exception of three investments which were underperforming
before the start of the revolution, the portfolio is current with no delay in repayments to date.

MIGA portfolio performance. Prior to the revolution MIGA experienced very little interest
in its political risk insurance products. After the revolution MIGA received more inquiries and
between FY13-FY14, MIGA provided US$120 million of guarantees into the oil and gas, and
manufacturing sectors. Both projects involved are performing satisfactorily.

                       ALIGNMENT WITH THE WBG TWIN GOALS

The recently completed Egypt Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) shows that past
engagement has not always addressed the key drivers to eliminating poverty and
increasing shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. The strategic objectives of the FY06-
11 CAS were facilitating private sector development; enhancing the provision of public
services; and promoting equity. The SCD emphasized macroeconomic management,
particularly the subsidy issues and governance, as key areas in need of reform. As the
moderately unsatisfactory rating of Pillar I (economic management) shows, Bank engagement
in macroeconomic management and governance issues has not been successful. Notably, little
progress was made in reducing subsidies, as emphasized in the SCD. Although Bank
engagement was more successful in Pillar 2 (jobs), little progress was made in addressing the
institutional issues of sector governance emphasized in the SCD. The bulk of Bank engagement
was in infrastructure lending, including energy, transport, and finance where there was good
progress in terms of achieving results.

Despite the lack of emphasis in some areas, there were a number of important areas brought
up in the SCD where the Bank has made progress in moving forward the reform process. IFC
supported the regulatory reforms to improve the business environment. Also, the Bank was
involved in improving safety net mechanisms during this period, including poverty mapping
to set up a targeting mechanism to better reach the poorest.

            KEY LESSONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THE NEXT CPF

Large infrastructure projects should be accompanied by institutional measures and used
as a vehicle for institutional reform provided such measures are embedded in the
projects. Bank engagement in the transport sector has shown that institutional reform
measures such as management contracts to introduce private sector efficiency can be
embedded in investment lending. For example, the Bank-financed Helwan South Power
Project embeds institutional change in project design, including grievance redress mechanisms.
This was not always the case in the Bank-financed energy sector projects. Going forward,
institutions and capacity building should be embedded in project design more systematically.
Focusing on sector reforms (especially in important areas like power) and the sequencing of
these reforms would be important in the new CPF in order to increase private sector
participation in this space.

Flexibility is important in a high risk political environment such as Egypt. The Bank and
IFC’s flexible response to the events of 2011 to changes in the country context enabled an
adjustment of the strategy to better respond to the Egyptian revolution. In a highly fluid


                                             79
political environment, the Bank and IFC should focus on the country’s immediate needs with
a mix of instruments. In the case of energy subsidies, the Bank was able to assemble a multi-
sector team to advance the dialogue on the issue in the absence of a DPL envisaged in the ISN.
IFC’s Management decision to provide counter-cyclical and confidence boosting support to
the private sector (despite the high risk environment where other commercial financing was
drying up) helped in job preservation/creation. This approach used under the previous CPS/ISN
period could help guide IFC’s intervention in the new CPF period.

Realism in results framework is crucial. The outcomes should focus only on what it can
influence in terms of results and what is achievable in the time frame of the CAS/ISN. In the
CAS/ISN period, the ISN kept the original CAS Progress Report’s results framework with the
intent that results would only be achieved in projects already under implementation. In
hindsight, this more scaled back results framework was the correct decision. One exception
was the macroeconomic outcome with a specific fiscal deficit target which was not under the
control of the Bank. The Bank and IFC should continue its realism and assessment of risks and
rewards when developing project and program level results given continued uncertainty in the
political and economic situation.

Proactive engagement with the donor community is important in leveraging our support.
The Bank has successfully leveraged donor support in a number of projects, most recently the
Bank-financed Emergency Labor Intensive Investment Project and the Helwan South Power
Project, and advisory engagements like the MSME Technical Assistance Facility. In an
environment where Bank support is relatively small in comparison to needs, continued
engagement with the donor community is crucial. In social sectors where the Government is
reluctant to borrow IBRD resources, the Bank can leverage grant funding.

It is important to integrate voice and accountability mechanisms and reaching out to
stakeholders. The Bank needs to reach out to CSOs and other stakeholders in project and
program design. This was, notably, evident in the implementation of the Bank-financed
Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage Infrastructure Project. Moreover, having in place
beneficiary feedback mechanisms is crucial to achieving results in Bank interventions. In the
water and energy sectors, for example, the changing political environment has led to more




                                           80
                                                     ATTACHMENT I

     COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW: ACHIEVEMENT OF RESULTS UNDER ISN AND CAS
                       RESULTS MATRIX FOR EGYPT, FY06-FY14

                                                                           WBG Activities 
        ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                          that contributed                Lessons 
                Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                          to the Outcome  
                                   Strategic Objective/Pillar 1: Economic Management 
1.1. Contain the fiscal deficit:   Partially Achieved 
Effective implementation of the Government’s plan to gradually            Ongoing               Our ESW was helpful in 
reduce fiscal deficit by end ISN period.                                  Economic              maintaining ongoing 
ISN Milestones                                                            monitoring            dialogue even in the 
     Gradual  phasing  out  of  energy  subsidies  for  energy                                 absence of lending.  
                                                                          FY09: Poverty 
         intensive industries is launched 
                                                                          Assessment            Our DPL discussions, which 
                                                                          FY11:  Savings        took place in parallel with 
Policy dialogue on macroeconomic targets and priority activities is 
                                                                          Study                 the IMF discussions over 
ongoing and constructive.  In the early years of the CAS 
                                                                                                the past two years, also 
implementation, the Government goal of one percent reduction in           FY12 Inequality 
                                                                                                contributed to advance the 
the fiscal deficit was on track, but the fiscal deficit has since been    Study 
                                                                                                agenda on both social 
increasing steadily from 8 percent of GDP in FY10 to 14 percent of        FY13:  Social         safety net and governance 
GDP in FY13. This was due to weak growth, averaging only two              Safety Nets TA        issues.  
percent over the past three years.  Some improvement in the fiscal 
                                                                          FY13 Expanding 
situation was seen in FY14, with the deficit down to 12.8 percent.  
                                                                          Opportunities for 
The Government’s plan to reduce the fiscal deficit involved 
                                                                          the next 
lowering energy subsidies. One of the key focus areas for Bank 
                                                                          generation 
dialogue has been the energy subsidies and there has been some 
progress recently.  Egypt has launched an ambitious energy 
subsidy reform initiative aimed at liberalizing energy prices over 
the coming 5‐10 years. While smaller steps were taken in 2012‐13, 
mainly to raise prices for energy‐intensive sectors, broader price 
increases for both firms and households were implemented in July 
2014 reducing subsidies by 25‐30 percent and yielding fiscal 
savings of around 2 percent of GDP.   
[REF CAS Progress Report Outcome 2.1. Consolidate 
macroeconomic stability] 
1.2.Improve transparency of public sector management:  Partially Achieved  
Increase rating on governance and transparency scorecards                 FY04: Egypt Public        
issued by major independent observatories of perceptions of               Expenditure and 
transparency process – by end‐CAS                                         Fiduciary 
ISN Milestones                                                            Management 
                                                                          (ongoing TA) 
        Government’s annual budgets, audited accounts and audit 
         reports are disclosed                                         FY08 Country 
                                                                       Financial 
      Launch  of  a  formal  program  to  improve  perceptions  of 
                                                                       Accountability 
         public sector transparency 
                                                                       Assessment 
While  there  were  some  improvements  in  perception,  the  reforms 
                                                                       FY09: Egypt 
undertaken  during  the  ISN  period  did  not  go  far  enough  in 
                                                                       Governance 
increasing  transparency.    Over  the  past  six  years,  Egypt  has 



                                                             81
                                                                                    WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                   that contributed        Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                   to the Outcome  
provided  more  budget  information  to  the  public,  and  its  score         Diagnostics 
jumped  from  19  in  2006  to  49  in  2010  on  the  Open  Budget  Index.    Survey FY09 (TA) 
Egypt’s  2010  score,  the  latest  available,  indicates  that  the           FY09: Governance 
Government  provides  the  public  with  limited  information  on  the         and Anti‐
central  Government’s  budget  and  financial  activities.  The                Corruption TA 
Government  also  moved  forward  with  the  drafting  of  several  laws 
                                                                               FY14: Public 
aimed  at  increasing  transparency  in  recent  years.  These  included: 
                                                                               Sector and 
Conflict of Interest; Access to Information; Anti‐corruption Agency; 
                                                                               Governance TA  
Whistleblower; Witness Protection; Procurement; Central Auditing 
Organization;  Income  and  Asset  Disclosure;  and  Consumer                   
Protection  laws.  The  Bank  successfully  mobilized  grant  funding  for      
technical  support  to  the  drafting  of  these  laws.  The  Bank  also 
engaged in dialogue with the authorities and stakeholders to create 
debate  and  consensus  but  only  the  Witness  Protection  and  the 
Conflict  of  Interest  laws  have  been  passed.  Reforms  such  as 
resuming  publication  of  a  citizen’s  budget,  issuing  a  budget 
framework  paper,  and  publishing  audits  of  SOEs  did  not  occur 
during  this  period.   A  formal  program  to  improve  perceptions  was 
not launched. 
[REF CAS Progress Report Outcome 2.5. Strengthen public sector 
performance] 
                                                Strategic Objective/Pillar 2: Jobs 
2.1. Create an enabling environment for private investment and businesses:  Achieved  
Improvement in the Business Environment as measured by Doing  Ongoing:                                  
Business surveys – by end‐ISN period.                             Benchmarking 
ISN Milestones                                                    through Doing 
                                                                  Business (TA) 
      Improvement of Doing Business rankings from 108 (2011) 
                                                                  FY07 Investment 
 
                                                                  Climate 
In September 2006, Doing Business ranked Egypt 152 out of 175     Assessment 
economies.  In Doing Business 2008, Egypt improved to 126 in the  Follow up 
rankings.  After that, the rankings stagnated or deteriorated in 
                                                                  FY09 Investment 
specific indicators due the absence of reform during 2011‐2013.  
                                                                  Climate Update 
Doing Business rankings were 109/189 in 2013 compared with 
                                                                  (ESW) 
106/189 in 2010 period. Overall in the CAS period, there was 
improvement.                                                      FY12: ICA Update  
Successful completion of regulatory reforms that would lead to a  Ongoing:  
level playing field and a more competitive environment            Investments in 
                                                                  PPPs (IFC) 
ISN Milestones 
                                                                  FY13: SME 
      New investment opportunities 
                                                                  Training through 
                                                                  IFC Business 
There was progress in undertaking regulatory reforms which        Edge/Toolkit 
improved the enabling environment for investment. The following  Ongoing; 
regulatory reform activities were undertaken with support from    Streamline 
the IFC and World Bank:                                           construction 




                                                                 82
                                                                                  WBG Activities 
           ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                 that contributed                 Lessons 
                   Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                 to the Outcome  
          Simplification of procedures to establish industrial projects         permits and 
           by  canceling  the  initial  approval  of  the  General  Authority    licenses (IFC TA) 
           for  Industrial  Development.  Simplification  of  registration       Ongoing:  Roll out 
           procedures  of  companies’  foreign  branches  by  reducing           Competitiveness 
           time  to  3  days  (instead  of  4‐6  months).  Simplification  of    Index nationwide 
           procedures, documents.                                                (IFC TA) 
          Simplification  of  registration  procedures  of  foreign  Ongoing:  
           companies’  representative  offices  (Reduce  time  to  3  days  Development of 
           (instead of 40 days).  Simplification of procedures.                 the post SNDB 
          Second  phase  of  electronic  business  registration  launch reform 
           (Electronic payment)                                                 activities in FY14, 
                                                                                targeting reform 
          Abolish security approval for the press companies. 
                                                                                implementation in 
          Issuance  of  imports  certificate  valid  for  3‐5  years  instead  15 governorates  
           of  stamping  invoices  on  a  regular  basis  and  issuance  of 
                                                                                Ongoing:  
           exports  certificate  valid  for  3‐5  years  instead  of  issuing 
                                                                                Capacity building 
           letter on a yearly basis 
                                                                                for Parliament 
          Simplification  of  Construction  Permitting  procedures  and  and Government 
           issuance  of  the  Unified  Construction  Law  executive  on business 
           regulations.                                                         environment 
          Development  of  smart  regulations  for  Investment  Zone 
           regimes in Egypt. 
          Completion  and  launch  of  the  Egypt  Subnational  Doing 
           Business  (SNDB)  2014  report,  catalyzing  reform  activities 
           by Government. 
            
Successful Completion of pilot PPPs in selected sectors, including 
education and irrigation.   IFC has successfully advised the PPP 
Central Unit of the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Higher 
Education in the implementation of the Alexandria Hospitals PPP 
Project. First waste water PPP in Egypt successfully completed. 
 
 [REF CAS Progress Report 1.3. Increase private business activity] 
    2.2. Improve financial sector competitiveness and efficiency:  Achieved  
Adoption by the Government of a sound strategic approach to                      FY14: Financial        DPLs were successful in 
expand access to finance to the poorest – by end‐CAS                             Development and        providing timely and 
Our strategy to reach the poorest is achieved through expanding                  Growth (ESW)           successful financial 
microfinance.  Enhancing micro and small enterprises (MSEs)                      Ongoing: Support       assistance in support of the 
access to finance is an important pillar of the Government‘s                     to financial sector    overall objective of financial 
agenda. In particular, the second generation of the Financial                    reform (TA)            sector reform. 
Sector Reform Program (2009–2013) focuses on financial                           FY10:  Affordable       
intermediation and improving access to finance.                                  Mortgage Finance       An integrated approach to 
The Social Fund for Development (SFD) has launched a Micro and                   Development            lending and ASA in the 
Small Enterprise Development Strategy (2009–2013) aiming at                      Policy Loan (SPN)      sector, where capacity 
improving the environment for MSEs. Significant activities have                                         building activities were 



                                                                   83
                                                                                WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                               that contributed               Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                               to the Outcome  
been undertaken by the World Bank to improve the business                      FY10: Financial      undertaken in support of 
environment for MSMEs and enhance capacity building of financial               Sector DPL III       the Government policy 
regulators and Government agencies. These activities include: (i)              FY08: Financial      reform efforts proved to be 
support to the CBE in the development of a credit guarantee                    Sector DPL II        very successful. 
facility for MSME financing; (ii) capacity building of SFD and EFSA 
                                                                               FY10: Enhancing 
to set up the regulatory framework to support the Microfinance 
                                                                               Access to Finance 
Law; (iii) capacity building of SFD; and (iv) capacity building of the 
                                                                               for SMEs  Project 
Egypt Post on product development, risk management and Islamic 
                                                                               (SPN) 
financial services. The World Bank is providing capacity building to 
SFD for major institutional and governance‐related reforms.                  Investments in 
                                                                             finance 
Substantial  increase  in  access  to  finance  evident  in  the  rise  of 
                                                                             institutions (IFC) 
credit by end‐CAS:   
                                                                             FY06: 
ISN Milestone:  
                                                                             privatization of 
 Development of a strategy to expand access to finance                      remaining state 
 Effective implementation of ongoing financial reforms.                     owned stake in 
This  result  was  partially  achieved.   Although  the  financial  reforms  Commercial 
led to a sound and stable system (as evident in the capital adequacy  International Bank 
ratio,  that  increased  from  14.7  in  2008  to  15.6  in  2011),  “CIB”). IFC 
improvements  in  financial  intermediation  to  the  private  sector  participated with 
were not maintained, due to the developments associated with the  Ripplewood 
January 25th revolution, which led to increased crowding‐out of the  Holdings to 
private  sector  by  the  Government’s  budget  deficit  and  sell‐off  of  purchase the 
Government  bonds  by  non‐financial  sector  holders.  In  addition,  entire remaining 
private  borrowers  were  not  interested  in  borrowing  due  to  the  state owned stake 
overall  macroeconomic  environment  and  the  uncertain  security  in the largest 
situation.    Credit  of  the  banking  sector  to  the  Government  has  private sector 
continued  to  accelerate;  increasing  by  41.4  percent  in  December  bank in Egypt. 
2011 and 45.3 percent in January 2012.  Credit in the private sector       FY09: worked 
grew  by  6.1  percent  in  December  2011  and  5.4  percent  in  January with Intesa 
2012.    The  Government’s  share  in  total  credit  increased  to        Sanpaolo (“ISP”) 
53 percent in January 2012, up from 45.2 percent in January 2011.          for the 
The  share  of  the  private  sector  shrank  to  43  percent  in  January privatization of 
                                                                           one the main four 
2012,  from  50.7  percent  in  January  2011,  when  it  was  starting  to 
pick up right before the revolution.                                       public sector 
                                                                           banks in Egypt 
                                                                           (“Bank of 
Increase of  annual  mortgage  loans  extended by  primary  lenders– 
                                                                           Alexandria” or 
by end‐CAS   
                                                                           “BoA”).  
ISN Milestones:   
                                                                           FY 07: IFC worked 
      Successful operation of the mortgage refinancing facility           with a regional 
This  result  was  achieved.   The  reforms  implemented  by  the  Bank’s  champion, Ahli 
Mortgage  Finance  Project  have  yielded  the  following  result:  an  United Bank to 
increase  in  volume  of  market‐based  mortgage  loans  extended  by  acquire and 
primary lenders from LE 300 million in 2006 to LE 4.5 billion in 2011.  successfully 
More  recently,  the  mortgage  market  experienced  a  modest  restructure a 
increase  during  Q1  2013,  with  the  overall  size  of  the  market  banking asset in 
reaching about LE 4.8 billion by March 31, 2013. Achievements also  Egypt with a 



                                                                 84
                                                                                      WBG Activities 
          ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                     that contributed    Lessons 
                  Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                     to the Outcome  
include: (i) an increase in the length of maturity term of a mortgage       challenged asset 
                                                                            quality profile and 
loan  to  16  years  in  2011  from  seven  years  in  2006,  exceeding  the 
                                                                            an inadequate 
target  of  15  years;  (ii)  an  increase  in  mortgage  finance  companies 
                                                                            capitalization 
from  2  in  2006  to  12  in  2011;  and  (iii)  a  rise  in  bank  lending  for 
mortgages from LE 12 million in 2006 to LE 2.6 billion in 2011.             base (Delta 
The  Mortgage  Finance  Subsidy  Program  has  been  making  good  International 
progress, and the key policy measures the DPL has been supporting,  Bank). 
have  been  achieved.  These  include  (i)  strengthening  the  legal,  Microfinance 
regulatory  and  institutional  framework  for  the  Mortgage  Finance  institutions (IFC 
Subsidy Program; (ii) developing an effective and efficient mortgage  TA) 
finance  subsidy  mechanism;  and  (iii)  improving  the  institutional  Credit Bureau (IFC 
framework  to  enhance  transparency  and  targeting  of  housing  TA) 
subsidies  
                                                                            Corporate 
In 2007, IFC joined forces with 27 local banks and MFCs to                  Governance (IFC 
establish the first mortgage refinance vehicle, Egypt Mortgage              TA) 
Refinance Company (“EMRC”). EMRC started playing an 
                                                                            SME banking (IFC 
instrumental role in providing long term funding to housing 
                                                                            TA)  
finance originators. 
                                                                            Joint WB‐IFC 
A  developed  NBFI  regulator  and  a  more  sound  Egyptian  Financial 
                                                                            MSME Technical 
Supervisory Authority (EFSA)  
                                                                            Assistance Facility 
ISN Milestone:   
                                                                            IFC Advisory 
        Publication  of  the  Financial  Stability  Report,  enhancing  Support for 
            transparency                                                    Corporate 
This  result  was  achieved.  Progress  achieved  towards  the  Governance 
strengthening  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  of   
NBFIs was reflected in the issuance of the Non‐Bank Financial Sector 
                                                                            FY13: Investment 
Law  No.  10  of  2009,  which  was  enacted,  establishing  EFSA  as  the 
                                                                            in Fawry to 
single  regulator  for  NBFIs.  The  EFSA  merger  was  completed  and  in 
                                                                            broaden financial 
January  2011  the  then  Chairman  issued  a  comprehensive  report 
                                                                            services and 
covering  background,  establishment,  internal  restructuring  plans 
                                                                            increase efficiency 
and achievements to date  
                                                                            of such 
EFSA  has  undertaken  several  reforms,  as  follows:  (i)  the  first  transactions 
organizational  chart  of  EFSA  has  been  approved  in  2011,  where 
EFSA was able to fully integrate its departments based on functions; 
(ii)  the  supervision  department  has  undergone  restructuring;  (iii) 
the  salary  scheme  of  all  EFSA  employees  has  been  restructured  to 
guarantee  leveled  and  fair  compensation  for  all  employees;  (iv) 
EFSA  has  succeeded  in  unifying  the  regulations  and  disclosures 
throughout  the  nonbanking  financial  sector;  and  (v)  EFSA  has 
contributed  substantially  to  reducing  any  systemic  risk  after  the 
revolution and the reopening of the Egyptian Stock Market.  
 
Issuance  of  the  Corporate  Governance  Code  for  the  banking 
sector,  preventing  potential  conflict  of  interest,  improving 
transparency, and establishing good governance.  
ISN Milestone:   



                                                                      85
                                                                                 WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                that contributed    Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                to the Outcome  
         Further  improvement  and  enforcement  of  the  corporate 
          governance regulation 
The  Central  Bank  of  Egypt  (CBE)  has  strengthened  corporate 
governance in the banking system by issuing Corporate Governance 
Regulations on July 5, 2011. The World Bank is working closely with 
the  CBE  on  strengthening  CBE’s  macro  prudential  supervision  by 
conducting  annual  stress  testing  for  the  banking  sector,  and  by 
preparing  quarterly  consolidated  banking  sector  reports  that  will 
serve as the basis for the CBE’s Financial Stability Report. 
 
Amendment of the Central Bank, Money and Banking Law, 
improving the governance of the Central Bank of Egypt  
ISN Milestone:   
         Effective  conduct  of  stress  testing,  using  Financial 
          Protection Model 
 CBE has amended the Central Bank, Banking System, and Money 
Law No. 88 of 2003 in October 8, 2011, introducing changes 
regarding improving CBE’s own governance, reconstituting its own 
board of directors to remove conflicts of interest, and tightening 
supervisory capacity and processes. The CBE is conducting periodic 
stress testing of the aggregate balance sheet of the banking sector 
and individual banks annually since 2008 (a main action supported 
by the third Financial Sector DPL), and stress testing has become 
an integral part of the CBE’s systemic surveillance of the banking 
sector. Currently, CBE is involved in an intensive technical 
assistance project with the World Bank to strengthen its stress 
testing framework through the integration of the Financial 
Projection Model (FPM) into its supervision. 
 
Substantial reduction in state ownership of commercial banks and 
divestiture of public shares in joint venture banks‐by end CAS. 
There  is  increased  private  sector  ownership  of  the  banking  sector.  
The banking sector is still predominately owned by the state (based 
on  asset  ownership)  however  reforms  initiated  since  2005  have 
helped  increase  competition  in  the  financial  sector.  These  reforms 
were undertaken with active lending and advisory support from the 
Bank  and  IFC,  including  through  the  MSME  Technical  Assistance 
Facility  that  is  being  jointly  implemented  by  both  institutions  The 
reforms  succeeded  in  attracting  foreign  and  regional  strategic 
investments  and  inviting  banking  know‐how.  This  resulted  in  the 
reduction of state control of the banking sector as indicated by the 
direct  and  indirect  share  of  state‐owned  banks  of  banking  system 
deposits,  which  declined  from  over  70  percent  in  2004  to  45.5 
percent in 2009.  
 




                                                                 86
                                                                                 WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                that contributed       Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                to the Outcome  
In  2009,  IFC  worked  closely  with  a  global  bank,  Intesa  Sanpaolo 
(“ISP”)  to  acquire  the  majority  (80%)  state‐owned  stake  in  one  of 
the main four public sector banks at the time, BoA. the project also 
fully  privatized  the  management  of  the  bank  and  contributed  to 
enhancing  its  competitiveness  and  efficiency.  In  2006,  IFC 
participated  in  divesting  the  entire  remaining  state‐owned 
shareholding  (19%)  in  CIB  and  fully  privatizing  the  Bank.  IFC’s 
involvement  in  this  project  was  critical  in  providing  comfort  to  a 
group  of  foreign  investors  led  by  New  York  based  Ripplewood 
Holdings, tapping the Egyptian market for the first time. 
 [REF CAS Progress Report Objective 1.1 Improve Financial Sector 
Competitiveness and Efficiency] 
2.3. Expand and improve power and transport infrastructure:  Partially Achieved 
Energy:  Mostly Achieved                                                                     When it comes to 
                                                                                FY06: El Tebbin 
Expansion of power generation capacity by 27,000  MW – by end‐                               enhancing our dialogue, the 
                                                                                Power Project  
CAS; increasing share of renewables in generation mix                     FY08: Kureimat     engagement in 
                                                                          Solar ‐Thermal     conventional and 
ISN Milestone:  
                                                                          Project            renewable power 
      Effective  advancement  of  works  on  power  projects  and                           generation has 
           natural gas connections project.                               FY08: Natural Gas 
                                                                                             strengthened our dialogue 
                                                                          Connections 
Although the goal of expansion of power generation capacity by                               in improving sector 
                                                                          Project  
27,000 MW was not achieved, the fast track power generation                                  sustainability and energy 
program (2,600 MW) was one of the main drivers for bringing               FY09: Ain Sokhna  subsidies. The projects did 
installed capacity to over 27,000 MW in total. The Bank financed          Power Project      not focus on conditionality 
projects included:  Construction of 700 MW El Tebbin in 2010;             FY10: Wind Power  and this approach has 
construction of 140 MW Kureimat Solar‐Thermal Power in 2011               Development        strengthened the Bank’s 
(which is a renewables project). In addition, construction of 3,550  Project                 position as a partner for 
MW in gas‐fired power plants is underway.  A Wind power project  FY10‐FY15: Dairut  sector reform rather.  
for construction of high‐voltage transmission lines and a 250‐MW  Power Plant                 
wind power plant are under implementation.  In addition, IFC              advisory           Sector reform, including 
advised the Government on a 2,250 MW gas‐fired power plant in 
                                                                          FY10: North Giza   energy pricing, needs time 
Dairut,   
                                                                          Power Project      and persistence. Our 
Conversion from highly‐subsidized LPG to natural gas                      (SPN)              previous engagement was 
consumption for 300,000 households – by end‐CAS.                                             diversified and timely for 
                                                                          FY13: Helwan 
In 2008, the Bank approved a natural gas connections project to           South Power        Egypt.  
increase household connections to natural gas. This has now               Project             
closed.  Through support by the Bank‐financed project, conversion 
                                                                          FY13: Investments  A proactive approach 
to natural gas consumption for over 300,000 households has been 
                                                                          in Petroceltic,    should be taken to design 
achieved.  
                                                                          Transglobe, and    our energy sector 
Reform of energy pricing and subsidies, to reduce the fiscal              regional projects  engagement in a way with 
impact of global price increases – by end‐CAS                             with Egypt focus   clear pillars/programs (e.g. 
                                                                          (IFC)              power generation, energy 
                                                                                             pricing, energy efficiency, 
                                                                                             privatization etc.) and 
ISN Milestone: 
                                                                                             framework instead of 
      Design  of  a  gradual  yet  substantial  energy  pricing  reform                     project/ASA based 
           and launch of its first phase.                                                    program. This could help in 


                                                                  87
                                                                                   WBG Activities 
        ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                  that contributed             Lessons 
                Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                  to the Outcome  
On energy pricing reforms, the result is mostly achieved.  Egypt                                      having more effective 
has launched an ambitious energy subsidy reform initiative aimed                                      monitoring and shorten the 
at liberalizing energy prices over the coming 5‐10 years. While                                       approval process. 
smaller steps were taken in 2012‐13, mainly to raise prices for 
energy‐intensive sectors, broader price increases for both firms 
and households were implemented in July 2014 reducing subsidies 
by 25‐30 percent and yielding fiscal savings of around 2 percent of 
GDP. 
Transport:  Partially Achieved                                                FY10: Cairo              
Increase of capacity of key international airports (Cairo and                 Airport Project II   
Sharm El Sheikh) and delegation of airports management to the                 FY09:  Railways 
private sector                                                                Restructuring 
ISN Milestone:                                                                Project 
        Rehabilitation and expansion of an existing terminal (T2) in  FY10: Cairo 
         Cairo  airport  is  well  advanced;  an  air  transport  Airport Project II 
         liberalization strategy is adopted.                           FY07:Road asset 
Capacity of the airport has been increased so the result is            management ASA 
achieved.  Construction of a new airport terminal has been                    FY12:  Transport 
completed in Cairo airport (T3) and Sharm El Sheikh airport;                  regulations TA 
airports management has been strengthened with the assistance                  
of the private sector. The rehabilitation/extension of the terminal 
2 in Cairo airport (T2) is underway to expand further the overall 
capacity. 
Increase of financial viability and safety of Egypt National 
Railways   
ISN Milestones:  
        The  Government  has  completed  the  modernization  and 
         reorganization of ENR;  
        Modernization  of  signaling  of  railways  in  Cairo  Assiut  is 
         ongoing. 
This result of increasing the financial viability and safety of Egypt 
National Railways is partially achieved.  The Government has 
approved a restructuring plan of Egyptian National Railways (ENR), 
by Bank‐recommended priorities, and focusing on increasing the 
safety, quality and reliability of services and financial viability of 
railways services; the financing of a modernization program of 
signaling systems between Alexandria and Assiut is in place. The 
financial viability had been improving but was jeopardized by the 
ongoing political and economic situation. The overall safety of the 
railways is still an issue and will take a longer time to overcome. 
 
 
Increase of financing for and regularity of road maintenance  
ISN Milestones:  




                                                                88
                                                                                WBG Activities 
        ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                               that contributed                  Lessons 
                Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                               to the Outcome  
        The  Government  has  adopted  a  road  asset  management 
         strategy aiming to improve road maintenance. 
        A pilot PPP road project is underway.  
        Restructuring of freight road transport sector is underway 
         and  effective  transport  strategy  is  in  place  and  effective 
         regulation  is  in  place  to  improve  the  performance  of 
         logistics. 
This result is partially achieved. Government has adopted a road 
asset management strategy aiming, among others, to improve 
road maintenance; a pilot PPP road project has been 
experimented with but the PPP experience was terminated as 
prices offered were way above the estimate. The Government is 
implementing the Bank recommendations on Transport regulation 
and has secured EU funding to carry out detailed studies for the 
establishment of a regulatory agency (study almost completed).  
 
Improve public urban transport in greater Cairo area   
ISN Milestones:   
        The  Greater  Cairo  Urban  Transport  Authority  is  in  place 
         and  fully  operational;  the  Cairo  Urban  Transport 
         Infrastructure Development Project is underway. 
This is not achieved.  An urban transport authority for Greater 
Cairo has been established but is not yet operational. 
Telecoms: Not Achieved                                                         FY08‐11 several         With the political upheaval, 
Reduction in the cost of telecommunications services – by end‐                 RAS with the            the Bank  tried to keep a 
CAS                                                                            National Telecom        line of dialogue with our 
                                                                               Regulatory              technical counterparts, so 
ISN Milestone: 
                                                                               Authority, the          as to be able to reengage 
        Award of second national fixed line operator license.                 Ministry of ICT, the    formally as soon as the 
On the telecom sector, our engagement was framed under a RAS                   Information             opportunity occurs;  
program that did not pertain specifically to costs decrease, but               Technology 
rather to capacity building on statistics, legal and broadband                 Industry 
policy.   Some cost reduction may have happened but there is no                Development 
evidence that it can be attributed to our RAS program.                         Agency, and the 
[REF CAS Progress Report 2.2. Expand and modernize                             Egypt National 
infrastructure services]                                                       Postal 
                                                                               Organization. 
2.4. Increase relevance of education for labor market:  Mostly Achieved 
Successful  testing (for an eventual scaling‐up) of pilot schemes              FY05: Early             The key lessons learn are: 
for improving quality/relevance of: (i) higher education, (ii) skills          Childhood               (i) getting buy into from top 
development,  (iii) early childhood development – by end‐CAS                   Education               level education authorities 
                                                                               Enhancement             and renewing that 
                                                                               Project (SPN)           involvement and 
ISN Milestones: 
                                                                               FY99:Secondary          commitment is essential to 
                                                                               Education               the success of critical 



                                                                 89
                                                                                  WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                 that contributed               Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                 to the Outcome  
         Effective  dialogue  to  scale  up  the  skills  development  pilot  Enhancement            modernization initiatives; 
          project                                                              Project (SPN)          (ii) the World Bank team 
         Effective policy dialogue to support Government efforts to  FY04: Skills                    should be flexible in order 
          improve technical and vocational education                           Development            to be able to reallocate 
                                                                               Project                resources that are critical 
 
                                                                                                      for successful 
This  was  achieved  in  several  ways.  In  the  case  of  higher  education    TA to expand use 
                                                                                                      implementation support of 
and  skills  upgrading,  quality  assurance  and  accreditation                  of a 
                                                                                                      projects; and (iii) 
mechanisms, the development of universities’ IT infrastructure and               benchmarking toll 
                                                                                                      collaboration with donors is 
library networks and the modernization and upgrading of mid‐level                for universities 
                                                                                                      a must in order to not 
technical education were established. In the case of early childhood             IFC ITIDA Project    duplicate efforts but also to 
education (ECE) the main achievement has been the explanation of                 TA to strengthen     guide the donor support in 
access by supporting NGOs schemes; the preparation and design of                 planning and         the same direction. 
new standard and curriculum for ECE; and the development of new                  monitoring in         
learning  materials  to  support  the  implementation  of  the  new              education 
standards.  The  WBG  is  also  providing  support  that  aims  to  bridge 
the skills gap for the ICT industry and improve the employability of 
students.   In  addition,  the  Work  Force  Development  study  in  MNA 
countries  and  E4E  Study  have  highlighted  for  policy  makers  the 
mismatch between the type and level of skills needed by the labor 
market  and  those  being  supplied  by  the  education  and  training 
system.  IFC  signed  an  agreement  with  the Information  Technology 
Industry  Development  Agency  (ITIDA)  to  help  enhance  the  skills  of 
prospective  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT) 
workers  in  Egypt,  develop  sector  specific  education  and  training, 
and improve the employability of ICT graduates. 
Improved curriculum especially with regard to the transition 
from secondary to post‐secondary education and to the labor 
market – by end‐CAS:   Achievements in relation to the 
improvement of the curriculum for secondary education have 
been mixed. On the one hand, the Ministry of Education recently 
approved the new curriculum framework for secondary education, 
but on the other it has not been able to translate the ideas of the 
new framework into a well‐developed new curriculum document.   
[REF CPS Progress Report 2.4. Increase relevance of education for 
labor market] 
2.5. Increase trade with regional and global partners:  Partially Achieved 
Successful development of schemes for improving the linkages                        IFC Business           
between suppliers and external markets in (i) services, (ii)                        Edge Program 
agriculture in Upper Egypt – by end‐CAS.                                             
ISN milestones 
         Successful  completion  of  the  pilot  schemes  and  effective 
          launch  of  a  substantive  dialogue  on  their  scaling 
          up/adjustment. 
         Increased trade infrastructure capacity. 
IFC helped improve linkages across value chains through (i) the 
development of a supply chain management tool for an 


                                                                   90
                                                                               WBG Activities 
           ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                              that contributed                Lessons 
                   Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                              to the Outcome  
agribusiness lead firm, (ii) the development of a contract farming 
model in the poultry sector, and (iii) capacity building of suppliers 
and distributors in the value chains of lead firms, focusing on 
improving management skills through the IFC Business Edge 
program. In total, 1,721 persons from 130 different SMEs, part of 
the value chain of four large lead firms in the ICT, FMCG, 
Pharmaceutical, and Telecommunications sector, were trained. IFC 
committed US$428.2 million into 13 South‐South projects with 
sponsors from India, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon and other 
nationalities. Furthermore, to promote trade finance, IFC 
committed US$95.2 million during the period through its GTFP 
program. 
[REF CPS Progress Report 1.2. Increase trade with regional and 
global partners] 
                                            Strategic Objective/Pillar 3: Inclusion 
3.1. Improve management of water, sanitation and irrigation systems:  Partially achieved 
Outcome: Successful testing (for an eventual scaling‐up) of pilot              FY08:               There should be only one 
schemes for (i) expanding networked sanitation infrastructure                   Integrated          lead implementing agency 
into rural areas; and (ii) increasing efficiency and beneficiary                Sanitation and      to avoid implementation 
participation in irrigation management; and (iii) developing PPPs               Sewerage            confusions and 
– by end‐ISN (CAS PR 2.2).                                                      Infrastructure      bureaucratic delay in 
                                                                                Project             procurement process and 
                                                                               FY11: Second        flow of funds. 
ISN milestones: 
                                                                                Integrated          Design consultants must be 
           Expansion of networked piped sanitation services in 
                                                                                Sanitation and      selected competitively.  
            targeted rural areas in Gharbeya, Beheira, and Kafr‐el 
                                                                                Sewerage            Also, project construction 
            Sheikh governorates and implement at least 6 
                                                                                Infrastructure      supervision consultants 
            decentralized waste water systems under ISSIP1 
                                                                                Project             (Engineer in the contract) 
           Expansion of networked piped sanitation services in 
                                                                                                    must be selected 
            targeted rural areas in Sharquia, Monorfia, Asiut, and 
                                                                               FY08:               competitively.  
            Sohag governorates under ISSIP2. 
                                                                                Integrated          When there are capacity 
           Improved irrigation and drainage services to 65,000                 Irrigation          constraints within the 
            farmers.                                                            Improvement         Government and 
                                                                                Management          implementing agencies, the 
           All 1,420 water user associations registered. 
                                                                                Project (IIIMP)     projects can recruit a 
           Agreement on alternative model for PPPs in irrigation                                   program management 
            management.                                                    
                                                                                                    consultant who supervises 
                                                                                                    the project construction 
                                                                               FY00: Second 
There has been notable progress in irrigation and drainage, less so                                 supervision consultants in 
                                                                                National 
in sanitation.   Results include:                                                                   place of the Government 
                                                                                Drainage 
                                                                                                    agencies.   
      It is expected that launch of a new rural networked sanitation           Project (NDP2, 
       program in 3 needy governorates in the Nile Delta under the              and Additional       
       National Rural Sanitation Program                                        Financing in        Government agencies also 
                                                                                2010)               need support of 
     First waste water PPP in Egypt successfully completed (IFC). The 
                                                                               FY11: Farm‐         environmental and social 
      project sponsors have started operations and the Government 
                                                                                level Irrigation    consultant to prepare ESIAs 



                                                              91
                                                                                    WBG Activities 
             ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                   that contributed                   Lessons 
                     Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                   to the Outcome  
        is leveraging the experience they acquired on the New Cairo                  Modernization       and carry out consultation 
        Wastewater project to tender out several others including Abu                Project (FIMP)      with local beneficiaries in 
        Rawash Plant.                                                                                    the planning and design 
     Improved irrigation and drainage services provided to over                                         stages to avoid local 
      300,000 farmers                                                                                    community obstructions 
                                                                                                         during construction. 
     1,465 water user associations (WUAs) have been established, of 
      which 711 have been fully operational.                                                              
     122 branch canal WUAs fully operational and 14 integrated                                          Government’s land 
      irrigation water districts fully operational.                                                      acquisition procedures 
                                                                                                         need streamlining and an 
     A pilot scheme for PPP in irrigation has been launched but the                                     appropriate compensation 
      procurement aborted due to lack of sufficient qualified bids.                                      mechanism needs to be 
     Decentralized sanitation has been pilot tested under ISSIP1,                                       established independently 
      which is to be expanded under ISSIP2 and new Projects. Due to                                      from the respective 
      delay in implementation of the decentralized schemes under                                         implementing agencies. 
      ISSIP1, it is still in pilot stage, not expansion stage.                                            
                                                                                                         Weak contract 
Expansion of networked sanitation infrastructure into rural areas                                        management has led to 
is ongoing under the Bank‐financed ISSIP1 and ISSIP2 projects. The                                       delayed implementation 
result of Phase I of ISSIP1 is not promising because of high                                             progress under many 
investment costs due to poor engineering designs done by local                                           contracts, especially under 
consultants and poor implementation by local small contractors.                                          subsurface drainage 
Designs of Phase II of ISSIP1 and Phase I of ISSIP2 have been                                            contracts.  
improved significantly by rectifying the designs and with local                                          The Government needs to 
consultation and are being implemented without local                                                     push for expedited 
obstructions.                                                                                            implementation progress, 
                                                                                                         esp. for contracts that are 
                                                                                                         being implemented by 
                                                                                                         public contractors. 
3.2. Improve air and water quality: Achieved 
Successful testing (for an eventual scaling‐up) of pilot schemes                    FY06: Pollution     The Bank needs to stay 
for: (i) reduction of industrial air pollution; and (ii) waste                       Abatement           engaged and keep an 
management by end‐CAS.                                                               Project II (SPN)    ongoing dialogue with the 
ISN Milestones                                                                      FY05: Country       stakeholders in the sector. 
        Effective  launch  of  a  substantive  dialogue  on  the  scaling           Environment                   
         up/adjustment  of  the  pilot  scheme  for  industrial  air  pollution      Analysis                 
         abatement.                                                                 FY13: Cairo Air 
        Launch  of  a  pilot  scheme  for  waste  management  pollution             Quality ESW 
         abatement. 
As to pilot schemes for reduction of industrial air pollution, the 
pilot phase (Egyptian Pollution Abatement Project (EPAP): 1999‐
2005) was successful and was scaled up by the Second Pollution 
Abatement Project (EPAP II): 2006‐2014. Despite the unstable 
situation in Egypt after the Arab Spring, the EPAP pipeline 
remained strong with increasing number of companies showing 
interest to participate. EPAP stimulated similar projects such as 


                                                                     92
                                                                                  WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                 that contributed           Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                 to the Outcome  
the Private Public Sector Industry Project (PPSI) financed by KfW. A 
waste water treatment plant was financed by the Bank project 
after the successful testing of waste water pollution abatement. 
The EPAP II contributed to the improvements of emissions notably 
from cement sector and brick factories, one of the most polluting 
sectors.  Recent  Cairo  Air  Quality  ESW  observed  improvements  in 
the air quality. The finding shows that concentrations of PM10 and 
PM2.5  were  lower  in  fall  2010  than  in  fall  1999.  This  decline  may 
be attributed to several factors, namely, the expansion of the road 
and highway network, improved car efficiency, industrial pollution 
control, and efforts to contain open burning 

ISN Milestone 
         Improvement  of  environmental  standards  regulations  by 
          end ‐CAS   
There has been progress in adopting legal and institutional 
measures for improving air quality such as amendment of the 
environmental protection Law #4 of 1994 by Law #9 of 2009 which 
prohibits waste burning by imposing heavy fines on offenders. The 
air quality standards set forth in the executive regulations of 1995 
were revised in 2005 and further revised as a result of the 
enactment of Law 9 of 2009, although these executive regulations 
have not yet been issued by the Council of Ministers. This was 
supported by the Bank operation. 
[REF CPS Progress Report 2.3. Improve air and water quality] 
 3.3. Expand access to healthcare:  Not achieved 
Adoption of a health insurance reform reflecting international                   Health sector       Flexibility in project 
best practice – by end‐CAS                                                       reform project      design is crucial. The 
ISN Milestones:                                                                  (SPN‐closed)        adoption of a more 
                                                                                                     flexible design in the 
         Completion  and  adoption  of  actuarial  studies  and  an  FY10: Health 
                                                                           Insurance Systems         project should lead to 
          implementation plan for rolling out the reform. 
                                                                           Development               better outcomes going 
      Contract  verification  and  validation  firm  to  deliver  hands‐                            forward since it will 
                                                                           Project 
          on  support  to  the  health  insurance  payor  for  decision‐                             better respond to 
          taking,  technical  advice,  and  verification  and  validation  Ongoing: Dialogue         Government concerns. 
          services.                                                        on Universal 
                                                                           Health Insurance 
      Commitment  of  the  Government  to  expand  universal  (TA) 
          health  coverage  to  a  new  group  of  uninsured  population, 
          mainly the poor.                                                 Alexandria 
                                                                           Hospitals PPP 
The adoption of health insurance reform has not taken place. The           Project: the PPP 
Bank’s main intervention is the Health Insurance Systems                   Contract was 
Development Project, which has been recently restructured with a  signed in April 
more flexible design to expand health coverage to the poor using a  2012 and the 
fast disbursing design to pay premiums for enrollment in social            project is 
health insurance. When a new Government was appointed after                currently 
June 30, 2013, the Government showed concerns about the                    undergoing 
financial sustainability of their social health insurance and 


                                                                   93
                                                                                     WBG Activities 
        ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                                    that contributed            Lessons 
                Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                                    to the Outcome  
requested our technical assistance to conduct a number of studies               financial closure 
that will help in looking into ways to make the project financially             (IFC) 
sustainable with a possibility of revisiting the project design once             
more to fit the current Government priorities. IFC has successfully 
advised the PPP Central Unit of the Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Higher Education in the implementation of the 
Alexandria Hospitals PPP Project.  
 
[REF CPS Progress Report 3.3. Expand access to healthcare] 
3.4. Develop targeted and sustainable safety nets: Partially Achieved 
Definition and implementation of a sound plan to move towards                   FY12: Emergency     On ASA, it is important to 
a more transparent and sustainable system.                                      Labor‐Intensive     engage the client fully and 
Definition and implementation of new pension regulations                        Works               to focus on emerging policy 
reflecting international best practice.                                         Pension reform      priorities of the client to 
                                                                                (RTA)               enhance the value of our 
ISN Milestones: 
                                                                                                    interventions. However, we 
        Preparation of an implementation plan for subsidy reform               FY13: Inequality 
                                                                                                    need to mindful of the 
         informed by international best practice.                               of Opportunity 
                                                                                                    prevailing country 
                                                                                Study 
        Completion  of  the  technical  work  on  pension  reform                                  environment. Despite our 
         (including regulations and actuarial work).                            Ongoing: Social     best intentions and efforts, 
                                                                                Protection          success is not guaranteed 
             Due  to  the  prevailing  conditions  in  Egypt,  despite         Strategy Note (TA)  as there are factors beyond 
              Bank’s sustained effort we were not able to transition 
              away from the subsidy system to a more efficient and                                  our control. This has been 
              poverty  targeted  SSN  system  although  a  sustained                                particularly true in Egypt. 
              dialogue on this issue was ongoing. However, the Bank                                      
              is  using  the  transition  fund  project  and  the  ongoing                                   
              SSN TA to continue to push for SSN reform. One of the 
              main  achievements  of  the  Bank  in  this  area  has  been 
              support  to  the  development  of  a  poverty  map  for 
              better targeting of social safety net interventions. The 
              Bank  also  supported  the  design  of  a  comprehensive 
              Social Insurance reform through a multi‐year technical 
              assistance  program.  In  June  2010,  the  Egyptian 
              Parliament  approved  a  new  Social  Insurance  and 
              Pensions Law that introduced a systemic reform which 
              was  expected  to  constitute  a  landmark  in  the  Middle 
              East  region.  The  new  system  was  to  be  effective  in 
              January  2012,  but  the  implementation  was  delayed 
              after the revolution and in early 2013 the Government 
              decided  to  cancel  the  law.  The  Bank  provided 
              technical  assistance  through  a  multiyear  program 
              developed  in  two  phases.  The  decision  of  the 
              Government to cancel the Social Insurance law delays 
              the  solution  to  critical  shortcomings  of  the  current 
              pension  system,  notably  concerning  the  fiscal 
              implications  of  projected  deficits  in  the  existing 
              schemes  (in  spite  of  a  high  tax  wedge  on  labor),  the 



                                                                 94
                                                                              WBG Activities 
        ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                             that contributed        Lessons 
                Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                             to the Outcome  
             lack  of  coverage  of  a  significant  number  of  Egyptian 
             workers,  the  high  volatility  of  the  real  value  of 
             pensions  due  to  the  practice  of  “ad  hoc”  arbitrary 
             indexation,  and  the  inadequate  targeting  of  non‐
             contributory  pensions.  The  Government  has 
             expressed  concerns  with  these  issues  and  a  new 
             reform (with a different approach) is under study, but 
             the  scope,  contents  and  potential  impact  of  such 
             reform  still  remain  unclear.  The  Bank  supported  the 
             Government  to  establish  a  poverty‐based  targeting 
             methodology using proxy means testing and the HIECs 
             data,  which  has  been  adopted  as  the  mechanism  to 
             identify  the  poor  for  the  newly  established  Cash 
             Transfer  Program  –  Takaful  and  Karama.    A  $400 
             million  IBRD  Loan  was  delivered  in  FY15  – 
             Strengthening Social Safety Net Project (SSNP) ‐ which 
             supports  the  Government  establish  and  implement 
             the  CT  program.    As  implementation  of  the  CT  and 
             LIWs programs mature, these two programs provide a 
             solid targeted SSN system in Egypt, which would allow 
             for  reforming  and  consolidation  of  old  legacy  SSN 
             programs  that  have  suffered  from  inefficiencies.  The 
             SSNP  is  investing  in  the  establishment  of  a  Unified 
             National  Registry (UNR)  which  will  act  as the  national 
             database  platform  to  support  consolidation  of  SSN 
             and social service programs and facilitate coordinated 
             targeting and delivery mechanisms. The UNR initiative 
             has  already  made  some  progress  toward  linking  the 
             Family  Smart  Card  (food  subsidy),  SSP,  and  social 
             security  databases  through  the  national  ID.    Having 
             well‐tested  SSN  programs  in  place  is  expected  to 
             provide  some  enabling  conditions  to  progress  in  the 
             subsidy reform.  

[REF CPS Progress Report 3.1. Develop targeted and sustainable 
safetv nets] 
3.5. Reduce interregional disparities:  Partially Achieved 
Strong pro‐poor targeting of public investment in Upper Egypt by  FY12: Reclaiming                
end CAS                                                           their Voice: New 
ISN Milestones:                                                   Perspectives from 
                                                                  Young Women 
      Adoption  by  the  Government  of  the  findings  and 
                                                                  and Men in Upper 
          recommendation  of  analytical  work  on  Upper  Egypt 
                                                                  Egypt” 
          sources of growth and poverty. 
                                                                  FY:12:  Emergency 
 
                                                                  Labor Intensive 
The Labor Intensive Investment Project is focused on upper Egypt  Investment 
and should produce further results.  70% of disbursements are     Program 
allotted for upper Egypt, much of which have been disbursed. 



                                                               95
                                                                        WBG Activities 
         ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                       that contributed             Lessons 
                 Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                       to the Outcome  
Due to the prevailing political environment, the Bank was unable 
to establish a sustained dialogue in this area so the goal is 
considered only partially achieved.  The Bank did release a study 
on youth and women in upper Egypt which enabled a continued 
dialogue in this area.    
 
[REF CPS Progress Report 3.2. Reduce interregional disparities] 
3.6. Reduce gender disparities: Achieved 
Effective contribution to informed advocacy and policymaking on         FY11: Gender      Our sustained dialogue 
gender issues by end ‐CAS                                                Assessment        and cross sectoral 
ISN Milestone:                                                          FY12:             engagement with a mix of 
                                                                                           ASA and lending activities 
         Adoption  by  the  Government  of  the  findings  and          Reclaiming 
                                                                         their Voice:      was generally successful. 
          recommendations of Bank analytical work on gender and 
          economic opportunities.                                        New 
                                                                         Perspectives 
This result was achieved.  During the ISN period the Bank released 
                                                                         from Young 
and widely disseminated a number of important reports on gender 
                                                                         Women and 
issues, including:  (i) World Development Report 2012 on Gender 
                                                                         Men in Upper 
and Development; (ii) Opening Doors: Gender Equality and 
                                                                         Egypt” 
Development in the Middle East and North Africa (2013) ‐ a 
regional companion report to the WDR 2012; (iii) Gender                 FY12: MSME 
Assessment “Narrowing the Gap: Improving Labor Market                    Project  
Opportunities for Women in Egypt (2011); and (iv) “Reclaiming           2012: Support 
their Voice: New Perspectives From Young Women and Men in                for Egypt 
Upper Egypt” (2012).                                                     Development 
The strong emphasis on policy dialogue on gender has also been           Marketplace 
accompanied with a renewed corporate, regional and sectoral             FY13: TA on 
commitment on mainstreaming gender into Bank‐financed                    Enhancing 
operations. In the last couple of years, regions, networks and           Microfinance 
sectors have developed gender action plans. Specifically, the            among Women 
MENA Regional Gender Action Plan (2012) adopted a two‐pronged            in MNA 
approach, supplementing support to country programs with an 
explicit focus on informing dialogue and providing a platform for 
debate.  
Specialized Windows for women to improve their access to 
finance:   
The intense policy dialogue on gender has resulted in a number of 
gender‐informed operations in Egypt, focused on increasing 
female employment through business development training and 
access to finance (CAS outcome #2), including: 
In June 2013, the Egypt Development Marketplace program (DM) 
awarded grants of US$1.25 million to 45 organizations, to 
contribute to job creation in agribusiness and handicrafts projects 
across Egypt, with special focus on Upper (Southern) Egypt. Upper 
Egypt predominantly thrives on the agriculture and handicrafts 
sectors as a primary source of income, and it is where women 
tend to earn their living. The program offers women the 


                                                           96
                                                                            WBG Activities 
        ISN outcome/cluster of outcomes and milestones  
                                                                           that contributed    Lessons 
                Status and Evaluation Summary 
                                                                           to the Outcome  
opportunity to network with counterparts in the field as well as 
with local and international development organizations, to explore 
opportunities during and after the grant period. In November 
2012, outreach events were held in Assyut, Qena, Aswan, and 
Minya to raise awareness for the DM and to encourage 
organizations operating in the targeted locations to apply. In April 
2013, two 4‐day capacity building workshops for the finalists were 
organized in Aswan and Minya, to provide in‐depth, interactive 
training on proposal writing, budgeting, social impact monitoring 
and evaluation, and communication skills. Through the Egypt DM 
initiative, projects with the highest potential for scale, replication, 
and financial sustainability have been identified for support. The 
DM provided a platform to support high performing enterprises 
and inclusive business models, mainly led by women, to scale up 
and increase their capacity to reach disenfranchised communities 
with basic and essential goods and services. 
TA Middle East and North Africa: Enhancing Microfinance Amongst 
Women and Youth in MENA (P144655) (approved June 2013) that 
seeks to enhance microfinance access and usage amongst women 
and youth in Morocco, Tunisia, and Egypt through demand‐side 
analysis of access to finance constraints amongst women and 
youth; developing financial literacy modules targeted to women 
and youth; and South‐South learning and training.   
Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprises 
Project (P116011) (approved in April 2012). To date, a total of 
77,818 loans have been disbursed to MSEs leading to the creation 
of over 111 thousand job opportunities. Youth, a severely 
underserved segment suffering from disproportionately high 
unemployment rates, have been effectively targeted, with 
beneficiaries between the age of 21 to 35 and representing 60 
percent of all microfinance lending during the period of January 
2011 and June 2013. The strong impact the operation has had on 
gender mainstreaming is evident in the increase in the number of 
female‐owned MSEs from 4,573 to 20,536 from June 2012 to June 
2013, which represents 25 percent of all financed projects.   
 
[REF CPS Progress report 3.4. Reduce gender disparities] 




                                                              97
                                       Attachment II
                              Completion and Learning Review
                         From CAS to ISN: Pillars and Covered Sectors

 CAS Pillar 1:  Facilitating Private Sector          ISN Pillar 1:  Economic Management
 Development 

 Financial                                           Macro 

 Trade                                               PS/Governance

 PSD 

 CAS Pillar 2: Enhancing Provision of Public         ISN Pillar 2: Jobs
 Services 

 Macro                                               PSD

 Infrastructure32                                    Financial

 Water/Env                                           Infrastructure

 Education                                           Education

 PS/Governance                                       Trade

 CAS Pillar 3: Promoting Equity                      ISN Pillar 3: Inclusion 

 Social Protection                                   Water/Env

 Interregional Disparities                           Social Protection

 Health                                              Interregional Disparities 

 Gender                                              Health

                                                     Gender




32
  Infrastructure is broken down into energy, transport, and telecommunications in both the CAS
and ISN.


                                                98
                                         ATTACHMENT III

                           COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW:
                       PROPOSED CAS/ISN ACTIVITIES FOR FY06-FY14


Those delivered (*)                                 Health Insurance System Development*
                                                    Upper Egypt Integrated Development
Lending
                                                    FY11
FY06                                                Power III *
West Delta Irrigation Infrastructure *              Clean Technology for Energy *
El Tebbin Power *                                   Urban Transport Infrastructure
Mortgage Finance *                                  Solid Waste
Ports Sector Development                            Agriculture/Poultry Industry Recovery*

FY07                                                FY12
Urban/Alexandria Growth Pole*                       Giza North (AF)*
Integrated Governorates Development                 Emergency Labor Intensive *
Social Funds IV
Education Enhancement II                            FY13
Pollution Abatement II*                             Helwan South Power Project*
Solar Thermal                                       Kom Ombo Solar
Financial Sector Restructuring Loan*                Urban Transport Infrastructure Project

FY08
Transport/Road Asset Management
Integrated Governorates II
Railways *
Delta Integrated Sanitation and Sewerage
Infr *
Financial Sector Loan II*

FY09
Additional Financing for Mortgage*
Low Income Social Housing
Ain Sokhna Power Project *
Railways Restructuring *
National Drainage (AF)*

FY10
Facilitating Access to Finance *
Gas Infrastructure*
Airports II *
Roads Assets Management
Post-Basic Education Reform
Social Protection DPL


                                               99
                               Attachment IV
         Completion and Learning Review: Bank Approvals FY06-FY14
Year   Proj ID
                                                                    Commit Amt
FY06   EG- FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM DPL                              500.0
FY06   EG-Second Pollution Abatement                                20.0
FY06   EG-El Tebbin Power                                           259.6
FY07   West Delta Water Conserv. & Irrig. Rehab                     145.0
FY07   EG-MORTGAGE FINANCE                                          37.1
FY08   EG-ALEXANDRIA DEVELOPMENT                                    100.0
FY08   EG INTEGRATED SANITATION & SEWERAGE INFR                     120.0
FY08   EG-FINANCIAL SECTOR DPL II                                   500.0
FY08   EG-Natural Gas Connections Project                           75.0
FY08   EG-AIRPORTS DEV ADDITIONAL FINANCING                         40.0
FY09   EG-Ain Sokhna Power                                          600.0
FY09   EGYPT-Railways Restructuring                                 270.0
FY10   EG-Health Insurance Systems Development                      75.0
FY10   EG-Cairo Airport Development Project-TB2                     280.0
FY10   EG-National Drainage II Add. Financing                       30.0
FY10   EG-Affordable Mortgage Finance DPL                           300.0
FY10   EG-Wind Power Development                                    70.0
FY10   EG-Enhancing Access to Finance for SMEs                      300.0
FY10   EG-Giza North Power Project                                  600.0
FY10   Financial Sector DPL III                                     500.0
FY11   EG-Farm-level Irrigation Modernization                       100.0
FY11   EG-Integrated Sanitation & Sew. Infra. 2                     200.0
FY11   EG-Egypt National Railways Restructuring                     330.0
FY12   EG-Giza North Additional Financing                           240.0
FY12   EG Emergency Labor Intensive Investment                      200.0
FY13   EG - Helwan South Power Project                              585.4
       Overall Result                                               6,477.1



                           Approvals FY00-FY13




                                   100
                                            ATTACHMENT V

         COMPLETION AND LEARNING REVIEW: ISSUES RAISED IN ISN CONSULTATIONS



Area 1: Economic management

Suggestions for Bank involvement:
 Focus on social protection (e.g., conditional cash transfers for education, nutrition, and targeted energy
   subsidies);
 Promote institutional development to guarantee public access to information to inform the policy
   debate and assess the impact of public policy;
 Support increased use of natural gas in Egyptian economy, including transport (CNG); and
 Support to governance, accountability, monitoring and evaluation, and transparency.


Area 2: Jobs

Suggestions for Bank involvement:
 Support technical education and vocational training;
 Support improvement of business environment and doing business, especially for SMEs development,
   including through capacity building;
 Support lending for SMEs development, for employment generation; and
 Reach out to the parliament and media;

Area 3: Inclusion

Suggestions for Bank involvement:
 Working further on access to education in poor areas to improve equity (medium-term);
 Early childhood development;
 Engage in benchmarking, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation (education);
 Cooperation on eradication of illiteracy (medium-term);
 Dialogue on designing the transition to universal health coverage for the poor;
 Health sector governance;
 Results-based financing and pay for performance
 Support temporary employment (such as waste collection, canals cleaning, and other poor self-
   selective labor intensive works) and be involved in social protection programs;
 Support rural road improvements; and
 Support agriculture to eradicate poverty.




                                                    101
ANNEX 3: DONOR ACTIVITIES




         102
103
104
  ANNEX 4: SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT
                                        As Of Date 10/20/2015

Indicator                                              2013          2014         2015          2016
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a                 21            22           21            22
Average Implementation Period (years) b                  4.1           4.5          4.0           4.2
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c              19.0          18.2         28.6          27.3
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c               8.6          20.4         18.1          16.5
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d              19.0          18.2         28.6          27.3
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d               8.6          20.4         18.1          16.5
Disbursement Ratio (%) e                                14.4          11.4         19.0           5.0
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

                                                      Since FY       Last Five
Memorandum Item                                       80             FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number                                     107             4
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)                     6,789.4         351.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number                     23.5          50.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt                        14.5          88.8
a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress
(IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
   beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
   which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.




                                                 105
                                                            ANNEX 5: EGYPT OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS)
                                                            Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
                                                                           As Of Date 10/20/2015

         Closed Projects                122



IBRD/IDA *
  Total Disbursed (Active)                2,073.44
        of w hich has been repaid         33.25
  Total Disbursed (Closed)                3,143.17
        of w hich has been repaid         1,871.77
  Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)       5,216.60
        of w hich has been repaid         1,905.02

  Total Undisbursed (Active)              4,251.08
  Total Undisbursed (Closed)              0.00
  Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)     4,251.08




  Active Projects                                                                                                                                                                       Difference Between
                                                                                Last PSR                                                                                                Expected and Actual
                                                                           Supervision Rating                                   Original Amount in US$ Millions                          Disbursements a/
                                                                     Development       Implementation
Project ID                              Project Name                                                     Fiscal Year    IBRD               IDA           GRANT     Cancel.    Undisb.       Orig. Frm Rev'd
                                                                      Objectives          Progress
P118090                                 EG - Enhanced Water Reso    S                        MS             2013                                          6.682              4.154381
P117407                                 EG - Helwan South Power P   MS                       MU             2013        585.4                                                538.8749    319.8082
P126339                                 EG Emergency Labor Inten S                            S             2012          200                                                24.66655   -20.33345   -21.1448
P150993                                 EG Inclusive Housing FinanMS                         MS             2015          500                                                     500
P094311                                 EG INTEGRATED SANITAT       MU                       MS             2008          120                                                56.91451   56.914505 56.91451
P100047                                 EG-Ain Sokhna Power         S                         S             2009          600                                                217.6221   217.62213
P101201                                 EG-Cairo Airport Developme  S                        MS             2010          280                                                101.8162   101.81621 70.48288
P116011                                 EG-Enhancing Access to FS                             S             2010          300
P117745                                 EG-Farm-level Irrigation Mo MS                       MS             2011          100                                                  82.571   74.304329
P116194                                 EG-Giza North Power ProjeMS                          MS             2010          840                                                 352.198     112.198   177.4644
P080228                                 EG-Health Care Quality ImpU                           U             2010           75                                                      75          75         23
P073977                                 EG-INTEGRATED IRRIGATMS                              MS             2005          120                                                26.41161   26.411607   26.41161
P120161                                 EG-Integrated Sanitation & MU                        MU             2011          200                                                   189.5       130.5   66.16667
P113416                                 EG-Wind Power DevelopmeMS                            MU             2010           70                                                56.91245   56.912453   56.91245
P146007                                 EG: Household Gas Conne S                             S             2015          500                                                     500      0.0001
P116230                                 EG: Sustainable POPs Mn S                            MS             2014                                             8.1                  7.5         1.4
P095925                                 EG:GEF Alexandria CZM /LS                            MS             2010                                            7.15             3.669684   3.6696839   -0.53477
P101103                                 EGYPT-Railways RestructuMS                           MS             2009         600                                                 485.2923   155.29233   56.62566
P146244                                 Promoting Innovation for IncS                         S             2014         300                                                 93.29906
P130801                                 Regional Coordination for ImU                         U             2013                                            1.05             0.839004
P145699                                 Strengthening Social SafetyS                          S             2015          400                                                     400
P154112                                 Sustainable Rural Sanitatio #                         #             2016          550                                                     550
Overall Result                                                                                                         6340.4                            22.982              4267.242   1102.0766 512.2987




                                                                                                               106
                         ANNEX 6: STATEMENT OF IFC’S HELD AND DISBURSED PORTFOLIO

                                                                   As of 9/30/2015
                                                                  (In USD Millions)



                                                            Committed                                    Disbursed Outstanding

                                                                **Quasi               Partici                     **Quasi          Partici
FY Approval           Company                  Loan    Equity    Equity *GT/RM         pant      Loan    Equity    Equity *GT/RM    pant

0                     Adl                          0    58.18        0         0           0         0    58.18        0       0        0
0/12/15               Aub egypt                    0    37.84        0      0.22           0         0    37.84        0    0.22        0
2008                  Bank alexandria              0   196.67        0         0           0         0   196.67        0       0        0
2009                  Beltone egypt                0     2.77        0         0           0         0     1.97        0       0        0
2015                  Cheiron                     50        0        0         0           0     37.55        0        0       0        0
2009                  Citadl mena ji f             0     1.99        0         0           0         0        0        0       0        0
2007/15               Dar al fouad                 0     0.96        0         0           0         0     0.96        0       0        0
2014                  Ecred                       60        0        0         0           0         0        0        0       0        0
0                     Efc egypt                 94.1        0        0         0       58.81      94.1        0        0       0    58.81
2010                  Efg hermes                   0     4.31        0         0           0         0     4.31        0       0        0
2005                  Egypt factors                0        3        0         0           0         0        3        0       0        0
2011                  Eipet sokhna                35        0        0         0           0        35        0        0       0        0
2013                  Elif plastik             13.95        0        0         0           0     13.95        0        0       0        0
2013                  Fawry                        0        6        0         0           0         0        6        0       0        0
2011/12               Galaxy chemicals         10.33        0        0         0           0     10.33        0        0       0        0
0                     Gwfp aube                   10        0        0        10           0         0        0        0       0        0
2007                  Ipi                      15.01        0        0         0           0     15.01        0        0       0        0
0                     Magrabi egypt               10        0        0         0           0        10        0        0       0        0
1992                  Misr compressor            6.8        0        0         0           0       6.8        0        0       0        0
0                     New al-salama             7.71        0        0         0           0      7.71        0        0       0        0
2012                  Nile kordsa               2.23        0        0         0           0      2.23        0        0       0        0
2008                  Nile suez                    8        0        0         0           0         8        0        0       0        0
2010                  Npc egypt                    0     7.15        0         0           0         0     6.72        0       0        0
0                     Oc dubai                     0      5.4        0         0           0         0      5.4        0       0        0
0                     Oci n.v.                     0    25.64        0         0           0         0    25.64        0       0        0
2007                  Omar effendi                30        0        0         0           0        30        0        0       0        0
2010                  Orient ltd                   0       85        0         0           0         0    68.64        0       0        0
1996                  Orix leasing egt             0     0.53        0         0           0         0     0.53        0       0        0
2013                  Petroceltic              91.12        0        0         0           0     58.25        0        0       0        0
2015                  Sindbad club              10.5        0        0         0           0         0        0        0       0        0
2009                  Sphinx egypt                 0     2.53        0         0           0         0     2.33        0       0        0
2015                  Sphinx glass                 0    21.27        0         0           0         0        0        0       0        0
2013                  Transglobe                 1.5     2.34        0     22.17           0         0     2.34        0   19.55        0
2008/10               Wadi group                  18        0        0         0           0        18        0        0       0        0

              Total Portfolio:               474.25    461.58        0     32.39       58.81    346.93   420.53        0   19.77    58.81

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.




                                                                         107
           ANNEX 7: SCD PRIORITIES AND WBG PROPOSED INTERVENTIONS UNDER THE CPF

        Foundation/Highest Priority Areas of SCD                      World Bank Group Interventions under CPF
Improvement in public sector governance                               Working with GOE at central level as well as
   Increase GOE transparency by making more data                      across sectors, embedding greater
    publicly available and making progress towards                     transparency, citizen participation and
    rights to Information Law.                                         feedback in all WBG initiatives at sector level
   Amend the civil service law to allow meritocratic                 Egypt Public Sector/ Governance TA Phase 2
    hiring, promotion and firing.
                                                                      PFM TA
   Amend the public procurement law according to
    OECD/UNICITRAL good practices                                     Development Policy Framework (FY16)
Macroeconomic stabilization
   Tax reform                                              ASA on energy sector and policy reform
   Energy subsidy reform
   Wage bill drift
   Ministry of Finance-Central Bank coordination
   Improve public debt management                          TA (RAS) on Medium-Term Debt Management
   Improve primary and secondary markets for               Strategy; second RAS on establishing Debt
    Government securities                                   Management Office, accounting for contingent
   Prepare a Public Investment Management (PIM)            liabilities and developing the primary and secondary
    system                                                  markets for Government securities.
   Enhance financial sector competition through            Development Policy Framework (FY16)
    facilitating entry/exit and enforcement of corporate
    governance code
   Promote access to finance for private sector,
    especially MSMEs, including through
    strengthening the financial infrastructure: improved
    quality and quantity of credit data collected by the
    credit bureau, secured lending framework and
    registry of movable assets.
Energy subsidies
   Rebase the current price controls with ad valorem       Development Policy Framework (FY16)
    subsidy rates allowing for price adjustments in line
    with international prices.
   Eliminate distortions within the energy sector, both
    across fuels and users, to avoid undesirable
    substitution and rent-seeking trade.
   Implement a clear time bound plan for phasing out
    overall fuel subsidies, and use the resulting savings
    for high priority social and growth needs. This
    needs to be supported by an effective
    communication plan, social protection measures to
    compensate the poor and vulnerable from price
    shocks.
   Scale up energy efficiency programs and improve
    the generation mix to increase the share of
    renewable energy and secure the long term supply
    of natural gas
   Underpin the above measures with improved
    energy services and improvements in the
    governance structure of the energy and gas sectors.




                                                            108
                   SCD priorities                         World Bank Group Interventions
Key Driver I: Increase Private Sector Led Job   Focus Area I: Increase Private Sector Led Job
Creation                                        Creation and Spatial Integration
                                                 Upper Egypt Local Development Program (FY16)
Competition
Information                                       Inclusive Agricultural Development          Program
                                                   (FY17)
Simplification
                                                Development Policy Framework (FY16)
Bankruptcy
                                                     TA and investments to the Ministries of Investment
                                                      and Industry and agencies on regulatory governance
                                                      and policy.
                                                     TA and investments in competitiveness and skills
                                                     Industry-specific TA: ICT investment policy and
                                                      promotion, skills development for ICT, green
                                                      manufacturing and innovation TA
                                                     ASA on Sub-national Doing Business and
                                                      enterprise survey
                                                     Support for energy policy reforms, to include
                                                      private sector participation, pricing, regulatory
                                                      policies, and improving governance of energy
                                                      SOEs
                                                 IFC investment projects and technical assistance
                                                MIGA guarantees
Key Driver II: Enhance Spatial Integration      Focus Area I: Increase Private Sector Led Job
                                                Creation and Spatial Integration

Cooperative law                                 Upper Egypt Local Development Program (FY 16)
 Branch Canal law                                 Inclusive Agricultural Development Program
Land Committee                                      (FY17)
Urban Planning                                  Agriculture Productivity TA and international expertise
                                                (FY16-17)
                                                Possible programmatic support for metropolitan
                                                governance and planning to focus on improved urban
                                                planning and institutional development and inclusive
                                                service delivery (FY17)
Key Driver III: Inclusion                       Focus Area II: Service Delivery for the Poor and
                                                Social Protection

Family Health Services Model                    Just in time notes/papers, Health Quality Operation
Cash transfers                                  (FY17)
Unified National Registry                       Social Safety Net Operation (FY15)
                                                Programmatic Just in time support to Social Protection
                                                (FY15)
                                                ASA on Allocative efficiency of Social Expenditures
                                                (FY15)
                                                SSN sector reform transition fund (FY16)




                                                109
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IBRD 33400R1


                                                                                               A R A B R E PU B L I C O F E GYP T
                                                                                                         CITIES AND TOWNS

                                                                                                         GOVERNORATE CAPITALS

                                                                                                         NATIONAL CAPITAL                                                 GOVERNORATES IN NILE DELTA:
        ARAB REPUBLIC
            OF EGYPT                                                                                     RIVERS
                                                                                                                                                                         1       KAFR EL SHEIKH              8   MENOUFIYA
                                                                                                                                                                         2       DAMIETTA                    9   SHARGIYAH
                                                                                                         MAIN ROADS                                                      3       PORT SAID                  10   QALIUBIYA
                                                                                                                                                                         4       ALEXANDRIA                 11   ISMAILIA
                                                                                                         RAILROADS                                                       5       BEHEIRA                    12   CAIRO
                                                                                                                                                                         6       GHARBIYA                   13   GIZA
                                                                                                         GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES                                          7       DAGAHLIYA

                                                                                                         INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES



                    25°E                                                                      30°E                                                                              35°E

                                                                                                                                             WEST BANK                  To
      To                                                                                                                                     AND GAZA
    Darnah                                            Mediterranean                                 Sea                                                              Tel Aviv

                           Salum
                                                     Marsa Matruh                                                       2 Damietta
                                                                                                          Kafr el
                                                                                                        1 Sheikh                      Port Said El'Arish
                                                                                Alexandria
         Libyan Plateau                                                               Damanhur                   El Mansura 3                                         ISRAEL                     JORDAN
                                                                                                          6 Tanta 7 9
                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                  Zagizig
                                                                                            Shibin el Kom 8                 Ismailia
                                                                                                        Benha                                    NORTHERN
                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                 5              10                                 SINAI
30°N                                                                                                                  CAIRO                                                                                                   30°N
                                                           Qattara                                        Giza
                                                                                                          Giza                           Suez
                                                                                                          13          12       SUEZ
                                                          Depression
                                            Qara                                                                     Helwan                                              Taba

                                                                                               El Fayoum             HELWAN                          SOUTHERN
                     Siwa
                                                                                              EL FAYOUM                                                SINAI
                                  MARSA MATRUH                                                                     Beni Suef




                                                                                                                                                                                 Aqaba
                                                                                                                                         Gu
                                                                                               BENI SUEF                                            Abu Zenima
                                                                                                                                           lf
                                                                            GI ZA                                                           of
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAUDI



                                                                                                                                                                         Gulf of
                                                                                                                                              Su
                                                                                                                                 Ras Gharib     ez
                                                                                            AL MINYA                                                       El Tur
                                                                                               Al Minya                                                                                                ARABIA
                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                            a




 LIBYA
                                                                                                                                                s t
                                                                                                               N




                                                                                                                                  AL BAHR
                                                                                                               ile




                                                                                              ASSIUT                                                          Al Ghurdaqah
                                                                                                                                                    e r



                                                                                                                     Assiut
                                                                                                                                AL AHMAR
                                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                       Riv




                                                                                                                                                                Bir Seiyala
                                                                                                                        er




                                          W e s t e r n                                                                       Sohag
                                                                                                                                  SOHAG                                                   Red
                                                                                                                                                           D e
                    L i




                                                                                                                                            Qena                         Quseir
                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                          Sea
                                                                                                                                                               s e




                                                Desert
                        b y




                                                                                                                                                QENA
                                                                                                                                           Luxor
                                                                                                                                                                   r t




                                                A L WA D I                Mut
                                                                            .               El-Kharga                                      LUXOR
                            a n




25°N                                            AL JADID                                                                                                                                 Marsa 'Alam                          25°N

                                                                                                                                                    ASWAN
                            D e




                                                                                                                                                 Kom Ombo

                                                                                                                             Aswan Dam           Aswan
                                s e r




  To
 Jalu
                                                                                                                                Lake
                                      t




                                                                                                                               Nasser


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Halaib




                                                                                  SUDAN
                                                                                                                                                       0        50       100             150    200 Kilometers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         To
                                                                                                       To                                    To                                                                  Port Sudan
                                                                                                     Dongola                               Berber
                         This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.                                                               0              50                  100        150 Miles
20°N                     The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information                                                                                                                                      20°N
                         shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
                         Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
                         endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
             25°E                                                                            30°E                                                                                         35°E

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FEBRUARY 2013
