    IFC ADVISORY SERVICES | ACCESS TO FINANCE   94794




    Kilimo Salama ­– Index-based
    Agriculture Insurance
    A Product Design Case Study




ideas
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance




Product Design Case Studies
Overview
The poor and other underserved populations in developing countries have unique financial
services needs. However, there is often a mismatch between what financial institutions offer and
what underserved populations need or want. This ‗product gap‘ may reflect a lack of interest by
financial institutions in designing more target products, or a lack of willingness or capacity on
the part of financial institutions to design, market and implement tailor-made financial products.

A better understanding of successful products and the processes behind their design,
development and implementation may help increase Access to Finance for underserved
populations. In line with IFC‘s Learning Agenda on responsible financial inclusion, the Product
Design Case Studies were established to bridge the gap between product design/innovation and
financial inclusion, increase knowledge related to product design and development processes,
and focus attention on the end beneficiaries of financial products.

The objectives of the Product Design Case Studies are to 1) develop expertise related to product
design and innovation processes through a better understanding of best practices in the field, in-
depth research and application of behavioral economics concepts; 2) increase awareness of
product design/innovation and the links between product development and financial inclusion;
and 3) generate publicity and knowledge sharing around product design and innovation.

IFC has partnered with ideas42 to research and develop the Product Design Case Studies with a
particular focus on behavioral economics. The case studies present useful products and product
innovations that are scalable across a broad range of markets and offer broadly valuable insights
into features of successful products, customer behavior and the product development process
itself. The case studies also highlight the benefits for financial institutions of implementing or
designing new products, and the corresponding effect on responsible financial inclusion of
underserved populations.


Acknowledgements
IFC together with ideas42 would like to thank all those who helped make this publication
possible. This report was prepared by Piyush Tantia and Tyler Comings at ideas42, under the
management of Gilles Galludec and Sarah Craig. The team would like to acknowledge the
contributions of Rose Goslinga of the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture; Patrick
Nyaboga Ng‘ate of Safaricom; Joseph Kamiri of UAP Insurance; Peter Maina from IFC Global
Index Insurance Facility, and Panos Varangis, Bikki Randhawa, Rolf Behrndt and Margarete
Biallas from IFC Access to Finance. Aichin Lim-Jones provided the cover design, layout and
production of this publication.




                                                1
                             Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance




Kilimo Salama –
Index-based Agriculture
Insurance

Overview of the Case Study
The objective of this case study is to describe the design and implementation of an index-based
agricultural insurance product targeting rural farmers in Kenya. The Kilimo Salama (―Safe
Agriculture‖ in Kiswahili) product has been successful in protecting farmers against risks from
drought or excessive rainfall, both of which can have disastrous effects on the harvest.

The following sections present weather-related risks affecting farmers, the steps taken to address
these problems by designing a new insurance product, the product development and
implementation process, and the impact of this new product thus far. Beyond the focus on
product design, this case also discusses lessons learned since the product‘s launch, how the
product is expected to evolve in future versions, and scalability.

The preparation of this case study was supported by funding from IFC. Rose Goslinga at the
Syngenta Foundation accompanied ideas42 and IFC on a site visit in Kenya, and her help was
instrumental in preparing this case study.


The Problem: Unpredictability of Rainfall
Farming is a mainstay of the Kenyan economy, representing three quarters of employment in the
country. Nearly half of all farming output in the country is for subsistence purposes1. Therefore,
many farmers‘ livelihoods are entirely dependent on their harvests, both for the income
generated by selling crops and for feeding their families. Unfortunately, there is little certainty in
subsistence farming since the size of the harvest is largely determined by the timing and amount
of rainfall. One drought resulting in a bad harvest can lead to a lack of savings to invest in next
year‘s planting—a vicious cycle from which it is difficult to recover. This precarious situation is
prevalent in Kenya and other developing countries. Whereas individuals experiencing other
financial shocks can often turn to family or friends to help them in a time of need, lack of rainfall
occurs in a localized area where everyone is affected, making it more difficult to turn to peers for
help (Gine et al, 2010).


1
    Country Profile: Kenya, Library of Congress, Federal Research Division, June 2007.

                                                          2
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


Moreover, farmers traditionally have little access to formal banking services to save their
incomes or to borrow to overcome weather-related shocks. Savings would enable farmers to
smooth their consumption and investment over time by keeping income from the plentiful
harvests for use during a dry season. However, even with this ability to hedge there are still
inherent risks in farming. Even with sufficient income to cover seeds, fertilizer and other inputs
necessary for planting, the outcome is still susceptible to rainfall. Of course, farmers know this
and work towards lowering risk for things that they cannot control. For instance, they commonly
plant a variety of crops to diversify their harvests and effectively lower risk. However, the fact
remains that the most important element—rainfall—is completely out of their control.

Traditional insurance products available to farmers address this risk with mixed success. Most
insurance is indemnity-based, meaning the company insures against crop loss or damage. This
process involves the farmer buying insurance, reporting damage after it occurs, filing a formal
claim and receiving a visit from an insurance agent to determine the validity of the claim. After
the validity of the claim is established, the farmer receives a payout. The requirement of
personal visits to remote, rural areas makes this costly and burdensome for the insurer.
Indemnity-based insurance also leaves more room for tampering and fraud on the part of both the
farmer and the insurer.

Indemnity-based insurance offers the advantage of covering losses from any type of damage,
since the cause is not the only determinant of a payout; any cause from drought, flood or other
natural disasters would be indirectly covered if the resulting crops are damaged. However, this
advantage is far outweighed by the lack of certainty surrounding the claims process and higher
cost to both the farmer and insurer. Many farmers have a negative impression of insurance due to
stories of their peers being scammed by insurers—partly because of actual fraud but also because
of poor communication. Moreover, due to the high costs of implementation, a typical insurance
plan must have higher premiums than small-scale farmers can afford in order to be profitable.


The Innovation: Index-based Agricultural Insurance
Kilimo Salama, an index-based insurance product that covers farmers‘ inputs in the event of
drought or excessive rainfall, was developed by the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable
Agriculture (SFSA) and launched in partnership with Safaricom (the largest mobile network
operator in Kenya) and UAP (a large insurance company based in Kenya).

Kilimo Salama is a tool for farmers to avoid the risks associated with rainfall variability that
directly affect their livelihoods. This insurance product is index-based, meaning payouts are
determined by comparison to historical, regional rainfall patterns. During the planting season,
actual rainfall is measured using a solar-powered weather station in the area. If the rainfall is
determined to be too little or too much then there is a payout, the amount of which is based on
the deviation from the rainfall index. This is a large departure from indemnity-based insurance,
which is based on crop damage after the harvest. Kilimo Salama insures farming inputs, not
outputs, and insurance payouts are independent of actual crop damage, meaning a farmer may
receive a payout without experiencing crop damage and may not receive a payout when they do
have crop damage.


                                                3
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


Index-based insurance is not unique to Kilimo Salama; this type of innovation has become
increasingly popular in the developing world in recent years. There are similar products linked to
major disasters (e.g. earthquakes in Mexico using the Richter scale as an index), livestock and,
most commonly, drought (Barnett et al, 2008). Kilimo Salama, however, has distinguished itself
by distributing and marketing its product with remarkable success.

From a behavioral perspective, index-based insurance is akin to a lottery or gambling on the
weather. To sell traditional insurance, a potential customer must be convinced that there is a
reasonable probability of a loss that must be covered. On the other hand, the customer only needs
to believe that the weather is variable and unpredictable in order to find index-based insurance
attractive. Research suggests that both views will be affected by the recency of weather events
via the ―availability heuristic‖ (Kahneman et al, 1973). The availability heuristic is a rule of
thumb people apply when making judgments about probability whereby excessive weight is
placed on recent or easily recalled events. To the extent variability in weather is easier to recall
than a loss due to weather, index-based weather insurance ought to be easier to sell than
traditional insurance.

From an economic perspective, index-based insurance provides a buffer to protect the farmer
against shocks that is similar to having savings. However, savings would be less convenient for
weather protection if the farmer has not accumulated sufficient amount to cover their losses in
the event of a drought. For example, in an area with a drought one out of every ten years, an
insured farmer would pay a 10 percent premium in each of ten years and receive 100 percent
back in the year of the drought. Actual payouts are not binary, but the same element of saving for
a (not so) rainy day applies. However, an uninsured farmer would have to compensate for 100%
of the losses by depleting their savings or borrowing. The insurance allows them eliminate the
drought risk and spread the costs of protection over a longer period.


Design and Implementation
Product Design
Kilimo Salama was developed by the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture (SFSA),
a non-profit organization established by Syngenta, a large agri-business company based in
Switzerland. Syngenta gives the Foundation an annual endowment to develop research and
products to support small-scale farmers in developing countries. The Foundation employs 15 to
20 people who act independently of the Syngenta Company but may partner with it on projects,
allowing them to utilize the company‘s expertise. Kilimo Salama involves such a partnership: the
Foundation developed the idea and Syngenta Company provided access to its product
distribution network of local agri-dealers. The product development team was led by Rose
Goslinga, Agricultural Insurance Initiative Coordinator at the Syngenta Foundation. Kilimo
Salama is further supported by the Global Index Insurance Facility, a program managed by IFC
to facilitate the expansion of index-based insurance globally.

The problem that the product sought to address was the vulnerability of farmers to weather
unpredictability. In particular, a drought or excess rain can devastate crops, not only ruining a
farmer‘s harvest in that year but also affecting prospects for recovery in the future. Lower

                                                 4
                        Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


income from a smaller harvest leaves farmers with little to spend on next season‘s inputs. One
bad season can thus have consequences for several seasons if the farmer is not protected by
insurance, but adequate insurance coverage for small-scale farmers is not widely available.

The Syngenta Foundation wanted to develop an insurance product that could reach small-scale
farmers yet still be economically sustainable. The idea for the product came as a reaction to
traditional indemnity-based insurance, which requires personal visits by the insurer to assess the
damages from a farmer‘s claim. The costs associated with this model are unsustainable for small-
scale farmers since their premiums are low while the transaction costs are high. Indemnity-based
insurance also has a bad reputation among many farmers because of the perceived potential for
fraud.

The Foundation found that an index-based product best suited their needs. This product was
relatively new at the time but had been tried in some developing countries, including Rwanda,
India and Malawi, to insure against drought. The product is structured so that premiums and
payouts are calculated by comparing actual data to an index based on historical data. Typically,
this is done through the use of rainfall measurements from local weather stations compared to a
―trigger level‖—the minimal amount of rainfall necessary for normal plant growth. This design
was seen as advantageous since it relied on objective measurements to determine damage. Index-
based insurance is also cheaper than traditional insurance since it requires no personal visits to
assess damage.

After settling on index-based insurance as the preferred method of protecting vulnerable farmers
against weather-related risks, the Foundation needed to find a channel to deliver the product and
a country to test it in that met certain conditions: sufficient weather data to develop an index, risk
of drought, and lack of government subsidies—farmers would have to pay for the premiums
themselves. With these factors in mind, several countries were considered, including Mali,
Zambia, Tanzania, Ghana, and Kenya. The Foundation initially believed that the product would
be linked to formal credit but found that banks in these countries were reluctant to lend to small-
scale farmers. After exploring many opportunities, Kenya was picked as the best site to develop
the product once viable partners came on board.

The Syngenta Foundation talked with insurers in Kenya but found UAP in Kenya to be the most
suitable partner; their partnership formed the Agricultural Index Insurance Initiative. UAP
Insurance employed an agronomist that had already developed products for large-scale farmers,
meaning the company had the available expertise the Foundation was looking for. The presence
of an agronomist sent a signal that they were serious about developing their agriculture portfolio.

UAP Insurance was also independently exploring the idea of developing products to reach small-
scale farmers. From their perspective, this market had been largely underdeveloped, as insuring
small-scale farmers was not cost-effective. It had been difficult to reach farmers since they had
developed mistrust of the insurance industry from past dealings and also were resistant to paying
premiums on inputs. Farmers also took their own measures to mitigate risk, such as diversifying
their crop mixes each season. UAP wanted a simple, affordable yet sustainable product, and an
index-based approach met UAP‘s criteria for new product development. Unlike traditional
insurance products, this new product would cover only crop inputs and would not require

                                                  5
                             Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


personal site visits. The product—later called ―Kilimo Salama‖—went through the company‘s
formal approval process: a proposal was written, approved by a technical committee and signed
off on with final approval by top executives.


Rainfall Measurement and Payouts
The collection and use of weather data is the backbone of Kilimo Salama. Rainfall measurements
are used to calculate premiums and payouts, so must be accurate. Additionally, in order to
encourage farmers to trust the product the measurements have to be visibly objective.
(Indemnity-based insurance fails at this since the agent visiting the farm determines the validity
of the farmer‘s claim.) To address these issues, the Foundation used many features of other
index-based products but also added their own innovations.

Firstly, Kilimo Salama uses state-of-the-art weather stations in each agricultural region (about 15
square kilometers). These stations measure rainfall and other climate information (wind speed,
temperature) and continually send the data to a central location.. Since the measurements are
automated and there is little room for tampering, data collection is consistent across all regions.
The only drawback is that measurements at the station do not always match the rainfall at a
neighboring farm. This is inevitable and has caused concern, and farmers are allowed to choose
which station best represents their farm‘s climate.

As the basis for its rainfall index, the Foundation adopted the widely used Water Requirement
Satisfaction Index (WRSI). Payout calculations are determined by this index and by local
conditions. The WRSI determines the ―trigger amount‖—the minimum rainfall required for
normal growth for a certain crop. Local conditions were measured using region-specific data on
rainfall going back as far as 30 years from the Kenya Meteorological Department. The structure
of the insurance contracts is region-specific—payouts depend on the past rainfall in that region
and on current conditions on the ground2.

The premiums charged to consumers are calculated based on simple assumptions of the
frequency of drought in Kenya. Drought cycles in Kenya occur on average every seven to ten
years. (In a simple example, a 100 percent payout from the insurer every 10 years would require
a 10 percent annual premium to break even.) The payout scheme has undergone several changes
but currently Kilimo Salama customers pay an average of 10 percent premiums.




2
    More detail on the index is available at www.syngentafoundation.org

                                                          6
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


Product Distribution
One of the largest challenges in developing any financial product is distribution, and this was
particularly challenging for Kilimo Salama since it had to reach small-scale farmers with a lack
of supporting infrastructure and also remain economically sustainable while using mostly small
transactions. The solution to this barrier involved partnering with Safaricom, the largest mobile
network operator in Kenya, and using Syngenta‘s stockist network for selling the product.
Kilimo Salama is the first micro-insurance product to be distributed and implemented over a
mobile phone network. This is a groundbreaking innovation in insurance delivery, developed in
reaction to the lack of infrastructure in place for distributing such a product.

The nearly 8,500 agricultural stockists in Kenya were seen as a distribution channel for the
product. Syngenta‘s distributors helped the Foundation choose 50 dealers that were well-
established and had sufficient customer traffic. The dealers were incentivized to sell the product
by receiving a portion of the related profits. From a behavioral perspective, this distribution
channel makes sense as it should be easier to entice people to sign up for insurance at the time
that they purchase inputs. Moreover, charging the premium on top of the input costs, instead of
separately, capitalizes on ―mental accounting‖—customers will bundle the insurance and a bag
of seeds as one item to purchase instead of viewing them as two items.

Safaricom is the largest mobile network operator in Kenya with 80 percent of the market. It
therefore provided a tremendous network for reaching small-scale farmers. This system makes
the product affordable and convenient for farmers since many already have mobile phones. The
product is also scalable for the insurance company since the marginal cost of an additional
customer is minimal..

The product approval went through Safaricom‘s ―gate process‖ including developing the concept
and requirements, attaining executive final approval, piloting and scaling. The final application
designed by the Syngenta Foundation and Safaricom uses Safaricom‘s mobile banking system,
M-PESA, for transferring premiums and payouts. (M-PESA, started in 2007, now dominates the
market and is currently used by over 13 million Kenyans.) This system allows customers to
deposit or withdraw money, send money to another customer and pay bills.

The process for purchasing insurance works as follows (see diagram in Figure 1):

   The farmer visits a local stockist who offers them Kilimo Salama coverage as a premium on
    the cost of their seeds or other inputs.

   If the farmer decides to buy Kilimo Salama, the stockist scans a bar code on the bag of seeds
    using a Kilimo Salama application on their mobile phone. The application on their phone
    recognizes the bar code and sends the corresponding coverage amount to the insurance
    company (UAP). The application further tells the stockist how much premium the farmer
    should pay him.

   The farmer then gets a text message notifying them of their policy number and the items they
    have insured.


                                                7
                              Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


   The stockist collects the premiums of several customers before it is transferred via M-PESA
    to UAP.

   If a payout is necessary, the farmer receives a text message that they have a claim. They are
    informed of the amount of the payout, which is directly deposited into their M-PESA
    account.

                              Figure 1: Kilimo Salama Purchase Process




Source: Syngenta Foundation

Conducting most transactions over mobile phones is a key driver of this product‘s success. It
provides a cheap distribution mechanism for the insurer and is easily accessible for the customer.
In addition to reaching small-scale farmers through mobile technology, Kilimo Salama has been
successful in overcoming a key barrier to selling insurance: establishing trust with the customer.
Farmers are typically incredulous when presented with the option of purchasing insurance, due to
their own experiences or those of their peers with traditional indemnity-based insurance. Kilimo
Salama has largely overcome this obstacle by offering to insure small amounts—as little as one
bag of seed. This offer gives farmers the ability to ―test‖ the product and escalate the amount of
inputs they insure once they are comfortable. In a focus group discussion of over 20 farmers in
Moiben, all nine farmers who had bought insurance the previous year said they would buy it
again, and most of the remaining farmers said they would buy it for the first time this year. One

                                                     8
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


farmer summarized his relationship with Kilimo Salama: ―Last year we wanted to go slowly,
now we want to do it right away.‖


Customer Outreach
The product is marketed to farmers over the radio and at group training sessions. The radio
announcements were used since this is how most farmers get their information. The
advertisements tell of the benefits of Kilimo Salama and which local stockists to visit to acquire
the product (in this way, it also helps market the stockists themselves.) Group training sessions
are held in each region before the start of each planting season. Where possible, trainers are
assigned to the region they are from, as knowledge of the local culture and dialect are critical for
communicating to local farmers.

Educating potential customers on the benefits of insurance was another challenge facing Kilimo
Salama. As previously mentioned, insurance has a bad connotation for many farmers.
Overcoming this obstacle meant that any new insurance product had to establish trust with the
customer. Indeed, trust is easier to achieve since the product is offered by a stockist with whom
the farmer may have an established relationship. In addition, using local trainers can increase
farmer‘s trust in the insurance product. The Foundation recognized quickly that interactions with
peers can have a profound effect on customers and attract potential users.

Kilimo Salama also has a phone help line where agents can answer questions about the product.
This line is open to both existing and potential customers. Again, the Foundation was sensitive to
cultural differences for each region in setting up the help line. Agents are trained in how to deal
with customers from different regions. For instance, they are taught the proper greeting for each
region because if the farmer is greeted improperly, they are less likely to engage with the agent.
These cultural nuances are important to master, especially for acquiring new customers.


Changes During Implementation
Kilimo Salama was originally pilot tested in the Laikipia district in Kenya in March 2009 using
two weather stations that insured seeds for 200 local maize farmers. It is currently in its third
year of operation and has undergone changes with each iteration. The Foundation routinely
collects feedback from customers and stockists to gauge their opinions on the product. Kilimo
Salama has adapted to the wishes of current users to attract new customers. The following
changes have occurred throughout the product‘s evolution:

   Free offer. Initially the insurance premium was completely paid for by Syngenta Company
    and offered to farmers for free. However, this did not have the intended effect of enticing
    farmers to take up the product for cultural reasons: Kenyans are generally distrustful of
    products that are free. The Foundation dropped this strategy as a result and introduced a 10
    percent premium.

   Pricing. Since the product‘s price was set, the mix of funding the premiums has changed.
    The 10 percent premium was initially split between Syngenta Company and the farmer, with
    5 percent paid by each.

                                                 9
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance




   Insuring other inputs. The first version of Kilimo Salama only offered insurance for maize.
    After this pilot succeeded, the Foundation added insurance for more types of crops. After
    farmers were accustomed to using the product for seeds, they began to ask if they could
    insure other inputs. As a result, in the second year Kilimo Salama offered coverage for
    fertilizer (from MEA) and other chemicals (from Syngenta).

   Insuring outputs. The latest version, Kilimo Salama Plus, now offers coverage for crop
    outputs. This new product is only offered in certain areas where farmers expressed interest in
    this feature (e.g. Eldoret). With this new version, farmers can cover all of their input costs
    and the resulting crops based on the estimated value of the harvest. In this case they pay the
    full price of 10 percent premium themselves.

Kilimo Salama contributes to responsible financial inclusion by providing an accessible and
cheap product to people in the region. The product is offered at a low premium but covers the
farmer against potential for immense financial shock emanating from drought. Kilimo Salama is
also objective and transparent in measurement of rainfall and determination of payouts —leaving
no room for fraud. In fact, the key element of the product is the cultivation of trust with the
farmer. The Foundation continually interacts with the farmers and stockists to determine their
needs and adjusts the product accordingly. In the future, it will offer more education on the
weather to help farmers and more flexible protection.


Results
Impact on farmers
Kilimo Salama has successfully provided protection against rainfall while remaining affordable
and accessible to farmers in remote regions. The product has succeeded in meeting its goal of
protecting farmers against unpredictable weather. The product has also been successfully
implemented through the use of an extensive stockist network and mobile phone payment
system.

In 2009, the initial product pilot covering 200 farmers and two weather stations happened to
come before one of the worst droughts in recent history. As a result, all of the farmers received a
payout totaling either 30 percent or 80 percent of the insured maize seeds; the portion was
different for each of the two weather stations. In the following season, 12,000 farmers were
covered through 25 additional weather stations. In this season, only 10 percent of farmers (1,200
farmers from 10 weather stations) received payouts ranging from 10 percent to 50 percent of
their insured inputs.

Since then, the product has adapted to the needs of its customers by adding more features and
flexibility, with the ultimate goal of providing comprehensive protection to small-scale farmers.
It now offers protection for seeds, chemicals and harvest outputs. The latter will offer farmers the
ability to recover their potential earnings contemporaneously with their damage. If only inputs
are insured then the farmer gets compensated for those costs but has to wait until next season‘s
harvest to reap the benefits.

                                                10
                       Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


The product has shown remarkable growth and now covers 12,000 farmers and 30 weather
stations. Two thirds of these new farmers came from recruiting through microfinance institutions
(MFIs) where enrollment in Kilimo Salama is mandatory. Kilimo Salama offers the MFIs
indirect coverage by protecting their debtor, the farmer. This practice encourages farmers to take
up insurance if they want to receive a loan (Yang et al, 2008). Several farmers in a focus group
in Moiben mentioned that they were purchasing insurance because they wanted to take a loan to
expand their farm‘s acreage.


Partner Benefits and Profitability
The product would not have succeeded without the participation of its partners. Each took a risk
in backing a new venture that was not guaranteed to be profitable. Indeed, currently the product
has not turned a profit for every partner. However, as with other products aimed at the low-
income segment, it was not expected to generate an immediate profit.

Safaricom has generated a profit from the product, mainly through its transaction fees for M-
PESA. The company has also benefitted from marketing of M-PESA, claiming that Kilimo
Salama has helped it to acquire new customers and retain existing ones. Since all participating
farmers use M-PESA, Safaricom also benefits from other transactions resulting from a payout:
farmers may use the funds to purchase other goods or save the funds for next year‘s planting (a
majority of farmers in the focus group in Moiben said they would do the latter).

UAP has not yet generated a profit but believes the product will be profitable in the future. The
company initially struggled to convince customers of the product‘s benefits. The insurance
industry was largely unregulated and many companies collapsed as a result, leaving farmers with
unpaid claims. Therefore, the industry has had to regain customers‘ trust, which takes time.
However, UAP predicts that as the product scales up it will become profitable, possibly in 2012.

Stockists that sell Kilimo Salama benefit from the additional exposure the product provides.
They are advertised on the radio, which allows them to build relationships with new and existing
customers. In interviews with several stockists, all claimed that a minority of customers ask for
the product. They also have to take valuable time to explain the product to unfamiliar customers.
However, most of those interviewed believed that farmers would buy more inputs in the coming
season, partly because a good harvest is expected but also because of Kilimo Salama. One
stockist explained, ―we expect to sell more this year, they have peace of mind. The risk is
causing them to buy.‖




                                               11
                              Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance



Lessons Learned
For Design
Kilimo Salama has been successful in part because its key elements were well-established during
the design process. The Syngenta Foundation knew that they would need accurate, reputable data
collection and a sufficient distribution system for the product to flourish. This experience should
be taken into account for other index-based insurance products:

      Rainfall measurement must be objective: Micro-insurance products should rely on
       objective measurements for product reliability. Kilimo Salama uses innovative, solar-
       powered weather stations that give accurate rainfall measurements and also communicate
       other useful data for farmers.

      Establish a local distribution channel: Kilimo Salama is distributed using local stockists at
       the time of purchasing inputs, making it easier for the customer to adopt the new product.
       From a behavioral perspective, this distribution channel capitalizes on existing relationships
       since farmers are more likely to take advice from someone they know and trust.

      Mobile banking is a useful delivery tool: The use of Safaricom‘s M-PESA system was key
       to Kilimo Salama‘s success. It allowed the product to reach farmers throughout Kenya with
       little infrastructure requirement and provided easy access for every transaction. This tool
       removes ―channel factors3‖ by making it very easy for the farmer to sign up and removing
       the need for farmers to file a claim. It should be noted that this was successful partially
       because of Safaricom‘s significant pre-existing market penetration. Indeed, more mobile
       network competition would have provided more of a challenge to product take-up and
       distribution.


For the Product Innovation Process
Kilimo Salama has innovated and adapted with each new planting season. While its design was
carefully constructed, there were difficulties in implementing in the field (as with any product).
The issues faced by Kilimo Salama during this process can be instructive for future products:

 Establishing trust is critical: A key challenge faced by any insurance product is
       establishing trust between the insurer and customer. Kilimo Salama discovered this during
       the product roll-out, as people were reluctant to use any product until they saw that it would
       pay out. The Syngenta Foundation addressed this barrier by letting customers take as little
       insurance as they wanted. For instance, a farmer could insure just one bag of seeds so that
       they could ―test‖ the product before buying more insurance. They may then be more
       comfortable insuring more, even if there was no initial payout.

      Use local people where possible: The distribution and education for a product should use
       local people that understand the region. Kilimo Salama uses local stockists to market its

3
    Channel factors are used in psychology to describe anything that comes between intention and action.

                                                          12
                        Kilimo Salama – Index-based Agriculture Insurance


    product and local trainers to educate farmers on its benefits. These interactions are critical for
    engaging with farmers.

   Short-term profitability should not be a primary goal: All products aim to be sustainable
    and Kilimo Salama is no exception. The Foundation sought to offer an affordable product
    and needed to cut costs wherever possible. The delivery system for Kilimo Salama is indeed
    very cheap to implement, yet the scale of the market has yet to make it profitable. Products
    like insurance are contingent on establishing relationships and trust, which take time to
    cultivate. These elements should not be sacrificed for short-term profitability, and it is these
    very ingredients that are essential for long-term gains.


Future Improvements
Kilimo Salama provides a valuable example for how to distribute and implement a new product.
However, it is still changing and will continue to develop in future years. The Foundation
recently introduced Kilimo Salama Plus to cover more inputs and crop outputs in the current
season. The results from this are not yet available but should provide a new strategy going
forward.

The product continues to expand and has plenty of room for growth in Kenya. While the 30
weather stations currently support 12,000 farmers, Syngenta Foundation claims these stations
could support a total of 50,000 farmers. They and their partners all want to see Kilimo Salama
scaled up even more.


References
Barnett, Barry, Christopher Barrett and Jerry Skees, 2008. Poverty Traps and Index-Based Risk
Transfer Products, World Development Vol. 36, No. 10, 1766–1785.

Gine, Xavier, Lev Menand, Robert Townsend, and James Vickery, 2010. Microinsurance: A
Case Study of the Indian Rainfall Index Insurance Market, Handbook of the Indian Economy,
Oxford University Press.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tverksy , 1973. Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability, Cognitive Psychology, 4, 207-232.
Yang, Dean and Xavier Gine, 2008. Insurance, Credit, and Technology Adoption: Field
Experimental Evidence from Malawi, Journal of Development Economics, September 2008.




                                                 13
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
www.ifc.org




                               ideas
