                                              94807




Concept Note
For an IEG Complex Learning Product on
Environmental and Social Risk Mitigation in
DPOs




January 30, 2015
                                                                                              January 30, 2015


                                       Concept Note
                          For an IEG Complex Learning Product on
                      Environmental and Social Risk Mitigation in DPOs




1. Background and Motivation

Development policy lending differs markedly from investment lending. The two instruments diverge in
terms of what is supported by the loan, how development impact is intended to be achieved, the
mechanism for disbursement of funds, and many of the specific requirements that govern the design and
implementation of operations. Those requirements include approaches to addressing potential
environmental and social effects. Development policy lending is governed by a separate Bank Operational
Policy (OP 8.60), 1 which describes it as “rapidly disbursing policy-based financing, which the Bank provides
in the form of loans or grants to help a borrower address actual or anticipated development financing
requirements that have domestic or external origins.” The World Bank internal processing of
Development Policy Operations (DPOs) also differs from that of Investment Project Financing (IPF).

DPOs were introduced in 2004 replacing a variety of adjustment lending instruments. 2 In doing so, the
Bank moved to an approach of structuring budget support operations around policy areas with “prior
actions” that are to be implemented by the borrower before the operation is submitted to the Bank’s
Board, along with “triggers” for future policy actions when the loan is programmatic (or occasionally, in
tranches). 3 These are all summarized in a Policy Matrix. There is not supposed to be a direct relationship
between the implementation of the policy actions supported by the loan and the use of the funds. Indeed,
while investment operations finance specific investments and activities, under development policy
financing (or DPF) “the Bank normally disburses the proceeds of the Bank Loan into an account that forms
part of the country’s official foreign exchange reserves” (OP 8.60, para. 18).

While investment loans are typically implemented over a period of five years or more, individual DPOs
occur over a much shorter time period; single-loan DPOs typically go to the Board, become effective,
disburse, and close over a matter of months. However, DPOs are often combined into programmatic series
that can span several years. 4

The DPO instrument has been used in different ways by the Bank. Many DPOs aim to support economy-
wide reforms, with the theme of Public Sector Governance being the most common for prior actions,
followed by Financial and Private Sector Development (OPCS 2012). 5 Though less common, in other cases,
DPOs are designed to support policy reforms on specific themes, such as Human Development or
Environment and Natural Resources Management. Although the amounts have fluctuated substantially



1
  We have used the latest version of OP 8.60 available, “Revised July 2014”.
2
  Before 2004, budget support was provided through other instruments, such as Structural Adjustment Loans
(SALs) and Sectoral Adjustment Loans (SECALs).
3
  There are also “benchmarks” which were policy actions but not disbursement conditions. Current practice
discourages the use of benchmarks.
4
  The last OPCS DPL Retrospective reported that of the 221 operations over the three-year period covered, 64%
were part of a programmatic series, 32% were stand-alone, 4% were multi-tranche (OPCS 2012).
5
  2012 Development Policy Lending Retrospective, OPCS, The World Bank.

                                                      [1]
                                                                                               January 30, 2015


over time—peaking at times of international financial distress—development policy lending generally
accounts for about one third of the World Bank’s overall lending portfolio.

DPOs are designed to support programs of "policy and institutional actions that promote growth and
sustainable poverty reduction" (OP 8.60). Most DPOs are designed to help alleviate poverty or have other
positive social impacts through macroeconomic or sectoral policy reforms, and some are designed to have
positive environmental impacts by strengthening environmental policies or by improving incentives in
environmentally sensitive sectors. However, in some cases there may also be risks of adverse
environmental or social consequences from operations supporting policy reforms, and the Bank's policies
require it to assess and ensure that borrowers manage these risks.

The 2004 introduction of OP 8.60 was also intended to address key emerging issues with budget support
operations, including the treatment of poverty/social and environmental aspects. 6 Because DPO proceeds
are not designed to finance specific investments, it is assumed that there is no tangible investment
footprint associated with DPOs. For an instrument designed to improve the development of countries
through policy-measures, it was decided that the policies and procedures governing environmental and
social risk management in Investment Project Financing (IPF)—the so-called “safeguards”—were not
suitable. Hence, specific environmental and social requirements for DPOs were spelled out in OP 8.60.
The main requirements are reflected in paragraph 9: Poverty and Social Impacts, and paragraph 10:
Environmental, Forests, and other Natural Resource Aspects.

The contents of OP 8.60 paragraphs 9 and 10 mirror one another, and require the Bank to determine
whether specific country policies supported by the operation are likely to have significant poverty and
social/environmental effects. For Policies with likely significant effects, the Bank is required to summarize
in the Program Document relevant analytical knowledge of those effects and assess the borrower’s
systems for reducing such adverse effects and enhancing positive effects. If there are significant gaps in
the analysis or shortcomings in the borrower’s systems, the Bank is required to describe in the Program
Document how such gaps or shortcomings will be addressed before or during program implementation.
OP 8.60 does not address environmental or social effects of the use of the funds by the borrower.

There are requirements in other sections of OP 8.60 that are also relevant for the mitigation of
environmental and social risks in DPOs, including:

    •   Paragraph 3: Financing Criteria and Selectivity, which states: “The Bank’s decision to extend a DPF
        is based on an assessment of the Member Country’s policy and institutional framework—
        including its … environmental/natural resource management, and poverty and social aspects".

    •   Paragraph 5: Consultations and Participation, which states: “Relevant analytic work conducted by
        the Bank, particularly on poverty and social impacts and on environmental aspects, is made
        available to the public as part of the consultation process.”

    •   Paragraph 15: Risk Management, which states: “The Bank independently identifies risks
        associated with the program supported and ensures, when possible, that the operation contains
        appropriate mitigation measures.” 7


6
  Starting in 1999, SECALs were required to apply the Bank’s Environmental Assessment Policy, while SALS were
not.
7
  The previous version of OP 8.60 contained a footnote to the Risk Management paragraph that specified that risks
“include…social, environmental, reputational…risks, as appropriate.” That footnote is not found in the most recent

                                                       [2]
                                                                                                 January 30, 2015


All of this is to be described in the Program Document (PD), and draw on relevant analytical work.

On the other hand, in cases where countries are affected by crisis or conflict, where an unusually quick
response is required by the Bank, OP 8.60 states that there may not be sufficient time or country capacity
to adequately address issues like distributional or environmental effects.

With the help of sector technical specialists, OPCS has also prepared Good Practice Notes and Toolkits on
Environmental and Natural Resources Aspects and on Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) for
DPOs. These provide more detailed guidance to task teams on addressing environmental and social issues,
and encourage the monitoring and evaluation of environmental and social impacts. 8 In contrast to the
mandatory OPs/BPs that govern environmental and social safeguards in Investment Project Financing, the
DPL environmental and social Good Practice Notes and Toolkits are written more as guidance.

For the OPCS 2012 Development Policy Lending Retrospective, the Bank carried out its own assessment of
the application of the OP 8.60 social and environmental requirements in its DPO portfolio over the
preceding three years. They considered the “direct and short-term effects only”, and found that 75
percent of prior actions were neutral from a distributional perspective, and 90 percent were neutral from
an environmental perspective. Approximately 17 percent and 11 percent of prior actions were judged to
have potentially positive social and environmental effects, respectively. Approximately 8 percent and 0.3
percent were considered to have potentially adverse social and environmental effects, respectively. Of
the latter, the report determined that in 71 percent of cases with potentially adverse social effects, prior
actions were underpinned by some form of poverty and social impact analysis, while 30 percent of those
with potentially adverse environmental effects discussed relevant analytical knowledge of such effects
and the country’s capacity to mitigate them.

The report will complement a number of existing or forthcoming studies by IEG. A 2010 IEG evaluation
examined the effectiveness of PSIAs, and identified limitations in the implementation of PSIAs and
tensions between their various operational objectives. 9 IEG’s 2010 evaluation Safeguards and
Sustainability Policies in a Changing World looked at the adequacy of the Bank’s safeguard system in
relation to IPFs but did not include the management of environmental and social risks in DPOs. This report
is part of a series of Learning Products IEG is producing in 2015 which focuses on a range of specific aspects
of Development Policy Operations (see Annex A). This forthcoming series will contain two other studies
of particular relevance. The first will consider the influence of core poverty diagnostics on the design of
DPOs. A second will consider the intended environmental effects of DPOS in a separate Learning Product
examining those operations that explicitly aim to improve environmental policies or outcomes.

2. Objectives and Questions

The main objective of this Complex Learning Product is to assess the application of World Bank policy, and
identify lessons learned and good practices related to the implementation of the environmental and social
risk mitigation requirements of OP 8.60.

This learning product has been classified as “Complex,” since it includes both accountability and learning
aspects, and will therefore follow the full processing steps associated with a major evaluation.

version. However, the new Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT), which applies equally to DPOs and IPF
operations, includes “environment and social” as one of nine risk categories.
8
  As noted above, the environmental and social impacts of DPOs could be positive as well as negative.
9
  IEG, 2010. “Analyzing the Effects of Policy Reforms on the Poor: An Evaluation of the Effectiveness of World Bank
Support to Poverty and Social Impact Analyses”

                                                        [3]
                                                                                               January 30, 2015



Specific questions include:
        A. Are risks being identified? Is the Bank identifying potentially significant adverse
           environmental and social/distributional effects of Development Policy Operations in
           accordance with the requirements of OP 8.60? Are determinations of the presence or
           absence of risks of adverse effects based on adequate analytical evidence? Is the Bank
           undertaking adequate analysis of the borrower’s systems for managing them? Were there
           consultations by the borrower with non-government stakeholders on these risks? Was
           relevant analytical work conducted by the Bank made available to the public as part of the
           consultation process?
        B. Are risks being mitigated? Where risks of significant adverse effects are present, and gaps are
           identified in borrower systems for managing them, did the Bank describe how such gaps
           would be addressed in the Program Document? Are the risks and the adequacy of borrower
           country systems monitored after approval and evaluated at closure where appropriate?
        C. Is guidance adequate? Do Bank task teams have sufficient guidance on how to identify
           potential adverse environmental and social effects, and on how significant gaps in analysis or
           shortcomings in systems should be addressed as needed? Are the guidance provided and the
           requirements of BP 8.60 clear, and consistent with OP8.60?
        D. What is the institutional system? What are the Bank institutional arrangements for ensuring
           that environmental and social risks are adequately managed in DPOs? For example, how does
           the Bank ensure that environmental and social risk mitigation is being addressed at important
           stages of the DPO operational cycle: preparation, review, approval, supervision, and
           evaluation? What is the role of grievance mechanisms?

3. Scope

The relevant portfolio includes the entire World Bank Development Policy Lending Portfolio since the
inception of OP 8.60 in 2004. Active DPOs will also be included in this assessment to ensure that the
lessons learned will be as up-to-date and representative as possible. 10 The focus of the review is on Bank
actions, policies and procedures. Unless existing evaluative evidence is available, the review will not
attempt to assess the actual environmental or social effects of policy actions or mitigation measures on
the ground; nor will it assess the performance of borrowers. It will also not provide a detailed assessment
of the quality of background analytical work. 11

The review will not specifically validate the findings of previous World Bank DPL Retrospectives, though it
will attempt to provide a comparator. While an evaluation of whether the requirements laid out in OP
8.60 are sufficient is beyond the scope of this review given that actual outcomes on the ground will not
be assessed, to the extent that the desk review and accompanying interviews, focus groups and relevant
material reviewed can shed light on the policy, this will also be reflected in the review.

The review will focus on the mitigation of potentially adverse environmental and social effects of DPOs.
This should not detract from the fact that these loans are designed to have positive developmental effects,

10
   This is particularly important for DPOs in programmatic series, which under current requirements are not
evaluated until the series closes.
11
   Another Learning Product in the IEG DPO evaluation series will be on “The role and influence of knowledge on
poverty in DPOs”, which will include an assessment of the quality of poverty assessments and PSIAs.

                                                       [4]
                                                                                                  January 30, 2015


be it through supporting sound macroeconomic measures, social welfare policies, or environmental
policies and regulation. However, assessing effects on the ground would be a major undertaking that is
beyond the scope of this Learning Product. 12 Nevertheless, the review will attempt to identify good
practice examples in the mitigation of environmental and social risks in DPOs.

4. Methodology

This Learning Product will be based primarily on a review of existing documents and data, augmented by
interviews with staff. No new field work is envisaged. It is designed to be carried out rapidly in order to
provide a timely independent perspective in relation to the World Bank’s next Development Policy
Lending Retrospective, scheduled to be released in 2015. Given the time and budget constraints, direct
field assessment and consultation with borrowers will not be possible. However, where appropriate,
information will also be gleaned from IEG Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs, which include
missions) of DPOs carried out for other purposes. To develop the report the team will conduct:

     1. A portfolio review of DPOs from 2004 to December 2014.

             o    The review will undertake a random sample of the full DPO portfolio. 13 Sampling will be
                  conducted at the series level, so if one operation in a series is selected then the entire
                  series will be examined. Series will be weighted appropriately so that each operation has
                  an equal chance of being sampled. This random sampling will be representative of the
                  overall DPO portfolio, which will allow for portfolio-wide extrapolation of results. This will
                  be complemented by analysis of 20-25 operations selected non-randomly as case studies
                  being conducted as part of the larger set of IEG Learning Products on DPOs mentioned
                  above, and by additional case study examples where evidence is available. These latter
                  case study examples will not be statistically representative, and so they will be used as
                  illustrative examples rather than being part of the random sample.

             o    The assessment will consider all prior actions supported by the DPOs in the sample.

             o    For the specific policies supported by each operation, the review will evaluate consistency
                  with OP 8.60 and Bank DPO guidance. The Bank Good Practice Notes and Toolkits on
                  Environment and PSIA provide frameworks and advice for assessing the potential adverse
                  environmental and social impacts of different types of policy reforms. IEG will primarily
                  use this guidance to assess whether or not Bank teams should have identified the
                  potential for significant adverse environmental or social effects,14 whether direct or


12
   As part of the series of Learning Products on DPOs, IEG will conduct a separate review of DPOs that explicitly
aimed to support environmental goals.
13
   It may be that many DPOs will have little potential for adverse environmental or social impacts. These
operations will be included in the sample for statistical representativeness, but will likely require little analysis
beyond the initial screening.
14
   OP 8.60 refers to "significant effects". There is no formal definition of what constitutes a significant impact.
IEG's assessment will be based where possible on criteria laid out in Bank guidance, such as in the “Good Practice
Note: Environmental and Natural Resource Aspects of Development Policy Lending” and “Toolkit for Assessing the
Environmental, Forest, and Natural Resource Aspects of Development Policy Lending” on the environment side,
and the “Good Practice Note: Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis to Support Development Policy Operations”
on the social side. These notes provide some additional detail for interpreting what constitutes a “significant”
impact: the Environment Good Practice Note states that “Significant effects are environmental changes of
sufficient magnitude, duration and intensity as to have non-negligible effects on human welfare.”

                                                         [5]
                                                                                                     January 30, 2015


                  indirect. 15 If there is potential for such impacts IEG will assess (based on the documents
                  described in the next bullet): the level of background analytical work; the level of public
                  consultation on policy design; the degree to which risks were identified by the Bank; the
                  degree to which the Bank assessed client capacity for managing these risks; actions taken
                  by the Bank to support the client in effectively mitigating these risks; and monitoring and
                  reporting on these risks after approval and at closure.

             o    Documents to be reviewed include Program Documents, Legal Agreements, comments
                  submitted to review meetings, mission reports and ISRs, background analytical work (such
                  as Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) and Country Environmental Analysis (CEA)),
                  Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs), as well as IEG ICR Reviews and
                  PPARs.

             o    Where questions arise, the documentation review may be complemented by interviews
                  with key stakeholders in the operation.

             o    Any identified potential negative impacts will be reviewed by a minimum of two team
                  members to ensure accuracy and consistency.

     2. A review of World Bank DPL policies, processes, institutions, and practices. This will include reviews
        of relevant documentation as well as interviews with key stakeholders. Information reviewed will
        include documents accompanying the Board discussion of OP 8.60, the OP and BP themselves,
        and institutional arrangements for reviews and clearances.

     3. An assessment of guidance available to DPO task teams and borrowers. This will encompass a
        review of Guidance Notes and Toolkits, and input from specialists to draw lessons for possible
        enhancements.

     4. Stakeholder engagement. Time permitting, the task team will carry out targeted engagement with
        key stakeholders within the Bank using several methods. This may include individual interviews,
        focus groups, or just-in-time surveys of Task Team Leaders, environmental and social experts,
        operational policy experts, managers, and lawyers.

5. Audience

The main audience for this review will be World Bank Board members (and specifically CODE); staff and
management who play leading roles in managing DPOs; and those in the new Environment and Natural
Resources and Urban, Rural, Resilience and Social Development Global Practices and OPCS concerned
with environmental and social risk mitigation in DPOs. The external audience will include Bank clients and
civil society representatives with an interest in the environmental and social outcomes of World Bank
support.


15
  OP 8.60 does not make a distinction between direct and indirect effects. However, the Bank's Good Practice
Note on Environmental and Natural Resource Aspects of DPOs notes that "the effect of policy reforms on the
environment is often felt only indirectly", and the Bank's Toolkit for Assessing the Environmental, Forest, and
Natural Resource Aspects of Development Policy Lending is designed to facilitate "systematic analysis of direct and
indirect effects of development policy reforms on the natural environment and natural resources" and presents
tools for analyzing indirect effects. These indicate the Bank's expectation that significant indirect effects of policies
are intended to be considered.

                                                          [6]
                                                                                         January 30, 2015


6. Review processes.

As a Complex Learning Product, the report will have the same review requirements as an IEG major
evaluation, including circulation of the Concept Note and final report to CODE for information,
opportunity for WBG comment on the draft Concept Note and draft report, and public disclosure of the
final report in line with IEG Disclosure Policy.

As with all IEG learning products, the report will not contain formal recommendations and will not be
tracked in the Management Action Record process. It will provide advice and suggestions for the Bank to
consider.

7. Task Team

The Team Leader is William Sutton (Lead Economist & Cluster Leader, Agriculture and Environment), and
core team members include Stephen Hutton (Environmental Economist), John Redwood (Sr. Adviser on
Environment, consultant), Cyprian Fisiy (Sr. Adviser on Social, consultant), Zeljko Bogetic (Lead Economist
and DPF expert), Daniel Gibson (Lead Social Consultant), Gurkan Kuntasal (Sr. Environmental Specialist),
Richard Carroll (DPO and distributional impacts specialist), and Jesse Torrence (data analysis).

8. Peer Reviewers

The Peer Reviewers outside of IEG are Kirk Hamilton (Lead Environmental Economist, retired), Erwin
Tiongson (Professor in the Practice of International Affairs and Chair, International Development
Concentration, Georgetown University) and Reidar Kvam (Senior Manager in the Environment, Social and
Governance Department, IFC).




                                                    [7]
                                                                                           January 30, 2015


                                Annex A: IEG Learning Products on DPOs

IEGPS has developed a program of eight separate learning products on DPOs (budget support) to
strengthen learning in the Bank and IEG, and to influence Bank debate on the design and use of DPOs as
it prepares the next DPL Retrospective. Each learning product has been selected on the basis of recent
discussions and analysis, including the previous, 2012 DPL Retrospective produced by OPCS. A synthesis
of key findings will be prepared in FY16 based on the analysis.

The series of learning products consists of complementary, specific products covering salient areas
identified in the 2012 DPL Retrospective and in recent discussions of DPO evaluation held jointly between
OPCS and IEG. The purpose is to both deepen the understanding of the impact of budget support on
leveraging transformative reforms, building capacity, and supporting higher development objectives such
as greater efficiency in the use of public resources. It also aims to clarify differences across types of DPO
instruments, in particular general vs. sector specific support, the complementarity of parallel DPOs,
programmatic versus one-off operations, and coordination with parallel IMF operations. It further aims
to shed light on Bank compliance with requirements of OP 8.60 such as environmental and social risk
mitigation. The audience for this work includes the Board, external evaluation agencies, Bank staff and
management, OPCS, IEG evaluators, and civil society stakeholders. The main evaluative questions focus
on the overall effectiveness of DPO and factors influencing its design and performance.

The learning elements are organized around eight thematic tasks: (i) the quality of result frameworks in
DPOs; (ii) Adequacy, quality, and risk in DPO macro-fiscal frameworks; (iii) public Expenditure Reviews and
public resource allocation in DPOs; (iv) political economy analysis (PEA) and related factors influencing the
success of DPOs; (v) the influence of core poverty diagnostics on DPO design and outcomes; (vi) risk
mitigation of adverse environmental and social effects in DPOs; (vii) effectiveness of Environment Sectoral
DPOs; and (viii) Effectiveness of Financial Sector DPOs.

Four of these thematic tasks are scheduled to be delivered in FY15, those focusing on macro-fiscal
frameworks, results frameworks, public expenditures and resource allocation, and environmental and
social risks. The remaining three––on poverty, political economy, environmental DPOs, and financial
sector DPOs––are planned for FY16. At that time, a “capstone” synthesis will be prepared with main
findings and lessons from this learning product series.




                                                     [8]
