        IFC ADVISORY SERVICES | ACCESS TO FINANCE   94906




        MICROFINANCE AND
        THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
        A Call for BASEL




IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
© International Finance Corporation 2014. All rights reserved.

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
www.ifc.org

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may
be a violation of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
portions of the work promptly, and when the reproduction is for educational and non-commercial purposes, without a fee,
subject to such attributions and notices as we may reasonably require.

IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness of the content included in this work, or for the conclusions
or judgments described herein, and accepts no responsibility or liability for any omissions or errors (including, without
limitation, typographical errors and technical errors) in the content whatsoever or for reliance thereon. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of
The World Bank or the governments they represent.

The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only and are not intended to constitute legal,
securities, or investment advice, an opinion regarding the appropriateness of any investment, or a solicitation of any type.
IFC or its affiliates may have an investment in, provide other advice or services to, or otherwise have a financial interest in,
certain of the companies and parties (including named herein).

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to IFC’s Corporate Relations
Department, 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.

International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by Articles of Agreement among its member
countries, and a member of the World Bank Group. All names, logos and trademarks are the property of IFC and you may
not use any of such materials for any purpose without the express written consent of IFC. Additionally, “International Finance
Corporation” and “IFC” are registered trademarks of IFC and are protected under international law.

Cover photo: Stephan Hartenstein
Design/Layout: Aichin Lim Jones
MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL
                                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS   i




TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABBREVIATIONS	1
INTRODUCTION	3
THE CRISIS AND ITS AFTERMATH	                                          5
 Stronger correlation with financial markets	                          6
 Regional differences similar to the traditional banking sector	       9
MICROFINANCE AN INTEGRAL PART OF FINANCIAL SECTOR	                    11
	 Concentrated market competition	                                    12
 Over stretched systems	                                              12
THE CRISIS: ONE PROBLEM AMONGST OTHERS	                               13
THE IMPORTANCE OF BASEL	                                              17
 What is Basel?	                                                      18
BASEL FOR MFIS	                                                       21
 Credit risk	                                                         21
 Market risks	                                                        22
 Operational risk	                                                    26
 A comprehensive risk management system	                              28
CONCLUSION	31
BIBLIOGRAPHY	33
ENDNOTES	35


LIST OF BOXES
 Box 1: The authors reviewed and their views	                          5
 Box 2: Formal vs. Informal clients	                                   6
 Box 3: How the predicted liquidity crunch partially materialized	     8
 Box 4: Other disparities explained by type and age of institution	   10
 Box 5: Why Basel is important for mfis	                              18
 Box 6: The Basel pillars and their relevance to mfis	                19
 Box 7: General recommendations to manage marker risks	               23
 Box 8: Common metrics to monitor liquidity risk	                     25
 Box 9: Internal control and the risk management process	             26
ii   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      LIST OF FIGURES
                        Figure 1: Capital inflows	                       7
                        Figure 2: Credit growth	                         7
                        Figure 3: Risk management system	                29


                      LIST OF TABLES
                        Table 1: Regional decline of credit expansion	   9
                        Table 2: MFIs in Trouble: Main Causes	           13
                                               ABBREVIATIONS   1




ABBREVIATIONS

ALCO	   Asset-Liability Committee
AP	     Andhra Pradesh
AUA	    Available Unencumbered Assets
CAC	    Central America and the Caribbean
CEO	    Chief Executive Officer
CRM	    Credit Risk Management
DB 	    Deutsche Bank
DFI	    Development Finance Institution
EAP	    East Asia and the Pacific
ECA	    Eastern Europe and Central Asia
EUR	Euro
FI	     Financial Institution
FX	     Foreign Exchange Or Foreign Currency
GDP	    Gross Domestic Product
IFC	    International Finance Corporation
IR	     Interest Rate
LAC	    Latin America and the Caribbean
LCR	    Liquidity Coverage Ratio
MENA	   Middle East and North Africa
MF	Microfinance
MFI	    Microfinance Institution
MIV	    Microfinance Investment Vehicle
MIX	    Microfinance Information Exchange
2   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                     NBFI	          Non Bank Financial Institution
                     NGO	           Non Governmental Organization
                     NSFR	          Net Stable Funding Ratio
                     ODTI	          Other Deposit Taking Institution
                     PAR30	         Portfolio in arrears over 30 days
                     ROA	           Return On Assets
                     ROE	           Return On Equity
                     ROI	           Return On Investment
                     SA	            South Asia
                     SME	           Small And Medium Enterprises
                     SSA	           Sub Saharan Africa
                     SYM50	         Microfinance Institutions’ Benchmark Compiling 10
                     	              Key Indicators From 50 Mfis
                     USD	           United States Dollar
                     VaR	           Value At Risk
                                                                                               INTRODUCTION   3




INTRODUCTION

For many years, microfinance has been the poster child of governments, policymakers
and international organizations with the goal of lifting millions of people out of
poverty. The notion that microfinance could pursue and achieve the intertwined
goals of development and financial profitability without friction predominated. This
dual opportunity, combined with a huge untapped market for financial services at
the bottom of the pyramid attracted large amounts of funding from international
capital markets, triggering unprecedented levels of growth1. Until the global financial
crisis, the sustainability of the resulting market growth had not been significantly
questioned.
After several regional financial crises, from which domestic microfinance industries
emerged with little more than scratches, the sector earned its reputation as ‘a reliable
or trustworthy asset class.1
“Until the global financial crisis that erupted in late 2007, available data suggested at
most a weak relationship between usual performance indicators in the microfinance
industry and international capital market developments, and even domestic
macroeconomic conditions (Krauss and Walter, 2006, 2009; Gonzalez, 2007; Ahlin,
Lin and Maio, 2010).” (Di Bella, 2011, p.4)
The global financial crisis, however, was unparalleled in its size and reach.2 As the crisis
unfolded during the end of 2007, there seemed to be consensus among microfinance
practitioners, analysts and other industry experts that this crisis would be different.
The microfinance industry braced itself for anticipated liquidity crunches, increase in
costs of funds and foreign exchange, as well as a sharp rise in portfolio arrears.
This paper will:
•	 review recent publications that have drawn conclusions on the effects of the global
   financial crisis based on empirical data research.
•	 draw the conclusion that proper governance and risk management systems are
   essential and could have avoided many of the problems specific MFIs faced during
   the financial crisis.
•	 highlight Basel framework sections relevant to MFIs and demonstrate how these can
   be applied to strengthen MFIs. It will show that MFIs as financial intermediaries
   can increasingly use the Basel framework designed for financial institutions to
   best provide access to finance to help increase the availability and affordability of
   financial services.
4   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL
                                                                        THE CRISIS AND ITS AFTERMATH   5




THE CRISIS AND ITS AFTERMATH
Now that the microfinance industry has been through the eye of the storm, several
publications have appeared debating its aftermath. This first section will draw upon
articles written by Wagner (2010), Wagner & Winkler (2012), di Bella (2011), and
Gonzales (2011, 2012). All articles examine the effects of the financial crisis albeit
from different angles.

  Box 1: The authors reviewed and their views3

   Wagner and Wagner/Winkler are primarily focused on demonstrating
   that microfinance has adopted cyclical boom/bust patterns in credit growth
   associated with traditional financial markets. In their analysis, they hypothesize
   that certain characteristics adopted by MFIs (i.e. an increase in foreign funding)
   have led to this similarity.
   Di Bella establishes that MFI performance is correlated with both
   domestic economic conditions and changes in international capital markets.
   Transformations of MFIs to deposit-taking institutions, increased scale,
   diversification of funding to include international sources, etc., have all
   contributed to more linkages to the general economic environment, increasing
   the systemic risk of the industry. His findings also indicate a relationship
   between the sector’s increased participation in a country’s GDP and its
   sensitivity to macroeconomic changes.
   Gonzalez suggests that many problems observed in the MFI sector had their
   origins even before the most recent financial crisis. Gonzalez’ main hypothesis
   centers around the formalization theory: the higher the level of formalization,
   or integration of microfinance loan portfolios with the domestic economy, the
   worse the decline in portfolio quality during economic recessions.


Some noteworthy observations are shared throughout:
•	 although the sector fared fairly well as a whole, there is a significantly stronger
   correlation between the microfinance sector with domestic and international capital
   markets contradicting earlier evidence4, and
•	 the decline in growth and deterioration in asset quality differed per region and
   followed a pattern similar to that of the mainstream commercial financial markets.
6   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                     Stronger correlation with financial
                     markets
                     Whilst the microfinance sector, as a whole, was not as severely affected by the global
                     financial crisis as other market segments, the long held notion that microfinance as
                     an asset class is largely uncorrelated to the global financial markets can no longer be
                     endorsed. The links between the microfinance sector to both national economies and
                     international capital markets have grown stronger. The high growth rates prior to
                     the crisis have gone hand-in-hand with an increase in the operational scale of MFIs,
                     their dependency on commercial and cross-border funding sources, and integration
                     of more formal clients.

                       Box 2: Formal vs. informal clients

                        Although the terms formal and informal clients are widely used when discussing
                        the recipients of microfinance services, there is no clear-cut distinction between
                        the two. For this purpose, the authors refer to formal clients as those with
                        larger/ registered businesses, salaried clients, or clients seeking consumer,
                        housing, education, or small and medium enterprises (SME) loans.


                     Median MFI overall performance experienced ongoing growth during 2007 to 2009,
                     albeit with substantially lower rates as compared to the pre-crisis period.
                         “Assets of the median MFI increased at about 22 percent per year and lending
                         by 24 percent, while borrowings grew by 23 percent, i.e. 28 percentage
                         points lower than the rate observed during 1998-2006. Though profitability
                         (measured by ROE) of the median MFI appeared only slightly lower than
                         that observed during 1998-2006, the mean ROE was about 5-percentage
                         points lower. Asset quality deteriorated, with both PAR-30 and write offs
                         ratios showing increases.” (Di Bella, 2001, p. 11)
                     Other sources such as the Microfinance Information eXchange (MIX), DB Research,
                     and Symbiotics report similar findings, documenting how many MFIs globally
                     experienced asset deterioration in the form of rising Portfolio at Risk greater than 30
                     Days (PAR30) figures and diminishing returns. The MIX median for PAR30 rose to
                     3% by Dec 2008, whilst the Symbiotics SYM50 median PAR30 rose to 4.5% by June
                     2009. (Chen, et al., 2010). DB Research reports a drop in return on assets (RoA)
                     from 2.4% to 1.8%. (Lutzenkirchen, 2012, p.2)
                     Figure 1 (Wagner, 2010, p.13) shows a similar trend of capital inflows between the
                     banking and the microfinance sectors. In the years preceding the crisis, both sectors
                     were able to attract strong capital inflows from foreign sources contributing to a surge
                     in credit growth in emerging and developing economies. Since the mid-80s strong
                     capital inflows followed by steep declines have been a typical feature of the financial
                     integration of emerging and developing economies. (Wagner 2012, p.13)
                                                                      THE CRISIS AND ITS AFTERMATH   7




  Figure 1: Capital inflows




  Source: Lutzenkirchen, 2012, p.2


For the microfinance sector this was a relatively new phenomenon, which started in the
early 2000s with the rise of Microfinance Investment Vehicles (“MIVs”) and increased
attention from many Development Finance Institutions (DFIs). Rapid advances in
the three years preceding the crisis were followed by a significant slowdown in both
sectors.

  Figure 2: Credit growth




  Source: Wagner, 2012, p.13
8   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                     Figure 2 shows how, in 2008 and 2009, credit growth slowed substantially in emerging
                     and developing economies in both the microfinance and the traditional banking.
                     Compared to 2007, the drop amounted to 23 percentage points in the microfinance
                     sector and to 29 percentage points in the traditional banking sector in 2008. The
                     credit slump was most severe in ECA, whilst South Asia experienced a modest credit
                     contraction (in both sectors).
                     Although an overall decline in asset quality has been observed, empirical data shows
                     that on a global level the expected concerns, mostly related to the predicted liquidity
                     crunch, materialized only partially (Gonzalez, 2011, pp.3-6)

                       Box 3: How the predicted liquidity crunch partially materialized

                        Reduced growth due to a liquidity crunch – In 2009, 40% of the MFIs
                        reporting to the MIX experienced a reduction in debt, whilst more MFIs
                        reported an increase in their funding base. A decrease in demand has also
                        contributed to a decline in debt funding, i.e. the decrease was not only supply
                        driven. In other cases MFIs took prudent measures and slowed down growth
                        to build a liquidity buffer. Surprisingly, four new specialized microfinance
                        funds were established in the height of the crisis and equity valuations for MFIs
                        showed an increasing trend.
                        •	 Rise in short-term funding - The average debt transactions’ tenor actually
                           rose, although the increase was marginal.
                        •	 Higher expenses due to an increase in the cost of funds - In 2009, more than
                           half the MFIs reporting to the MIX experienced a decrease in funding costs,
                           mainly due to the global suppression of interest rates. Only 10% of MFIs
                           experienced an increase in cost of funds exceeding 2%.
                        •	 Higher expenses due to an increase in operating expenses - Gonzales (2011)
                           concludes that there was no significant correlation between portfolio quality
                           and inflation in 2009.
                        •	 Increased market risks due to larger foreign exchange (FX) exposure - MIX
                           data suggests that the actual FX exposure decreased over the 2008-2009
                           period.
                                                                       THE CRISIS AND ITS AFTERMATH   9




Regional differences similar to the
traditional banking sector

The fact that research shows many concerns related to a liquidity crunch only
partially materialized leads to the next finding: that of regional variation. Regional
microfinance markets that experienced strong capital inflows, rapid market growth,
and increasing competition, were also those to experience a slump in credit growth
and deterioration of credit quality as exemplified by Table 1.

  Table 1: Regional decline of credit expansion

   Reduced growth due to a liquidity crunch – In 2009, 40% of the MFIs
   reporting to the MIX experienced a reduction in debt, whilst more MFIs
   reported an increase in their funding base. A decrease in demand has also
   contributed to a decline in debt funding, i.e. the decrease was not only supply
   driven. In other cases MFIs took prudent measures and slowed down growth
   to build a liquidity buffer. Surprisingly, four new specialized microfinance
   funds were established in the height of the crisis and equity valuations for MFIs
   showed an increasing trend.



The research highlights how this especially holds true for the microfinance markets in
Middle East North Africa (MENA) and Eastern Europe Central Asia (ECA) regions,
and specifically for countries including Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Tajikistan,
Azerbaijan, Pakistan, and Morocco. By contrast, countries such as India, Mexico, and
Uganda continued to demonstrate record high growth rates throughout the crisis.
It should be noted that the record high growth rates in India recorded between ’07
and ’09 were based on excessive lending, over indebtedness, irresponsible lending
practices, and relatively high interest rates. The 2011 crisis (often referred to as the
Andhra Pradesh or AP crisis) exposed the weaknesses of the sector.
In the traditional banking sector similar regional boom-bust patterns can be observed.
Further research in 2012 also indicates a larger credit bust in countries with higher
pre-crisis inflation figures, as was the case throughout the ECA region. Similarities
are found in countries that in the pre-crisis period recorded higher GDP growth and
current account surpluses. These findings are largely consistent with those of the
traditional banking sector.. This pattern was predominantly evident in microfinance
markets where over-indebtedness was prevalent such as Morocco or Bosnia and
Herzegovina (aggravated further by dysfunctional credit bureaus and other forms of
information sharing) deterioration of credit underwriting procedures and the ensuing
deterioration of portfolio quality.
10   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      There is ample corroboration of regional differences showing a strong correlation
                      between MFI performance and conditions in domestic/international markets in ECA,
                      MENA, and Central America & the Caribbean (CAC) regions. Regional differences
                      related to the impact of the financial crisis are perhaps the most noteworthy. Apart
                      from regional differences, other disparities, as legal status, type and age of institution,
                      also play part in explaining how institutions are affected by the financial crisis.


                        Box 4: Other disparities explained by type and age of institution

                         •	 Legal status/type of institution : as more non-profits evolve into formal
                            regulated financial institutions, they become more susceptible to global
                            market shocks and economic conditions. In general, Banks and NBFIs have
                            systemically higher risk.
                         •	 A ge/growth rate : Risk is higher for younger institutions or institutions
                            experiencing a rapid exponential growth.
                                           MICROFINANCE AN INTEGRAL PART OF FINANCIAL SECTOR   11




MICROFINANCE AN INTEGRAL
PART OF FINANCIAL SECTOR

Regardless of where the emphasis is placed, the following main features have been
detrimental for specific MFIs and/or regions:
•	 A pre-crisis boom characterized by the oversupply of capital
•	 Rapid growth through expanding clientele and loan sizes,
•	 A deterioration in lending standards, followed by the same consequences experienced
   in the traditional banking sector (the bust):
•	 A drop in credit growth and a rise in non-performing portfolios.
After years of evidence proving the microfinance sector to be fairly resilient to
financial crises one wonders what has happened to the sector’s risk mitigating traits:
conservative credit technology, short-term lending with frequent installments, clients
with flexible informal businesses, and a market environment where over-indebtedness
is not common. An important reminder from the recent financial crisis is that MFIs
are also financial institutions with much the same associated problems. For too
long, they have been regarded as materially different from traditional financial retail
institutions. The more the microfinance sector matures, however, the more individual
MFIs and the sector as a whole are taking on characteristics of traditional financial
intuitions and sector, especially related to their expansion models, product offering
and portfolio financing.
Easy access to funding pushed certain markets to the tipping point. Although the role
of funders is not in the scope of this paper, it should be mentioned that many did not
live up to their responsibilities. Most microfinance funders have some type of social
mission, which they often use to attract funding. Although their specific missions
may differ, the core principle of doing good stands above all. Many MIVs and others,
however, were more concerned with investing their own funds and reaching projected
returns on investment (ROIs), such that the absorption capacity of MFIs was not
sufficiently scrutinized.5 Abundant external funding triggered rapid growth, which
in turn had the following consequences for certain regions and specific institutions:
concentrated market competition, multiple borrowing,6 overstretched MFI systems
and controls, deterioration of underwriting criteria, and expansion of credit offerings.7
These factors were also dominant during the Bolivian microfinance crisis in 1999,
and explain how the risk mitigating factors, once so characteristic of the microfinance
sector, have gone astray. The factors can be grouped under two headings, both further
discussed below:
•	 Concentrated market competition
•	 Over-stretched system.
12   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      Concentrated market competition
                      •	 Increased competition had an adverse effect on the incentives upon which MFIs rely.
                         In many urban centers and in specific in the identified crisis countries like Morocco,
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina, Nicaragua, Pakistan and later on India, clients have more
                         options to access funding and are therefore not reliant on one MFI. The prevailing
                         thought that the credit relationship of the client to the MFI would be a strong
                         stimulus to repay carries less weight in an increasingly competitive environment.
                      •	 Increased competition diminished the credit discipline as many MFIs tried to make
                         their product offering more attractive through reducing transaction times, applying
                         credit scoring techniques, and adapting existing product features such as raising loan
                         sizes and maturities.
                      •	Increased competition led to the formalization of credit portfolios and clients. To
                        attract new clients many MFIs have implemented new products as consumer loans,
                        SME loans, education loans, mortgage loans, etc. In this way, MFIs increased their
                        portfolio exposure to the domestic formal sector. This is especially relevant for MFIs
                        operating in more formal economies, which suffered a relatively stronger GDP
                        contraction.


                      Over stretched systems
                      Fast expansion led many MFIs to recruit a substantial number of new loan officers
                      to manage portfolio expansion. Hence, a large pool of inexperienced loan officers
                      was partially staffing the growth during the credit boom. Rapid credit growth
                      also stretched the capacity of even the most experienced loan officers, as they were
                      managing client numbers higher than their prior limits. The defining of limits plays
                      a central role in proper risk management systems as will be expanded later on in this
                      article.
                      •	When MFIs expand faster than their capacity, internal controls weaken and
                        methodological principles are diluted. This not only raises the likelihood of issuing
                        sub-standard loans but also opens the doors to potential fraudulent practices by
                        both staff and clients.
                      •	 MFIs that focus too strongly on growth and capturing market share can become
                         financially vulnerable through currency and cash flow mismatches, weak balance
                         sheet planning, excessive leverage, etc. This holds especially true for MFIs that enter
                         into a steep growth curve without having established and internalized proper risk
                         management principles related to their financial risk infrastructure.
                                                          THE CRISIS; ONE PROBLEM AMONGST OTHERS                     13




THE CRISIS: ONE PROBLEM
AMONGST OTHERS

Due to the financial and ensuing global crisis, a number of emerging market and
developing countries were heavily affected by declining GDP, remittances, and trade
balances. In several cases this reduced microfinance borrowers’ repayment capacity
and the MFI’s refinancing options, evidence of a correlation with the crisis. However,
industry wide, the components of the financial crisis which were predicted to have
severe negative impact on MFIs were less acute than forecasted. The sector continued
to grow at approximately 15% - 20% per annum during the crisis (DB Research,
2012) and was predicted to expand by 25% in 2012 (responsAbility, 2011).
Furthermore, the impact of the financial crisis has differed by MFI and by geographical
location as it is linked to the macro economic environment, level of integration of the
country to the global economy, level of integration of the MFI within the formal
economy, and the ability of the MFI and its management to effectively address the
crisis. Certain MFIs, primarily located in the microfinance crisis countries including
Morocco, Nicaragua, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, were so affected that they required
workout plans or shuttered their operations entirely. Although these deteriorations
occurred during the financial crisis, it can be argued that the global financial crisis was
not necessarily the predominant cause of the deterioration of asset quality experienced
by several MFIs globally. Irresponsible expansion resulting from easy access to funding
played a large role. The crisis, did, however, exacerbate an overall difficult situation
in certain overheated markets and may even have functioned as a trigger that exposed
fundamental underlying weaknesses that had evolved due to the manner in which the
industry and MFIs matured.
To illustrate the above point, the authors list below all IFC’s workout cases and losses
in its MF portfolio that occurred between 2007- 2010. These examples are evidence
that, although the specific MFI workouts occurred during the financial crisis, the
crisis itself was not the main culprit.


  Table 2: MFIs in Trouble: Main Causes

   Workout	                     Main causes of problems
   African MFI	                 Inadequate CEO, institutional growth without necessary controls, policies and
                                oversight. Difficult macroeconomic and political environment.
   Asian MFI 1	                 At the outset, the Bank experienced operational problems such as poor quality
                                of acquired portfolio, staff turnover, capital shortfall, and corporate governance
                                issues.
14         MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




     Table 2: MFIs in Trouble: Main Causes (continued)

      Asian MFI 2	             Initially, the Bank was able to grow its portfolio aggressively, but in 2008 it
                               experienced deterioration in its portfolio quality with PAR 30 days exceeding
                               40% due to the difficult operating environment and inadequate credit policies
                               and oversight. Other issues affecting operations were high staff turnover, weak
                               management, poor governance, and inadequate market positioning.
      Eurasian MFI	            Disengaged sponsor with no experience in financial intermediation and no on
                               the ground presence. Governance issues led to CEO departure leaving a vacuum
                               at the management level, spurring increased staff turnover. Offers of funding
                               from financial institutions were withdrawn leading to a liquidity crisis. Poor
                               governance increased operational risks with fraud cases appearing and portfolio
                               quality declining. Within a few months, the MFI faced a management crisis and
                               no sources of new funding, all of which led the MFI to default on its lenders.
      Asian MFI 3	             A regional microfinance crisis triggered mass defaults of clients. The MFI in
                               question experienced mass defaults in its loan portfolio, coupled with a freeze
                               in bank funding, which affected its ability to carry out disbursements in other
                               regions. Consequently, the portfolio in these other states was also under stress.
      Failures	
      Latin American MFI 1	 By September 2009, 60% of the Bank’s portfolio was in SME lending, which
                            marked a rapid shift from predominantly microloans. There was a lack of training
                            and appropriate credit underwriting for SME lending, and overexposure to a
                            specific type of cattle-focused lending. Weak local sponsorship led to governance
                            issues in which too much authority was given to the CEO. Disjointed international,
                            ownership structure led to lack of a rapid response when problems arose. A
                            contemporary country-wide adverse movement against lendingwas determined
                            to have a negative effect on this institution, but was not the primary cause of the
                            losses and eventual closure.
      Latin American MFI 2	 Incapable management, fundamental flaws in institutional set-up, weak
                            governance, no understanding of market conditions in particular area of the
                            country, endemic and problematic turnover of employees (almost 100% annually);
                            difficulty retaining top management.
                                                          THE CRISIS; ONE PROBLEM AMONGST OTHERS   15




In analyzing the above-mentioned MFIs that faced serious asset quality deterioration,
the authors would like to stress that a number of the causes which led to the deterioration
arose from a failure to implement best practices for operational management in general
and credit technology in particular. However, most importantly, these failures arose
from two principal drivers that have been highlighted for many years in literature
that analyzes traditional financial institutions: poor corporate governance and risk
management structures.
As the microfinance sector continues to grow and MFIs are becoming diversified, both
in segments and sectors, the systemic risk of these maturing MFIs has indisputably
increased. This holds especially true for MFIs that expand within the same geographic
and operational areas (i.e. more clients in the same areas), rather than expanding
outwards towards less served areas. Regardless, MFIs expanding rapidly need to
introduce comprehensive corporate governance and risk management processes,
focused not only on the appropriate implementation of microcredit technology, but
also on the incorporation of a broader vision of all the risks faced.
16   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL
                                                                               THE IMPORTANCE OF BASEL   17




THE IMPORTANCE OF BASEL

With the preceding sections, it has been proven that there is indeed correlation between
the microfinance sector and traditional financial markets. Root causes of major
problems at MFIs are similar to those observed at traditional financial institutions
(FIs). It is therefore logical to review what traditional FIs do to address similar
problems. As noted above, the main sources of these problems are found in the areas
of risk management and corporate governance. Thus, it is reasonable to take a closer
look at the related standards for traditional FIs – a large part of which are provided
in the Basel framework.8 In this context, it is important to emphasize that the basic
idea of Basel is to prevent financial crisis situations (even though it is recognized that
this expectation has not always been met in practice). The framework suggested by
Basel is indeed designed to protect financial institutions, financial systems, clients
(especially depositors) and employees of financial institutions. The chances therefore
are very high that this framework and the market practice developed over the past
decades in traditional FIs offers valuable risk management solutions that can prove
very helpful for MFIs, too.
In looking for approaches to apply risk management solutions of traditional FIs, it
is imperative to recognize proven business practices of MFIs, which often may be
quite different from traditional banking. Also, the differences in terms of maturity
among MFIs need to be taken into account. However, the strong argument for the
consideration of Basel for MFIs remains: it is a fact that MFIs are some kind of
Financial Institutions, and the more the microfinance industry is maturing the more
it is becoming integrated into the formal financial system. The Basel framework has
been built over the last 25 years, based on plenty of experience on what works well
and what does not in the financial sector. It crystallizes possibilities for FIs to improve
their operations in order to avoid shortcomings, which have been observed to lead to
massive problems and even complete institutional failures. Of course, many of these
could not happen in MFIs, especially when one thinks about the huge losses generated
by rogue trading. However, the massive promotion of mortgage loans which, in
conjunction with repackaging and selling, were one of the main reasons for the 2007
crisis, shows that there are problems in the traditional financial markets from which
MFIs may not be immune. Thus, many interesting and useful suggestions which
relate to lending activities and general operations in financial markets, make sense for
MFIs too. This article will highlight those parts of the Basel framework which keep
this promise, keeping aside those parts which are too complex or simply not relevant
even for highly developed MFIs.
18   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                        Box 5: Why Basel is important for MFIs

                         •	 MFIs are financial institutions and the more they and the whole MF sector
                            develops, the more they are integrated into the financial system
                         •	 Problems at MFIs often do relate to weaknesses in risk management
                         •	 The Basel framework offers recommendations for risk management standards
                            for financial institutions
                         •	 MFIs are in many aspects different from conventional financial institutions
                            and so not all parts of the Basel framework are practical and useful for MFIs.
                            Still there are many principles which are as valuable for MFIs as for normal
                            banks.



                      What is Basel?
                      “Basel” is a set of recommendations for management of risks in financial institutions
                      issued by an assembly of governors of central banks and other regulators from 27
                      countries. Many more countries have adopted these recommendations in local
                      banking laws, some only partly and some making modifications as they see fit.9
                      In its first version, Basel I was issued in 1988 (the so called “Basel Capital Accord”),
                      setting standards for a credit risk framework with a minimum capital of 8% required
                      to cover all risk weighted credit exposures. One can simplistically translate this as a
                      mechanism to link the maximum amount of risk a bank can take (by giving loan)
                      with its financial strength, represented by its equity capital. It ensures, by and large, a
                      bank’s capacity to absorb unexpected losses10 of up to 8% of its retail lending portfolio
                      by providing for an equally sized equity coverage. Of course, it is not as simple as
                      that in reality, because different loans have different risks and are therefore weighted
                      differently when calculating capital requirements.11 But the general principle remains
                      the same. In 1996, market risks were added and in 2001, Basel II was issued – adding
                      operational risk, internal rating methods and two more “pillars”, a supervisory review
                      process and disclosure requirements. The latter does not relate directly to the risk
                      management requirements for financial institutions and is therefore beyond scope
                      of this article. As with all regulations, the targets are moving and so Basel III is
                      currently being implemented in the first countries as a reaction to the recent financial
                      crisis, introducing additional requirements on financial institutions’ equity capital
                      and liquidity management.
                      As a general principle since Basel II, capital requirements (and therefore the
                      requirements to protect against unexpected risks) are reduced with the level of
                      sophistication applied in a bank’s risk management system. The underlying idea is
                      simply that if a bank is very good at risk management it should also be very good
                      at avoiding unwanted risk and therefore limiting unexpected risks. The reduction
                      of capital requirements with the increase of risk management quality is achieved
                      by risk factors applied to the measurement of capital requirements. For example,
                                                                            THE IMPORTANCE OF BASEL                19




if a bank uses a “Standard Approach” for Credit Risk Management (CRM),
its exposures in the retail portfolio12 would be weighted by 75%. If, however, the
bank applies an advanced “Internal Ratings Based Approach”, this weighting may
change significantly, based on a number of statistical parameters of the bank’s own
loan portfolio. Some of these parameters can be set by the regulator and others are
calculated by the banks themselves. The application of such an advanced approach
requires significant investments into the institution’s risk management capabilities.
Similarly for Operational Risk, if the bank applies a “Basic Indicator Approach”, the
capital requirement is equivalent to 15% of the institution’s average income over the
last 3 years. If, however, an advanced approach (the so called “standard approach”) is
implemented, this factor is reduced to 12% for the Retail Banking business typically
done at MFIs. Again, there are certain requirements13 to be met to get regulatory
approval for this more advanced approach.14
This leads directly to a key point: what is the appropriate amount of investment into
an institution’s Risk Management system – the one which represents just the right
balance of effort and value-added to the institution? Clearly, some of the very complex
solutions suggested by Basel will not always make sense for MFIs – but some of the
Basel recommendations are very straight-forward and practical considerations. They
could be considered and implemented very easily at many MFIs, depending on their
individual risk profile and level of maturity. These options are highlighted in the
following sections, discussing in turn each of the standard types of risk: credit risk,
market risks and operational risks.

  Box 6: The Basel pillars and their relevance to MFIs


    Pillar 1    Minimum Capital                Mainly relates to quantification           Limited relevance to
                Requirements to cover for      models for the evaluation of all           MFIs
                unexpected                     types of risk to then put the result in
                •	Credit Risk                  relation with the institution’s equity.
                •	Market Risk

    Pillar 2    The supervisory review         Describes processes and qualitative        Many aspects can be
                process                        requirements in the area of risk           considered very useful
                •	Internal Capital Adequacy    management at banks and the                for MFIs
                  Assessment Process           benchmark to be applied by
                •	Supervisory review and       regulators when reviewing these. 	
                  Evaluation Process           Many aspects can be considered very
                                               useful for MFIs.

    Pillar 3    Disclosure regulations         Defines publication requirements           Very limited relevance
                                               to allow market participants to            to MFIs.
                                               understand a financial institution’s
                                               approach to risk management.
20   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL
                                                                                            BASEL FOR MFIs   21




BASEL FOR MFIs

Credit risk
The main source of risk for MFIs stems from their lending portfolio, so Credit Risk
Management (CRM) is extremely important to MFIs. This is certainly not new to
MFIs and all of them pride themselves on their “superior” credit technology, designed
to reduce client defaults to a minimum. However, a review of common practice at
MFIs often reveals significant room for improvement in the area of CRM, which can
turn into serious problems once credit risk increases and the MFI’s capacity to deal
with that is tested. It is therefore very reasonable to check what Basel has to offer for
MFIs in this area. One indication that Basel is clearly relevant here is the observation
of increased PAR30 rates at MFIs during or after the 2007 crisis; the other is that
there may be efficiency gains possible by adopting “traditional” CRM practices,
which have proven useful and effective in many FIs. Certainly this does not mean
that MFIs should switch to CRM and lending processes adopted by traditional banks
completely and neglect what they have been doing to date. Rather, it is suggested
that certain elements of a “traditional” credit risk management approach may in fact
enrich and improve corresponding processes at MFIs where and if it makes sense, as
well as taking into consideration the MFI’s size and stage of development.
The Basel recommendations for Credit Risk under Pillar 1 and 215 mainly focus on the
risk weights to be applied to different loans, thus defining the capital requirements for
all forms of lending exposure. These are of some relevance to MFIs and their regulators
for those relating to retail, mortgage, and SME loans (section 69 et seq.).16 Of even
greater relevance, however, are the suggestions made for regulators on how to verify
the soundness of an institution’s CRM system17 in conjunction with market practice
suggested by local regulations. What is proposed here can be summarized in seven
key points for a proper system of Credit Risk Management. Many of these elements
are found at MFIs today – sometimes very explicitly established and sometimes in a
rather implicit way – and some of them are established very professionally while others
are not being seriously considered. This article suggests reviewing all of the elements
listed with two objectives in mind: to make sure an MFI’s credit risk management
system is established adequately and comprehensively and to set them up in such a
way that they constitute a proper CRM system as opposed to a mere collection of
isolated and not well coordinated activities. The seven key points for CRM are:
•	 Information Gathering and Client Assessment. The MFI should make sure client
   information is well documented and stored electronically so it can be easily used for
   additional analyses. The available information should be used for the credit decision
   process and additional information should be requested appropriately for loans with
   higher risks.
•	 Collateral / Guarantee Assessment and Verification. The key questions to ask in
   this respect: Are accepted forms of guarantees or collateral well defined, are they
22   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                        reviewed and re-assessed appropriately for mid- and long-term loans? Is the use of
                        collateral legally ensured and perfected? Is collateral recorded thoroughly and are
                        collateral registries used?
                      •	 Risk Assessment, Classification & Client Rating (Scoring). In this area, close
                         attention must be paid to specific (key risk) indicators to understand the risks of a
                         loan, risk classes to determine the intensity of all other steps in the CRM process,
                         proper distinction between clients, products, areas etc.
                      •	 The Decision Process should be on a multi-level structure, based on the results of
                         the risk assessment. It should include an independent review for high-risk loans
                         and incentive structures for lending staff involved in decision-making and should
                         support the MFI’s long-term objectives.
                      •	 The MFI should have a process for the Management / Monitoring of Loans and
                         the Loan Portfolio, which should include a regular analysis / review of the loan
                         portfolio to look for concentrations and correlations. Additional stress testing may
                         be useful to understand which factors can influence credit quality. Lastly, clear rules
                         for provisioning need to be established.
                      •	 An Early Warning System (EWS) should be established using indicators, which can
                         help the MFI identify critical situations ahead of time. These indicators should be
                         reviewed regularly and be complemented with indicators identified by a regularly
                         scheduled analysis of defaulted loans. Technically, the EWS can be closely related
                         to the MFI’s scoring system.
                      •	 Special resources should be nominated and trained to be able to deal professionally
                         with loans under distress, and clear processes should be established for intensified
                         loan management, for restructuring and for wind down.
                      An additional category of Credit Risk, which is often neglected by MFIs, is
                      Counterparty Risk. This is a special type of Credit Risk related to the exposures
                      to financial counterparties rather than customers. Not many MFIs have significant
                      exposure in this area, as mostly they are able to invest assets by lending to clients.
                      However, when there are (temporary) surpluses of liquidity, when collateral must be
                      kept at banks that provide local financing or when swap arrangements are executed, this
                      risk may be relevant to certain MFIs and should then also be managed appropriately.18


                      Market risks
                      Market Risks, sometimes also referred to as Financial Risks, are the risks affecting the
                      value of financial instruments as an effect of movements in market prices or situations.
                      They are further distinguished between Foreign Currency (FX) Risk, Interest Rate
                      (IR) Risk and Liquidity Risk. Depending on the market conditions an MFI is working
                      under and on the structure of its assets and liabilities in terms of currencies, interest
                      rates and terms, all three categories of Market Risk may be relevant to an MFI. In
                      fact, these risks can become very high and generate significant losses (or gains).
                      However, the business objective of an MFI is never to generate income by actively
                            MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL   23




taking market risks. Therefore, the strategic direction must always be to reduce these
risks to a bearable or unavoidable minimum. What is therefore considered adequate
must be determined by the MFI’s Board, taking into consideration the individual
situation of the MFI. Sometimes, Market Risks cannot be avoided: In some cases,
financing is only available from international sources in USD or EUR, but loans can
only be distributed in local currency. But even when there is no option to reduce risks
(by hedging, for example) these risks must be quantified regularly so that provisions
can be made for possible costs and losses.
Market risks are dealt with individually in the Basel documents but overall the
following recommendations should be considered by MFIs for managing FX, IR and
Liquidity Risk:


  Box 7: General recommendations to manage market risks

   •	 A strategy and a policy on the management of Market Risks should be put
      in writing and resolved by the Board;
   •	An independent unit should be charged with control and monitoring of
     market risk exposures regularly. Smaller MFIs would not set up a separate
     unit here, but typically will add this function to the Finance department;
   •	Market risk calculations and business limits need to be synchronized to
     limit the MFI’s ability to accumulate market risks. The acceptable level of
     each individual type of market risk for the MFI should be fixed in its Risk
     Management Strategy;
   •	 A clear escalation process should be defined for any cases of limit breaches;
   •	 Basic stress testing may be useful for advanced MFIs to complement regular
      monitoring of all market risks. Such tests help understand how relevant
      market risks can increase under certain expectable or worst case market
      scenarios;
   •	 Active involvement of the Board and top management in the risk control
      process is a must, substantiated by meaningful reporting and related
      discussions in the appropriate frequency. The establishment of an Asset-
      Liability Committee (e. g. an ALCO on management level) should be
      considered;
   •	 If material obligations are present, the suggested risk analyses should be done
      for each currency individually.



Besides these general points, a few more detailed suggestions for each of the market
risks should be considered as and when appropriate. The following sections summarize
related suggestions.
24   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      Foreign currency risk
                      If an MFI has different operating currencies (assets (e. g. loans) and liabilities (e. g.
                      financings) in other than the local currency) and these currencies are not pegged to
                      another, then there is currency risk, the level of which depends on respective volumes
                      in assets & liabilities and market fluctuations. This risk can translate in gains or losses
                      for the MFI. In addition to the general market risk management points listed above,
                      it is suggested that an MFI put in place a process to calculate exposure in each foreign
                      currency. Depending on the amounts, future interest payments should be included.
                      A Value-at-Risk (VaR) calculation model should be considered in the case of larger
                      MFIs.19


                      Interest rate risk
                      This risk is generated by differences in the interest rate structure of assets and
                      liabilities. If one side is static for a long time, while the other changes, the result may
                      be, for instance, that loans do not generate enough interest income to cover financing
                      costs. However, the typical conditions MFIs usually face suggest this type of risk is
                      not very relevant as in many instances, both the borrowing and lending is on fixed
                      terms and the interest spread between financing and lending often is huge, which
                      gives the MFI some buffer to deal with unfavorable changes in interest rates. Also,
                      MFI loan portfolios are typically of short duration, such that rates may be adjusted
                      quickly if necessary (even though interest rate caps and market competition may limit
                      the MFI’s ability to increase loan interest rates).
                      Nevertheless, there may be combinations of interest rate structures of assets and
                      liabilities that may lead to significant losses in case of changes in market rates and
                      it is still uncommon on the part of MFIs to pass on their financing costs to their
                      borrowers. MFIs with material interest rate gaps should prepare gap reports to identify
                      and measure short- and long-term re-pricing imbalances. Calculating the Interest
                      Earning Impact (and the Economic Value Impact at advanced MFIs) in the time
                      bands of such gap reports is the recommended method to evaluate interest rate risk for
                      MFIs; sophisticated modeling is not necessary in most situations.


                      Liquidity risk
                      It is obvious that an MFI just like any other FI must ensure it is able to meet all
                      payment obligations on time.20 Indeed, some FIs and MFIs experienced liquidity
                      problems in the 2007 crisis, when trust in FIs was lost and therefore the propensity
                      to lend money to them often diminished. MFIs that had not just simply presumed
                      they had adequate liquidity, but that were prepared at least partly to address liquidity
                      issues, were much better off. In order to be better prepared for the next liquidity
                      crunch, which may come even at short notice, the following is recommended by the
                      Basel committee:21
                                                                                               BASEL FOR MFIs                   25




•	Comprehensive cash flow forecasting is a must as well as the development of robust and multifaceted contingency
  funding plans and the maintenance of a sufficient cushion of high quality liquid assets to meet contingent liquidity needs;
•	 A set of common metrics should be considered as the minimum information to be monitored regularly to assess
   the MFI’s liquidity risk profile (liquidity coverage ratio, net stable funding ratio (for advanced MFIs), contractual
   maturity mismatch, concentration of funding, available unencumbered assets and some market-related monitoring
   to verify liquidity of securities held and availability of credit lines etc.).

  Box 8: Common metrics to monitor liquidity risk


            Metric                     Definition                                     Comment
    Liquidity Coverage          Stock of high quality        To ensure sufficient high quality liquid resources to
    Ratio (LCR)                 liquid assets / net cash     survive an acute stress scenario lasting for one month
                                outflows over a 30-day       (or: the amount of unencumbered, high quality
                                time period ≥ 100%.          liquid assets held, which can be used to offset net
                                                             cash outflows under short term (30 days) liquidity
                                                             constraints)
    Net Stable Funding          Available Amount             The NSFR measures the amount of longer-term,
    Ratio (NSFR)                of Stable Funding /          stable sources of funding relative to the liquidity
                                Required Amount of           profiles of its assets, considering also the potential
                                Stable Funding > 1           for calls on liquidity arising from off-balance sheet
                                                             commitments. It is intended to promote longer-term
                                                             structural funding for well-developed MFIs.
    Concentration of            The share of total           This is to avoid dependency on counterparties, which
    funding                     funding should not           may, if no longer available, cause severe liquidity
                                exceed 10 % for single       shortages
                                banks, 5 % for single
                                clients and 15 % for the
                                10 largest clients
    Available                   AUA ≥ 10 % of all        The assets the MFI has at hand to potentially be used
    unencumbered assets         liabilities              as collateral for secured funding either in the market
    (AUA)                                                or at standing central bank facilities
    Cushion of high liquid      (Cash and Sight          Measures the ability to meet immediate payment
    assets                      Balances with Banks      requirements relative to total balance sheet volume.
                                excluding required
                                reserves) / Total Assets
                                ≥ 10 %
    Liquidity position as       The total position of    A position < 0 indicates a lack of liquidity in the
    per GAP analysis            all buckets in the cash respective time bucket. This gap must be closed
                                flow forecast and of     within an appropriate time frame.
                                bucket 1 and 2 (up to
                                1 month),, respectively,
                                must be > 0
26   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      As with the recommendations for Credit Risk Management, the solutions suggested
                      for the different types of Market Risks must be implemented based on the needs and
                      the technical preparedness of the MFI. Again, many of the elements suggested can
                      be developed or tailored to the MFI’s specific situation with only a minimal effort.
                      A few spreadsheet solutions, well integrated into an overall monitoring and reporting
                      process, may be sufficient, and can indeed establish a comprehensive Market Risk
                      Management System which truly helps the MFI to professionally address this area.


                      Operational risk
                      A pragmatic definition of operational risk is: “The risk that something can go wrong”
                      22
                         – in any area or process of an institution, unless covered already by credit risk or
                      market risk. In practice, most MFIs still believe Operational Risks are sufficiently
                      covered by an Internal Audit function and an Internal Control function. However,
                      management of operational risks is a function which, when executed professionally,
                      does more than exercising control on what is done in the business – just as risk
                      management is a lot more than just “control”.

                        Box 9: Internal Control and the Risk Management process

                         The Risk Management process is made of 5 steps:
                         1.	 Identification,
                         2.	 Evaluation,
                         3.	 Treatment,
                         4.	 Monitoring / Control,
                         5.	 Documentation / Communication.
                         The “control” aspect is just one part of the risk management work. A proper
                         internal control system is based on the risks identified and focuses on high risk
                         areas. It typically is comprised of 3 “lines of defense”: the first line being the
                         controls done within the business, the second line covered by Risk Control /
                         Internal Control as a regular and independent control body, and Internal Audit
                         as the 3rd line – which also reviews the appropriateness of the internal control
                         system itself – and the risk management system.
                             MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL   27




As always, the management of these kinds of risk must be tailored to the specific
operations of an MFI and to practices and trends in the microfinance sector. The
standards suggested by Basel II provide very practical help in establishing the most
adequate and practical solution for management of Operational Risks at MFIs:
•	 The Board of Directors and senior management, as appropriate, must be actively
   involved in the oversight of the operational risk management framework;
•	 There should be a basic operational risk management system with clear authorities
   and responsibilities assigned. Larger MFIs should consider establishing a separate
   operational risk management function;
•	 Sufficient resources in the major business lines as well as the control and audit areas
   are provided for;
•	 All relevant operational risk data including material losses is systematically tracked;
•	There is an operational risk assessment system, closely integrated into the risk
  management processes of the MFI;
•	 Techniques for creating incentives to improve the management of operational risk
   are implemented throughout the firm;
•	There is regular reporting of operational risk exposures, including material
  operational losses, to business unit management, senior management, and to the
  Board of Directors. Related procedures ensure appropriate action is taken.23
The above elements of a system to manage operational risks are just as valuable for an
MFI as they are valuable for traditional Financial Institutions. These elements can be
implemented rather easily by taking the following steps:
1.	Nomination of an Operational Risk Manager, who can also cover the sub-areas of
   Compliance, Fraud, Information Security and Business Continuity. Smaller MFIs
   could consider this position be covered by existing staff;24
2.	Adjusting or setting up a policy defining which operational risks are relevant to
   the MFI, how responsibilities for managing them are distributed in the institution,
   what processes and tools are used and what reporting standards exist;
3.	Implementation of a risk event database tool, which ensures that whenever a risk
   event happens it will be tracked and managed professionally, and appropriate
   corrective and preventive measures are taken;
4.	Implementation of an annual risk assessment process and tool to support the
   identification of potential risks for timely implementation of counter measures;
5.	Establishment of a “New Risk Approval Process” to avoid new material risks arising
   with new business initiatives such as new products or new systems / processes.
Overall, with the employment of one (talented) person, the MFI will be much
better prepared for dealing with Operational Risk, including Compliance, Fraud
Risk and Information Security. This will not only reduce related losses and raise
28   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      process efficiency, but will also free time for management, which in MFIs is too often
                      consumed by addressing things that went wrong.
                      It should be mentioned that the specialized activities for Operational Risk
                      Management must be coordinated well with other elements of the MFI’s overall
                      Internal Control System. It is important to have a clear distribution of responsibilities
                      to avoid overlaps with Internal Control entities or the Internal Audit function. Hence,
                      when setting up an Operational Risk Management function, this might also lead to
                      an alleviation of the responsibilities of other, maybe already existing functions such
                      as Compliance, Internal Audit, or Internal Control.


                      A comprehensive Risk Management
                      System
                      In order to implement the above described elements of a risk management system,
                      the MFI needs to also take good care of the integration into its existing corporate
                      governance system. The Basel Committee recommends several organizational
                      constituents:25
                      •	 The Board has to assume overall responsibility for the proper implementation of an
                         appropriate risk management system;
                      •	 An adequately staffed independent Risk Management Department is established;
                      •	Specialized Risk Management experts are employed and trained to ensure
                        appropriate management of all material risks of the MFI;
                      •	 Besides the risk strategy, dedicated policies to define processes, tools, systems and
                         limits for the management of all relevant risk categories are required;
                      •	 The Risk Management System must be subject to regular validation and regular
                         independent review by Internal Audit;
                      •	 A process must be in place to assure a minimum of capital is available at all times to
                         cover for unexpected risks.26
                      A good summary of requirements is given by the recommendation to “have in place
                      a comprehensive risk management process (including Board and senior management
                      oversight) to identify, evaluate, monitor and control or mitigate all material risks and
                      to assess their overall capital adequacy in relation to their risk profile. These processes
                      should be commensurate with the size and complexity of the institution.”27
                      The chart in Figure 3 summarizes the main elements of a risk management system for
                      a financial institution.
                                                                                                         BASEL FOR MFIs   29




  Figure 3: Risk Management System


                                                                          Management
                                 Board                                          (of ...)
    Risk Bearing Capacity
      and Risk Appetite




                            Business Strategy
                                                                       ... Business, Staff,
                                                                      Change, Projects, ...
                              Risk Strategy

                                                                               ... Risks
                             Limit System


                                                                 Credit Risk               Market Risk


                                                                        Operational Risk


                            Internal Control                        Process                 Tools
                                                                                People



                                                Internal Audit



It is clear by now that there are plenty of suggestions to follow for the establishment of
a professional risk management system at an MFI. The time is therefore right to take
a look at the benefits to be expected:
A solid risk management system, built on the fundamentals of the Basel framework,
will support the MFI significantly to:
•	 Identify and evaluate all relevant risks, thereby attaining a more precise view on its
   risk profile. This will enable the MFI to verify that the right risks are taken with the
   appropriate amounts, in line with the MFIs business strategy;
•	 Avoid undue risks and all consequences (financial, reputational, regulatory, etc.). If
   risks do materialize, the MFI is much better prepared to address them;
•	 Make better management decisions through better information about risks;
•	 Ensure control efforts are implemented where they are needed most, safeguarding
   an appropriate allocation of resources in this area;
•	 Apply a well-established process to learn from mistakes (Risk Event Management)
   to constantly improve business processes;
•	 Build and maintain strong risk awareness across the MFI (further develop everyone’s
   risk management skills), which creates an even stronger first line of defense against
   all sorts of risks;
30   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      •	 Achieve (pre-emptive) compliance with ever increasing local regulatory requirements
                         to ensure the MFI can drive the necessary changes, and is not instead driven by the
                         regulator.
                      The last point above may not be of immediate interest to unregulated MFIs, or those
                      MFIs that believe microfinance regulation will not demand significant change in the
                      near future. However, regulators weigh the risks posed by the microfinance industry as
                      it grows against supervisory costs and they can apply new rules they know from other
                      FIs and international standards. When MFIs transform into “Other Deposit-Taking
                      Institutions” (ODTIs) or even banks, they will fall under tighter regulations and then
                      need to also apply minimum risk management standards, which are primarily driven
                      by Basel.
                      Anyway, the establishment of a risk management system is done for the MFI’s own
                      benefit, rather than simply for Basel or to comply with local regulations. As such,
                      each MFI needs to find its own tailored solution, depending on its business strategy,
                      history, culture, and structure - just as traditional FIs do. Most importantly, the
                      solution must be appropriate for the MFI. This appropriateness should be looked at
                      from two angles: On one side, the risk management system must be proportionate
                      with the risks the MFI faces, and on the other side, it should be in line with best
                      market practice, i. e. the practice-proven solutions put in place at other FIs. To date,
                      MFIs have considered this second view point at best by looking at what other MFIs
                      in the region were doing, but they have for the most part abstained from also taking
                      a look at what has been developed at traditional FIs in the past 25 years (unless they
                      transformed into ODTIs or banks and the regulators forced them to close the gaps in
                      their until then underdeveloped risk management systems).
                                                                                              CONCLUSION   31




CONCLUSION

The core idea of this article is that MFIs are not so different from traditional financial
institutions in many ways. This is why the financial crisis led to problems surfacing
at MFIs that were quite similar to those faced by traditional financial institutions.
As with preceding crises, financial regulators and financial institutions have tried to
learn from what went wrong. Much of this has been and will be codified in the Basel
framework. This is why the Basel framework includes suggestions for risk management
systems, which are useful not only for traditional financial institutions, but also MFIs.
In fact, the importance and benefit of implementing a Basel-based risk management
approach is a vital lesson learned from the last financial crisis.
The article provides evidence about the integration of MFIs in traditional financial
markets and highlights the usefulness of risk management elements that should be
considered by MFIs as a result of this background. Basel framework elements can help
MFIs improve their existing processes for managing their risks and make them more
comprehensive and robust. Doing so will also benefit MFIs in times of expansion,
when a properly working risk management system will prevent MFIs from over
stretching their systems and resources as described earlier (see section above: “Over
stretched systems”). A solid risk management system based on the fundamentals of
the Basel framework will ensure the right risks are taken to the appropriate amount
and controls are effective and efficient. It will also help build risk awareness across the
MFI, which prevents the occurrence of unwanted risk events.
MFIs should now take a big breath and step away from solely looking at MFI or
NGO solutions for competitive intelligence on how to manage risk. Instead, they
should take a close look at the very useful processes and strategies which have been
developed by FI expertise over time. MFIs can indeed be financial intermediaries with
best practice professional risk management and this in turn will help them strengthen
their resilience to potential institutional or market shocks, knowing they are not
insulated from future financial crises. Doing so creates and raises trust both in the
MFI and the microfinance sector as a whole. Fundamentally, it will enable MFIs to
more successfully and widely provide access to finance for those who most need it.
32   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL
                                                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY   33




BIBLIOGRAPHY

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (August 2010) Microfinance
activities and the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision,
Bank for International Settlements Communications, Basel, Switzerland.
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs175.htm

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (June 2006) International Convergence of
Capital Measurement and Capital Standards. A Revised Framework. Comprehensive
Version (Basel II), Bank for International Settlements Communications, Basel, Switzerland.
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs128.htm

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (June 2011) Basel III: A global
regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking systems,
Bank for International Settlements Communications, Basel, Switzerland.
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs189.htm

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (January 2013) Basel III:
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and liquidity risk monitoring tools,
Bank for International Settlements Communications, Basel, Switzerland.
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs238.pdf

Basel      Committee       on     Banking     Supervision     (October     2010)
Principles    for       enhancing     corporate     governance,     Bank      for
International      Settlements      Communications,       Basel,     Switzerland.
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs176.htm

Chen, G., Rasmussen S. & Reille, X. (2010) Growth and Vulnerabilities in
Microfinance. CGAP Focus Note, 61, February. http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/
CGAP-Focus-Note-Growth-and-Vulnerabilities-in-Microfinance-Feb-2010.pdf

Constantinou, D. & Ashta, A. 2010 Financial Crisis: Lessons from Microfinance.
Strategic Change: Briefings in Entrepreneurial Finance, Vol. 20, Nos. 5/6, pp. 187-203.

http://www.iupui.edu/~facinfo/I550-New/Financial%20Crisis%20-%20Lessons%20
from%20Microfinance.pdf

Di Bella, G. (2011) The Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on Microfinance and
Policy Implications. IMF Working Paper WP/11/175. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/
ft/wp/2011/wp11175.pdf

Goldberg, Mike, Palladini, Eric (2010) Managing risk and creating value with
microfinance, The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development /TheWorld Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.com/handle/10986/2442
34   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                      Gonzalez, A. (2011) An empirical review of the actual impact of financial crisis
                      and recessions on MFIs, and other factors explaining recent microfinance crisis.
                      MicroBanking Bulletin, 08/11. http://www.themix.org/sites/default/files/MBB-%20
                      Lessons%20for%20strengthening%20microfinance%20instutions.pdf

                      Gonzalez, A. (2012) A look at how the level of formalization, or integration of
                      microfinance loan portfolios with the domestic economy, effects the decline in portfolio
                      quality during economic recessions. MicroBanking Bulletin, 03/12. http://www.themix.
                      org/sites/default/files/MBB-Formalization%20Paper.pdf

                      Hussain, R. et al (2012) Implementation of Basel II in Microfinance Sector of Pakistan,
                      in: European Journal of Business and Management Vol 4, No.2, 2012.

                      Imboden, K. (April 2005) Basel II and Microfinance: Exercising National Prerogatives,
                      Women’s World Banking

                      Lutzenkirchen, C. & Weistroffer, C. (2012) Microfinance in evolution. An industry
                      between crisis and advancement. Deutsche Bank, DB Research, Current Issues, Global
                      Financial    Markets.   http://www.microfinancegateway.org/gm/document-1.9.59393/
                      DB%20Research%202012%20Microfinance%20in%20evolution.pdf

                      O’Donohoe, N, et.al. (2010), All Eyes on Microfinance Asset Quality - Microfinance
                      Global Valuation Survey 2010. CGAP Occasional Notes, No. 16, 03/10.
                      http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/CGAP-Occasional-Paper-All-Eyes-on-Asset-Quality-
                      Microfinance-Global-Valuation-Survey%202010-Mar-2010.pdf

                      responsAbility (2011) Microfinance Market Outlook 2012, http://www.responsability.
                      com/site/index.cfm?id_art=77263&vsprache=EN.

                      Roodman, David (2010), Who Inflated the Microcredit Bubbles? Centre
                      for Global Development, David Roodman’s Microfinance Open Book Blog.
                      http://international.cgdev.org/blog/who-inflated-microcredit-bubbles

                      Viada, L. & Gual, S. (2012) The Tipping Point: over-indebtedness and investment in
                      microfinance (2012), MicroBanking Bulletin, 02/12. http://www.microrate.com/media/
                      downloads/2012/04/MBB-The-Tipping-Point-over-indebtedness-and-investment-in-
                      microfinance_2.pdf

                      Wagner, C. (2010) From Boom to Bust: how different has microfinance been
                      from traditional banking? Frankfurt School – Working Paper Series, No. 15.6
                      http://www.frankfurtschool.de/clicnetclm/fileDownload.do?goid=000000262046AB4

                      Wagner C. & Winkler, A. (2012) The vulnerability of microfinance to financial turmoil
                      – evidence from the global financial crisis. Frankfurt School of Finance & Management,
                      draft version 04/12. http://economics.soc.uoc.gr/macro/docs/Year/2012/papers/paper_2_74.
                      pdf
                                                                                               ENDNOTES   35




ENDNOTES

1.	 In the four years leading up to the global financial crisis the microfinance sector
    boasted an average annual asset growth rate of 39%, accumulating total assets of
    over USD60 billion by December 2008. (Chen, et al., 2010, p.1)
2.	 With the exception of the Great Depression in the 1930s.
3.	 In their 2012 econometric analysis, Wagner and Winkler use the largest sample of
    microfinance institutions (655) from 80 emerging market countries. They differ
    from Di Bella’s analysis in the years used for the model, from 2000-2009 for
    Wagner/ Winkler and from 1998-2009 for Di Bella. It is also important to note
    that Di Bella used only 353 MFIs, all within the largest institutions (top 75% in
    asset size). These differences lead to slight variations in the results of each article.
4.	 See: Krauss and Walter, 2006, 2009; Gonzalez, 2007; Ahlin, Lin and Maio, 2010
5.	 For further reading see David Roodman, “Who Inflated the Microcredit Bubbles?”
6.	 In Bosnia Herzegovina, Nicaragua, Morocco, and Pakistan recent estimates
    suggest that over 40% of microfinance clients hold multiple loans in periods
    between 2007 and 2009. (CGAP, 2010, p.11)
7.	 This holds especially for the crises in Morocco, Nicaragua, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
    and Pakistan where PAR30 figures shot above 10% coupled with aggressive write-
    offs.
8.	 A study of corporate governance standards would be equally helpful but this article
    will focus on risk management.
9.	 Please see http://www.bis.org/fsi/fsiop2012.pdf for an overview of the
    implementation of Basel as of July 2012.
10.	 Expected losses, in the area of credit risk, for example, are the credit defaults
     an institution can expect by experience. These are covered by provisions as per
     applicable accounting standards. Equity capital is used to cover risks beyond these
     expected losses – the unexpected (but not unrealistic) losses.
11.	 While retail loans are weighted with 100% and therefore require 8% equity
     coverage, credits to OECD sovereigns were weighted with 0%, requiring no
     coverage at all. There are other types of credit exposure in between. Further,
     comparable rules apply for defaulted loans and the type of loan and collateral is
     also considered. Again, please note that provisions, which are deemed to represent
     “expected risk“, reduce exposure, and that capital requirements are intended to
     cover “unexpected risks“.
12.	 MFI Portfolios would qualify as Retail Portfolio as per section 70 of Basel II
36   CLOSING THE CREDIT GAP FOR FORMAL AND INFORMAL MSMEs




                     13.	 By and large, the institution has to do annual risk assessments and maintain a
                          database for risk events.
                     14.	 Besides the “Basic Indicator Approach” and the “Standard Approach” mentioned
                          in this text there is also an “Advanced Measurement Approach” possible, which
                          sets the stage for a quantification of operational risk based on a value at risk-model.
                          This approach shall be mentioned for completeness while its complexity makes it
                          very unlikely to be applied by MFIs.
                     15.	 See sections 53 et seq. and 733 et seq. in “International convergence of capital
                          measurement and capital standards: A revised framework”.
                     16.	 Even though the lack of formality in most MFIs’ business environment wouldn’t
                          allow them to use the type of collateral or guarantees as suggested by Basel – and
                          therefore this collateral may not be considered sufficiently adequate by regulators
                          to reduce exposures and risk.
                     17.	 Basel II section 765 et seq. (Pillar II), where regulatory expectations are set, and
                          principles 8 – 11 in “Microfinance activities and the Core Principles for Effective
                          Banking Supervision”.
                     18.	 Basel II (in section 777 et seq.) and market practice at traditional banks give
                          practical recommendations on how to make sure counterparty risk is managed
                          appropriately by those MFIs, which have material exposure:
                         •	 The institution should have a counterparty risk policy, processes and systems;
                         •	 No deal should be done with a counterparty (CP) before or without assessing
                            the counterparty risk and specifying which deals shall be done with the CP and
                            within which limits. Settlement and pre-settlement risk must be understood and
                            exposures must be measured daily and reviewed by a manager with sufficient
                            seniority ;
                         •	 The Board and Senior Management must be actively involved in the management
                            of CP Risk;
                         •	 CP Risk must be coordinated well with Credit Risk and Market Risks and must
                            combine all exposures related to one counterparty;
                         •	 CP Risk Management must be subject to regular validation and regular
                            independent review by Internal Audit. (This applies to all other parts of the
                            risk management system, too. Depending on local regulations, they will also be
                            reviewed by external auditors and / or the supervisors.)
                     19.	 The relevant recommendations of Basel for FX Risk are outlined in sections
                          718(xxx) and seq., especially sec. 718(Lxxiv). A VaR model as mentioned should
                          use 99% confidence intervals, 1 year look back and 10 days holding period at least.
                          It is easy to set up such model in an electronic spreadsheet. (The so called “short
                          hand” calculation of FX risk (as per sec. 718 (xL) et al.), which is only looking
                          at 8% of the larger of the sum of all net short or long positions, is not considered
                          very useful.)
                                                                                              ENDNOTES   37




20.	 This section does not discuss liquidity distribution among branches. The risks
     in that process are to be addressed by the Operational Risk Management system.
21.	 The following relates mostly to Basel III, which has been developed to improve
     banks‘ capabilities to manage liquidity risk. See: “Basel III: A global regulatory
     framework for more resilient banks and banking systems”, rev. June 2011, section
     38 seq. and “Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and liquidity risk monitoring
     tools”, January 2013
22.	 The “professional” definition in Basel II is: “Operational risk is defined as the risk
     of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems
     or from external events. This definition includes legal risk, but excludes strategic
     and reputational risk.” (section 644 ibid.)
23.	 Basel II sections 660 - 663
24.	 The introduction of an Operational Risk Management function may indeed lift
     some of the control requirements in other departments like Operations or Internal
     Audit.
25.	 See “International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards. A
     Revised Framework. Comprehensive Version” sec. 730 et seq. and “Principles for
     enhancing corporate governance” for details relating to this section.
26.	 It should be noted that capital requirements for MFIs may be higher than those
     normally applied for banks.
27.	 “Microfinance activities and the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision”
     – Principle 7 on page 20.
38   MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA

www.ifc.org




                               OCT 2013
