                                                               94918

                 IFC ACCESS TO FINANCE GLOBAL MICROFINANCE ADVISORY
                        IN PARTNERSHIP WITH DUTCH GOVErNMENT




                       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE
                       INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO
                       SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                       Based on Case Studies in LAC




IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
© International Finance Corporation 2014. All rights reserved.
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
www.ifc.org

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of
the work promptly, and when the reproduction is for educational and non-commercial purposes, without a fee, subject to such
attributions and notices as we may reasonably require. IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness of the
content included in this work, or for the conclusions or judgments described herein, and accepts no responsibility or liability for
any omissions or errors (including, without limitation, typographical errors and technical errors) in the content whatsoever or for
reliance thereon. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent.

The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only and are not intended to constitute legal, securities,
or investment advice, an opinion regarding the appropriateness of any investment, or a solicitation of any type. IFC or its affiliates
may have an investment in, provide other advice or services to, or otherwise have a financial interest in, certain of the companies
and parties (including named herein).

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to IFC’s Corporate Relations Department,
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.

International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by Articles of Agreement among its member
countries, and a member of the World Bank Group. All names, logos and trademarks are the property of IFC and you may not use
any of such materials for any purpose without the express written consent of IFC. Additionally, “International Finance Corporation”
and “IFC” are registered trademarks of IFC and are protected under international law.

Cover photo: IFC Photo Library
                                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS   i




Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	III
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	                                              V
I. INTRODUCTION	                                                1
II. MARKET OVERVIEW	                                            3
 A. DEFINITION OF VERY SMALL ENTERPRISE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
 SEGMENT	3
 B. OVERVIEW OF BANKS AND HOW THEY SERVE SMALL ENTERPRISES	      5
 C. OVERVIEW OF NON-BANKS AND HOW THEY SERVE VERY
 SMALL ENTERPRISES:	                                             6
III. PREREQUISITES	                                             7
IV. INSTITUTIONAL STRATEGY	                                    11
 A. STRATEGIC RATIONALE FOR ENTERING THIS NICHE	                12
 B. A “STEP-UP” OR A “LEAP-UP”?: WHO IS THE TARGET MARKET?	     15
 C. CONSIDERATIONS OF MARKET CONTEXT	                           16
 D. CONSIDERATIONS OF LEGAL STRUCTURE	                          17
 E. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS	                                       18
V. DEFINING THE VALUE PROPOSITION	                             19
vi. COMMERCIAL STRATEGY	                                       23
 A. UNDERSTANDING YOUR MARKET	                                  23
 B. PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT	                                        24
 C. PROSPECTING AND MARKETING	                                  29
 D. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS	                                       30
vii. CREDIT ANALYSIS	                                          31
 A. CAPACITY TO PAY UPGRADES	                                   33
 B. WILLINGNESS TO PAY ADJUSTMENTS	                             35
viii. CREDIT RISK MANAGEMENT	                                  39
 A. LOAN APPROVAL AND OVERSIGHT	                                39
 B. MONITORING AND TRACKING STRUCTURES AND POLICIES	            40
 C. RECOVERY POLICIES	                                          41
 D. REGULATIONS	                                                42
ii   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          Ix. hUMAN RESOURCES	                                                       43
                            A. SALES AND LOAN ANALYSIS STAFF	                                            43
                            B. COMPENSATION AND INCENTIVE ADAPTATIONS	                                   46
                            C. SPECIALIZED CAPACITY AND QUALIFICATIONS	                                  47
                            D. TRAINING AND SUPPORT	                                                     48
                          X. OPERATIONAL STRATEGY	                                                   51
                            A. DISCUSSION OF ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND ADAPTATIONS
                               NEEDED TO VARIOUS AREAS	                                                  51
                            B. IT CHANGES AND ADAPTATIONS	                                               52
                          XI. FINANCIAL STRATEGY	                                                    55
                            A. COSTS AND PROFITABILITY	                                                  55
                            B. ASSET/LIABILITY MANAGEMENT AND FUNDING STRATEGY	                          57
                          XII. CONCLUSIONS	                                                          59
                          BIBLIOGRAPHY	763
                          ENDNOTES	67
                                                                       ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   iii




Acknowledgements

This study was commissioned by IFC Access to Finance Microfinance
team and jointly conducted by IFC LAC Access to Finance Microfinance/
SME Banking and Global Microfinance Advisory. The studies benefitted
from peer review by Global and Regional Micro and SME Specialists
(Girish Nair, Patricia Mwangi, Mohammed Khaled, Swati Sawhney, Neil
Ramsden, Martin Hommes), as well as Financial Markets (Wendy Teleki)
and CGAP (Minh Huy Lai). Special thanks go to the regional micro and
SME specialists, Martin Spahr and Ignacio Estevez, and an industry expert,
Andrew Pospeilovsky, for their technical leads. Barbara Magnoni, at EA
Consultants, was hired to carry out the study. The team is grateful to the
Netherland’s Government for the funding that made the study possible and
to the IFC SME Finance Forum for the editorial support..

Project Team
Task Leader: Gaamaa Hishigsuren, IFC Access to Finance Global,
Microfinance Specialist

Lead Technical Specialists: Martin Spahr, IFC LAC, Microfinance
Specialist and Ignacio Estevez, IFC LAC SME Banking Specialist

Consultant Researcher: Barbara Magnoni, President of EA Consultants

Graphic Designer: Aichin Lim Jones, IFC Access to Finance, KM and
Learning
iv   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                                        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   v




Executive Summary

Very small enterprises (VSEs) in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) represent a
broad and heterogeneous segment, often underserved by formal financial institutions.
They are generally informal and often family businesses. The financial needs of these
enterprises are typically overlooked by “downscaling” banks, which find larger and
often more formal small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to be a more natural market
for their products and services. Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) are starting to move
upmarket to serve SMEs, and in particular, VSEs within this segment. However, they
use varying definitions, methodologies and products to do so and to date there has been
little research or documentation of their experiences. This report highlights the results
of a recent study of the existing practices in Latin America of MFIs serving VSEs,
where VSEs are considered to be those businesses with financing needs of between
US$7,000 and US$30,000. It is a starting point for an institution considering entering
the segment, or for one that finds itself having grown into the segment “organically” but
with a view to strengthen its position. It includes several checklists for MFIs interested
in expanding upmarket into the VSE space, as well as more detailed discussions and
examples of the most relevant points.

The research involved in producing this document and checklist included a desk review
of literature, phone interviews with MFIs and other stakeholders and four field visits to
MFIs in Bolivia and Peru. It is important to note that most of the institutions we spoke
to have entered the VSE space relatively recently (the majority since 2009 or 2010, or
in a few cases 2006), and that the macroeconomic context in most of their countries
has been very favorable to microenterprise and VSE growth. This strong performance
may buffer VSEs and the institutions that serve them from some of the volatility that is
often characteristic of VSEs worldwide. As such, their models have not really been fully
tested and the lessons drawn from their experiences are evolving.

When an MFI is considering expanding upmarket to serve VSEs, it must first evaluate
its readiness to expand into new business areas. This assessment should include a
review of both the external opportunities (i.e. market gap, regulatory environment,
credit bureau access) as well as the internal capacity across all areas. Balancing risk and
growth is critical when expanding to VSEs, thus, an essential prerequisite for an MFI
to successfully expand upmarket is that their existing credit risk management policies
and procedures be strong, and that these can be adapted to a new segment.

The next step is to clearly define its institutional strategy or the high level approach it
plans to take to VSEs. At the core of this strategy is identifying how it would like to
incorporate VSEs into its existing business. Generally speaking there are two types of
business models that MFIs have adopted to serve the sector: an “organic model” that
many MFIs who are expanding upmarket to follow their existing clients adopt; and a
“Proactive Model” that involves greater structural changes and segmentation between
micro and VSE clients, yet provides a stronger foundation for serving new VSEs and/
vi   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          or slightly larger VSEs. However, over time, even MFIs who enter the VSE segment
                          somewhat organically often have to adopt a more Proactive approach to VSE lending as
                          they move from purely serving “graduated” micro clients to working with new VSEs.

                          Generally speaking, the key to entering the VSE market effectively, regardless of the
                          model, appears to be in striking an appropriate balance between risk management
                          and an institutions commercial goals. Microfinance requires similar trade-offs, but
                          smaller loans are spread over a larger potential risk, naturally mitigating some of the
                          problems of credit risk. With VSEs, loan sizes are larger, and portfolios may be more
                          concentrated in fewer clients’ businesses. Thus getting the risk/growth balance right at
                          the appropriate cost is more critical and requires a more nuanced strategy.

                          A commercial strategy for MFIs to serve VSEs should identify a key market segment, or
                          multiple segments and define the MFI value proposition for each, ideally one de-linked
                          from interest rates as MFIs tend to be at a disadvantage compared to banks in terms
                          of funding costs. While interest rates are important in some markets, having a greater
                          appetite for risk and the willingness to lend larger amounts against a given collateral
                          item can often be highly effective in attracting VSEs, as can an MFI’s convenience,
                          flexibility, agility or product design. VSE loan products require some adaptation of
                          traditional microenterprise loans including working capital and fixed investment loans
                          with longer tenors, lower interest rates and larger loan sizes. Credit and non-credit
                          products must be available to VSEs to serve their needs, but also to increase the total
                          profitability of relationships with these businesses and the “stickiness” of the clients.

                          A revision of credit analysis and risk management policies is essential to the success
                          of expanding upmarket. Simply using “micro” technology to serve these informal
                          VSEs can increase portfolio risk. However, the complexity of the credit analysis
                          must be weighed against both the MFI’s cost of conducting it (in order to maintain
                          profitability for the sector) as well as the impact of its agility and flexibility in serving
                          its clients. Typical upgrades to an MFIs credit analysis and credit risk management may
                          include: better validation of financial information; greater documentation of company
                          information, references or collateral; formalized evaluation of external risks; more in-
                          depth cash flow analysis and in some case pro-forma cash-flow analysis; more reliance
                          on credit bureaus; greater collateral requirements; and revisions in loan approval and
                          branch autonomy. The design of VSE loans and their collateral requirements must take
                          into consideration not just the capacity of VSEs to provide real collateral, but also the
                          costs of documenting and registering this collateral and their impact on the overall cost
                          of the loan.

                          VSE lending requires proactive monitoring, even in Organic Models. Proactive
                          monitoring can help identify risky loans or sectors as soon as or even before they become
                          problematic and help the MFI to avoid similar risks going forward. Centralized risk
                          monitoring and tracking appears to be more effective in reducing portfolio at risk, but
                          requires a sophisticated and agile MIS. It is absolutely essential that an MFI’s MIS
                          allow for the micro and VSE loans to be tracked separately, ideally at the institutional,
                          branch and loan officer level. This allows the risk department to identify not only
                                                                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   vii




problematic segments, but also the source of these segments, and to adjust policies
accordingly.

Key human resources considerations include deciding whether to hire specialized
VSE loan officers (more common in Proactive models) or have existing loan officers
work with both micro and VSE clients (more common in Organic models). Either
model requires careful review of the incentive policies for loan officers to ensure the
appropriate balance is struck between micro and VSE goals as well as portfolio growth
versus risk management. Additional, an expansion upmarket requires investment in
training or retraining not just loan officers but other branch and head office staff.

The financial impact of serving VSEs for MFIs varies depending on the market.
Generally VSE loans charge lower interest rates, but these lower interest rates can
be offset by lower per dollar lent acquisition costs, lower portfolio at risk (at times)
and cross-selling other products to the VSE owner or owner’s family members. Thus,
when looking at a profitability for the VSE sector, MFIs should consider total client
profitability versus total product profitability. Another key financial consideration of
VSE lending is obtaining sufficent funding, generally longer term, in order to fund
portfolio growth.
viii   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                                                 I. INTRODUCTION   1




I. Introduction

Increasing access to finance for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) has become an
important goal for many governments and development agencies as SMEs are seen
as drivers of economic growth and creators of employment. Especially in developing
countries, these firms have traditionally been ignored by banks because they are viewed
as either too small, too risky or too costly to serve, yet their financial needs generally far
exceed the product offerings of microfinance institutions (MFIs).1 In Latin America,
the SME financing gap is estimated at 125-155 billion (Stein 2010).

In recent years, many banks in Latin America and worldwide, have begun to recognize
the market potential of the sector and started downscaling their operations to serve
these enterprises. Despite their enthusiasm, however, only a fraction of SMEs have
access to loans from a financial institution today. Smaller firms are at a particular
disadvantage. Most banks have concentrated on the larger and more formal SMEs,
excluding many very small enterprises (VSEs)2 due to their size, formality or inability
to meet collateral or guarantee conditions. 3 In turn, MFIs and other specialized entities
that serve low-income markets find their products, systems and operations inadequate
to serve the small end of this sector. As a result, small enterprises have traditionally
been one of the most underserved segments in the MSME sector. 4

A few MFIs in Latin America and worldwide have stepped in by adapting their
products, systems and processes to the needs of this segment (IPC 2012, CGAP
2012). Some of these MFIs have expanded upmarket intentionally in recognition of
an underserved niche, such as many of the ProCredit Banks, while others have done
so more organically as they adapt to retain and meet the needs of their existing clients’
growth. However, to date, there has been little research done in Latin America on
MFIs that are serving VSEs and few cases that are well documented.

This document begins to fill that gap by providing a synthesis of information and
lessons learned during a four-month research process. The research included a review
of literature and data to understand what types of financing are currently available to
VSEs in Latin America and to explore the challenges MFIs have encountered when
entering the VSE segment in Latin America. It also included a series of phone interviews
with industry practitioners and MFIs that have expanded upmarket in Latin America
as well as in-depth visits with four MFIs in Bolivia and Peru.

The resulting report represents an initial review of the current practices of MFIs in the
region that have expanded upmarket to serve VSEs and some initial lessons that can be
drawn from their experiences. One of the most important lessons is that the approach
an MFI takes to expanding upmarket must be driven by the market and regulatory
context in the country and their own institutional strategy and goals. Hence, the report
is not meant to be prescriptive but rather to outline a spectrum of issues that must be
considered when expanding, based on the experience and current practices observed in
a variety of strong MFIs in the region.
2   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                         It is also important to remember that most of these institutions have entered the VSE
                         space relatively recently (the majority since 2009 or 2010, or in a few cases 2006).
                         During this period, the macroeconomic context in most of their countries has been very
                         favorable to microenterprise and VSE growth. The research focused on experiences in
                         Colombia, Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia as these countries are considered to be “leading
                         markets” for MFIs that expanded upmarket to serve small and medium enterprises,
                         but in particular, the segment of VSEs within the more broadly defined SME sector.
                         Each of these countries has a relatively well-developed microfinance sector as well as
                         several MFIs that are serving both VSEs and microenterprises. The sophistication of
                         the SME banking market varies, but in each country there is at least some penetration
                         of the small enterprise sector by banks. Each of these countries has also benefitted from
                         strong economic growth over the past decade, a liquid financial sector and growth of
                         both microfinance institutions and the clients they serve. This strong performance
                         may buffer VSEs and the institutions that serve them from some of the volatility that
                         is often characteristic of very small enterprises worldwide. As such, their models have
                         not really been fully tested and the lessons drawn from their experiences are evolving.
                         Nonetheless, for those that are interested in this market segment, there is much that
                         can be learned from these leading players.  
                                                                                        II. MARKET OVERVIEW   3




II. Market Overview

A. Definition of Very Small Enterprise
and Characteristics of the Segment:

Definition of “very small enterprise”
Approaching the Very Small Enterprise (VSEs) segment must inevitably begin with a
discussion of how this segment is characterized or defined as we have identified a lack
of consensus around firm size definitions. The term “very small enterprise” has only
recently started being used, and refers to smaller small enterprises, thus our discussion
of definition starts with “small enterprise” (SEs). Governments and donor agencies
often define micro, small, medium and large firms in terms of annual sales, asset size,
equity, number of employees and/or loan size, although the range for each may vary
depending on the entity, country or usage (See the box below). In Latin America,
there seems to be a general consensus in definitions that SEs have between 6 and 50
employees, with some variation by sector. There is much greater variation in definitions
that include annual sales or assets. Financial institutions, bank superintendencies
and regulatory authorities seeking to monitor lending to SEs tend to use definitions
based on loan size. However, definitions based on loan size also vary substantially.
Moreover, even when loan size figures are comparable in absolute terms, they can mean
very different things depending on the country. In Peru, for example, the definition
captures the total formal indebtedness of a client while in Bolivia it only includes the
loan from a given institution. While in post-crisis Bolivia, clients are far less likely
to have multiple loans than before, this potentially allows for an underestimation of
business size. In Colombia, clients are even more likely to have loans from multiple
institutions as well as credit cards, which makes using loan size as a proxy for business
size more complicated.

Despite some of the potential problems with using loan size to define business size,
loan size is the easiest way for most financial institutions to delineate their portfolio,
loan size is very relevant to their operations and is the most frequently reported and
available information in most cases. It is also typically used by financial institutions to
make strategic decisions regarding the segment. Thus, for the purposes of our research,
we used the IDB’s definition of SEs as those requiring US$10,000-US$150,000 in
financing as a general benchmark to characterize SEs, while microenterprises are
defined as those requiring less than $10,000 in financing.5 More specifically, our
research looked at VSEs, which tends to be where most MFI’s SE clients are found.
These enterprises need loans of between $10,000-$30,0006 in most cases and in some
markets and instances, as much as $50,000 or $75,000.
4       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                            Defining SEs by Firm Size
    In Latin America, governments define small businesses differently, broadly ranging anywhere from US $40,000 to
    US$8,000,000 in annual sales and between 6-50 employees. Very small business are not typically a subsegment
    within these definitions.
    The World Bank defines small businesses as those with 10-49 employees, US$100,000-US$3,000,000 in assets and
    annual sales, and/or approximately US$10,000-US$100,000 in loan size (IFC 2009)

                                      Defining SEs and VSEs by Loan Size
    •	 The IFC uses an SE loan size proxy of US$10,000-100,000 and a VSE loan size proxy of US$10,000-$25,000
    •	 The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) defines SE loans as those between US$10,000 and US$150,000/
       US$250,000 depending on the country
    •	 In Peru clients with between US$7,500 and US$110,000 in total debt (excluding housing loans) with regulated
       financial institutions are considered small business clients
    •	 In Ecuador SE loans start at US$20,000
    •	 MFIs in Latin America in a 2012 survey by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) reported making
       loans to SEs and VSEs varying between bottom ranges of US$7,500-25,000 and top ranges of around US$90,000-
       $100,000.


                                   Characteristics of SEs and VSEs
                                A resonating theme in the literature and research on SEs is that although they are larger
                                than micro businesses in terms of required loan size, employees, sales and assets, they
                                have more in common with micro businesses than with medium or large businesses
                                (IPC 2012, CGAP 2012). The VSEs that MFIs serve tend to be family businesses in
                                which the owner still works, but may also employ non-family members (Shorebank,
                                CGAP 2012, IPC 2012). They are generally informal or semi-formal (IPC 2012).
                                Their book keeping, organization and management is more sophisticated than most
                                                             micro enterprises, but still relatively weak. Where formal
                   Characteristics of a                      accounts and documentation exists, it is often unreliable.
                 Very Small Enterprise                       They are more vulnerable and their growth tends to be
                                                             more volatile than large enterprises (OECD 2006). They
    A Compilation of Qualitative Comments from Field         are also a heterogeneous group with divergent financial
    Visits in Peru and Bolivia:                              needs (CGAP 2012, IPC 2012, Beck 2008).
    Business Characteristics                                 Because of this informality and poor documentation,
    •	 Semi-formal                                           VSEs often lack access to financing from traditional
    •	 May have tax ID or pay minimal or partial taxes       banks, however, their financial needs are generally larger
    •	 Typically hire an accountant to file taxes            and more complex than micro enterprises and exceed
    •	 Have informal employees (can include family)          what MFIs typically can offer (IPC 2012). Initially they
    •	 Few formal financial records                          may need short-term loans to manage cash flow and
    Owner Characteristics                                    basic current accounts, but they also need longer-term
    •	 Typically older (over 35)                             investment capital, credit lines, overdraft facilities, transfer
    •	 More men than women                                   and payments services and business credit cards (IPC
                                                             2012, CGAP 2012, IFC 2010). VSEs financial needs are
                                                                                       II. MARKET OVERVIEW   5




not as complex as medium enterprises that may also want investment products or more
fee based services such as letters of credit or foreign trade financing.


SE financial product usage in Latin America
Transactional and deposit services are indispensible to SMEs, while credit access
and needs are more variable (FRS 2006 as reported in de la Torre 2009). All firms
interviewed in this study used some kind of deposit product, primarily current and
savings accounts (See Appendix 1, Figure 2), and more than 95% used some kind of
transactional product (mostly internet banking; payment of taxes, wages or suppliers,
insurance; and other payments and transfers). The use of credit services varied from 35%
(Mexico) to 87% (Chile). A more recent study of emerging markets banks (McKinsey
2012) illustrates that all MSME clients of surveyed banks have transactional products,
while only about a quarter have loans. The studies suggest that demand is not the only
constraint to credit access. Supply of products to SMEs likely plays a role as well. For
example, countries with greater flexibility and financial inclusiveness (such as Chile
and Peru) show greater usage by SMEs of loan products than countries with more rigid
financial sectors such as Mexico and Venezuela.


B. Overview of banks and how they
serve small enterprises
According to recent research, banks continue to show a strong interest in financing the
SME sector worldwide and in Latin America. Seventy-seven percent of the banks in the
IDB’s latest SME Banking Survey had a favorable outlook on the sector and expected
to grow their SME business (IDB 2012). The main motivating factors for banks to
downscale to the SME sector are to increase their profitability and are also based on
increased competition in their traditional markets (de la Torre 2009, Beck 2008, IDB
2012). Nonetheless, despite an increased interest in the SME sector, most banks are still
not successfully serving the full range of SEs.7 Their lending requirements are generally
geared towards larger more formal small businesses, and their policies and procedures
are generally very rigid. Most banks still take a collateral based lending approach versus
a cash-flow or character based lending approach, and many VSE’s either lack pledgable
assets or have assets with insufficient documentation to meet bank’s requirements.
Additionally, the cost of obtaining documentation and registering collateral for many
VSEs may be prohibitive in relation to the size of loan being sought.

Most banks have a separate area/business line to serve SMEs, a few also separate SEs
from medium enterprises (Beck 2008). Eighty-seven percent of the banks from the
IDB’s SME Banking Survey have a separate small business unit. Sales are generally
decentralized, while loan approval, risk management and recovery functions are
centralized – very different than the traditional MFI model. Banks tend to view the
SME sector as riskier and more costly to serve than their traditional segments. To help
manage risks, banks downscaling to serve SMEs have adopted a variety of techniques,
including asset based lending (USAID 2009, de la Torre 2009) and leveraging value
chains (FOMIN 2012). Some also use credit scoring and standardized risk tools to
6   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                         control costs, especially for SEs, although most banks report that credit scoring is only
                         one input in the credit analysis process (Beck 2008, de la Torre 2009). Banks may also
                         boost their revenues from SME clients by cross-selling other fee-based products (de la
                         Torre 2009), with up to 60% of revenues coming from noncredit products (IFC 2009).


                         C. Overview of non-banks and how
                         they serve very small enterprises
                         In recent years many MFIs worldwide and in Latin America have started to expand
                         upmarket to serve VSEs. According to a recent survey done by CGAP, 49% of LAC
                         MFIs said small enterprises were part of their current business strategy, and an additional
                         25% of respondents indicated that they were considering expanding into the small
                         enterprise sector. MFIs cited “business growth” and “growing with their clients” as the
                         main reasons for expanding upmarket (CGAP 2012). Early on, there may be substantial
                         room for an MFI to expand upmarket with its existing clients, generally by increasing
                         loan sizes to help reduce a client’s borrowing from other institutions in order to meet his
                         or her full funding needs. However, to grow a healthy VSE portfolio, MFIs also need to
                         look externally for new clients, especially as most MFIs in Latin America find that only
                         a small percentage of their clients are actually able to grow to become a VSE.

                         MFIs may have several additional advantages over banks in serving VSEs. VSEs tend
                         to resemble the micro enterprises that MFIs are familiar with more than they do the
                         large enterprises with which banks are familiar. MFIs are accustomed to working with
                         informal enterprises and ones with limited or poor record keeping. As a result, their
                         policies and procedures tend to be flexible to accommodate this informality. They also
                         tend to be more agile and able to more quickly disperse a loan, which is likely attractive
                         to VSEs. One MFI in Peru notes that it can obtain approval for a VSE loan in 8-12
                         hours compared to up to a month by banks in the market. In addition, MFIs tend to
                         have closer, more personal relationships with their clients than banks, which can help
                         to mitigate the risks involved with serving VSEs.
                                                                                           III. PREREQUISITES              7




III. Prerequisites

                                                    Prerequisites
  •	 Sufficient institutional capacity at all areas of the MFI to expand into new businesses
  •	 Perception of market access gap in the VSE segment
  •	 Regulatory environment conducive to SME lending at market interest rates
  •	 Ideally, access to a credit bureau that combines bank and MFI loans
  •	 Access to technical assistance or resources to obtain specialized know-how
  •	 Strong risk management framework, tools, and systems in place
  •	 Access to sufficient funding for portfolio expansion
  •	 Access to funding sources with maturities over one year
  •	 IT system that offers flexibility for multiple products and maturities
  •	 Ability to take savings or offer “seamless” bank-MFI transfers


Expanding upmarket is not an easy task. It requires resources, systems, and capacity in
excess of what is typically available when lending only to microentrepreneurs. As such,
MFIs must give cautious consideration to this task and be prepared to determine that
it is, in fact, not yet prepared to take on the challenge. A microfinance institution must
be have the capacity to expand into new business activities in general, and VSE lending
in particular, prior to embarking on the task of expanding upmarket. Reviewing the
checklist in this document can offer a tool for assessing
this preparedness as well as areas that may need to be                 PR Tip #1: Be Realistic. A realistic
strengthened.
                                                                   assessment of readiness should be
Ideally, the institution should be working within a              presented by Management to the Board
regulatory context that is supportive, rather than deterrent.                and discussed.
In Ecuador, for example, entrants have been discouraged
                                                                 This may be revised over time to reflect evolutions in
from the VSE market because of interest rate caps on
                                                                 the market or institution.
larger loans. A regulatory framework that requires the
segmentation of loans or clients between micro, small and        Example: One MFI interviewed for this document
medium, can be helpful for tracking and benchmarking.            has gone through two rounds of strategic analysis
The metrics used for these definitions are often rough.          and planning for their VSE lending.  During an initial
Reviewing institutional capacity in this segment should          round, its Management and Board were enthusiastic
not be a static activity (see PR Tip #1) as external and         about the segment, and planned for growth
internal conditions may change over time.                        accordingly. After three years, the same institution
                                                                 has re-evaluated its strategy.  Its risk management,
An assessment of readiness to enter the VSE segment              in particular, is challenged and constrains the success
should include a review of both the external opportunities       of the VSE portfolio.  While perhaps not sufficient to
and the internal health and risk management of the               discourage entering the segment, at minimum, prior
institution. Externally, some assessment of the potential        strengthening of risk management processes and
market will be needed (see Section IX). Institutions             tools would have benefitted the institution.  
may have a hard time quantifying this market if limited
8       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  public data is available or if their own market is much “lower” than the VSE market.
                                  Analyzing whether there is potential demand in attractive scale is important.
                                  Determining whether there is a gap in access or room for a new player can be even more
                                  important. Sometimes institutions seek to expand into new business activities because
                                  the institution is struggling in its current business and thinks this is due to market
                                  issues, rather than institutional weaknesses. Before entering into any new business, the
                                  institution should take a critical approach to its own health and ensure its current risk
                                  management and organizational capacity is sound.

                                                                Internally, an assessment of institutional capacity
     PR Tip #2: Benchmark with institutions                     should look not only at management and staff capacity,
        in country and outside to “test”                        but also its capacity in terms of funding, strategic risk
           whether you are VSE ready.                           management, IT/MIS, human resources, legal, as well as
                                                                its future potential to serve the needs of VSEs for related
    This may be revised over time to reflect evolutions in      financial services. This can be difficult in a vacuum.
    the market or institution.                                  Taking institutions that are offering loans to VSEs as
    Example: Most institutions interviewed for this             rough benchmarks can help an institution measure
    document that were actively lending to VSEs                 its own potential. The relative newness of this market
    were market “leaders”.   Most have assets over              suggests that this be done with some caution, nonetheless.
    US$500 million with over 200,000 clients. Most
                                                                Balancing risk and growth is critical when expanding to
    were regulated institutions and a large number
                                                                VSEs, and an assessment of risk management capacity is
    took deposits. There were important exceptions,
                                                                critical. External factors such as regulatory requirements
    however. One relatively new, regulated deposit-
                                                                and supervision, the effectiveness and use of credit bureaus
    taking institution has approximately 50,000 clients
                                                                and market risk can be very supportive. In their absence,
    and US$200 million in assets.   In Colombia, one
                                                                credit policies may need to be more conservative, and
    institution was not regulated, rather it was an NGO.
                                                                analysis may require more documentation. An essential
    Example: Most instituions we visited used core              prerequisite for an MFI to successfully expand upmarket
    banking systems for their MIS, which were flexible          is strong existing credit risk management policies and
    enough   to manage VSE lending needs.   However,            procedures. Furthermore, these must be flexible enough
    not all used sophisticated data analysis to segment         to be adapted to a new segment. An institution that is
    loans, track commercial goals and manage credit             struggling with credit risk must correct critical institutional
    risk, often to their detriment.                             weaknesses before taking on the risks of a new segment.
                                                                Those institutions whose analysis may not be VSE-ready
                                  should evaluate available sources of technical assistance prior to venturing into VSEs.
                                  Most institutions we interviewed were deposit-taking or used core banking systems to
                                  track their loans. As such, their IT was relatively well positioned for VSE lending. At
                                  some stage, most MFIs will require more sophisticated MIS capacity that segments
                                  loans by size and client to assess both commercial goals and risk (See PR Tip #2).

                                  VSE loans require larger sizes and often, longer tenors. Most of the MFIs interviewed
                                  for this document had been flush with liquidity, and did not need to establish a
                                  funding strategy to move gradually into VSEs right away. As the VSE portfolio grows,
                                  however, matching assets and liabilities in terms of both costs and tenors becomes more
                                  critical. Many MFIs who were taking deposits found they needed sources of longer-
                                  term funding to match their longer VSE or SME loan tenors, albeit at a higher cost.
                                                                                        III. PREREQUISITES   9




Over time, VSE lending should transform into VSE client relationships, where MFIs
understand their clients and offer them a suite of potentially useful products and
services. These could be as simple as transactional deposit accounts and wires and as
complex as leasing instruments. While not always available initially, an MFI with the
capacity to continuously expand its product offering may be best positioned to serve
larger enterprises, including VSEs, small and medium enterprises.
10   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                                 IV. INSTITUTIONAL STRATEGY   11




IV. Institutional Strategy

                                        Institutional Strategy Checklist
  •	 Understanding of legal and regulatory implicaitons of expanding upmarket
  •	 Strong strategic rationale for entering the market
  •	 Clearly defined definition of VSE and target market
  •	 Understanding of market dynamics and realistic expectations of segment’s potential scale
  •	 SWOT analysis and financial projections for the segment
  •	 Board of Directors engagement
  •	 Clear mapping of activities required to implement the expansion
  •	 Identification of responsibility and accountability for implementation


When an MFI is considering expanding upmarket to serve small enterprises, it must
recognize that VSEs differ from micro and SME businesses and require their own
approach to service and promotion, credit analysis, collateral, risk management and
operations. The extent to which these approaches differ from micro will depend on
the institution and the market and should be defined in the institutional strategy
or the high level approach the MFI plans to take to VSEs. At the core of this strategy
is identifying how to incorporate VSEs into the MFIs existing business. Generally
speaking there are two types of business models that MFIs have adopted to serve the
sector.

First, the “Proactive Model- (P)” borrows from the know-how and processes most
typical in banks, including those that have downscaled into VSE lending. It is more
complex and, in many ways, more deliberate in that it requires important structural
decisions and adaptations from the start. As in a bank, units are segmented with clear
distinctions between the micro and VSE businesses. Clients are segmented and directed
to specific units, which determines who will serve them and how. At the headquarters
level, it involves setting up a separate business line for VSEs and corresponding new
policies and procedures, credit analysis and risk management. The VSE unit can
leverage departments shared with the microfinance unit, such as Marketing, IT and
Human Resources, but it is also likely to develop its own marketing and sales strategy.
At the branch level, there are separate loan officers dedicated to VSEs and generally
a separate VSE area of the branch. The model has been actively disseminated by Pro
Credit (IPC 2012) and implemented regionally throughout the Pro Credit banks in
countries such as Bolivia, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Ecuador. It generally targets
a business segment that is outside of an MFI’s existing client base, and may also be
underserved by the financial system. As such, it required significant prospecting to
identify clients. If these clients have been excluded altogether from the formal financial
sector, they may have a limited credit track record and require a high level of proactivity
in terms of developing risk management models and controls.
12   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          Second, the “Organic Model- (O)” follows a more organic process. It is often a reaction
                          to a trend observed as an MFI’s microenterprise portfolio begins to grow in asset size
                          by more than its client growth, suggesting that larger clients are requiring larger
                          loans and in some cases may be leaving when these are not available. While it may
                          initially represent a reaction to client trends, it does require strategic decision-making
                          and adjustments to the traditional microfinance business model. However, these
                          adjustments are less pronounced compared to the Proactive Model. They typically
                          allow the MFI to target a new market segment without major changes to its operational
                          structure. Loan products and requirements, most obviously loan amounts, are adjusted
                          and tweaked, as is the credit analysis and risk management. At the headquarters level,
                          there may be a project or product manager or small team in charge of driving the
                          new VSE segment, but there is not a separate business unit and no major changes to
                          reporting lines. At the branch level, loan officers may serve both micro and VSE clients
                          or there may be some segmentation, though generally not as strongly delineated as
                          in the Proactive Model (P). Revising risk management policies is important in this
                          model, yet credit risk may be contained initially by focusing on existing clients with an
                          established track record, and later similar types of clients. Notably, this model is easier
                          and faster to implement and less costly to operate in the short term.

                          Both models offer advantages and disadvantages, and while there are examples of both
                          operating in LAC today, there are also indications of “hybrids” that borrow practices
                          from both sides to help balance some of the trade-offs between efficiency and depth.
                          When determining which of these two models to adopt (or a hybrid) an MFI must
                          consider their strategic rationale for entering the market, its target clientele, the market
                          dynamics (competition and potential size) and the legal implications of the expansion.


                          A. Strategic rationale for entering
                          this niche
                          There are a variety of business motivations for an MFI to expand upmarket to serve
                          VSEs, some opportunistic and proactive, others more reactive. Amongst the most
                          common motivations mentioned in Latin America are:

                          Client retention: As their best microfinance clients grow into VSEs, many MFIs have
                          found it necessary to increase loan sizes in order to continue to meet their financing
                          needs. O

                            “We were losing our largest clients to the banks…. We have cut our desertion rate in
                            half since we started offering VSE loans.” – Colombian MFI

                          Blue ocean opportunity: Very small enterprises have access to few existing financing
                          options and thus the MFI has the opportunity to be one of the first movers into the
                          market. P

                             “We started making bigger loans for our existing clients, but then we saw that the
                            banks were not serving VSEs and realized it was a really good market opportunity.” –
                            Bolivian MFI
                                                                                     IV. INSTITUTIONAL STRATEGY   13




Competition in traditional markets: MFIs may expand upmarket to serve VSEs if its
traditional microfinance markets are oversaturated. P O

  “We are interested in expanding upmarket where competition is lesser and we can carve
  out a niche.” – Panamanian MFI

High levels of liquidity: Increased liquidity due to increased access to debt financing,
expansion of liability products or less demand from its traditional clients may motivate
an MFI to enter the VSE space in order to put these funds to work more quickly. P

  “There is excessive liquidity in the system. We have even put limits on deposit taking.”
  – Bolivian MFI

Strategic long-term move: For some MFIs, an expansion to serve VSEs may be
motivated by its long-term goals of transforming into a regulated financial institutions
or a bank. P

  Many of Pro Credit’s NGOs began the transformation process early vis-à-vis competition
  in the microfinance sector. This positioned them well to offer a broader set of services
  to a higher market.

Asset diversification: Expanding upmarket can help MFIs to diversify their asset base
and thus their risks. When VSE clients have graduated from micro, they can represent
a lower risk segment for an MFI. P O

  Growing with clients allowed a Peruvian MFI to keep its best customers and maintain a
  more diversified portfolio including VSE, micro and rural loans.

Regulatory or public policy changes: Some MFIs may be enticed to enter the space
because of incentives offered by governments or donors, such as guarantee funds or
below-market financing. Regulatory constraints may keep actors out of the space.
In Ecuador, interest rate caps on larger loans have kept some MFI players out of the
market as they are not able to lend profitably. In Costa Rica, the lack of access by MFIs
to the credit bureaus used by regulated banks increases the risk of lending to VSEs that
may have had access to bank loans and performed poorly. P O

  Negative regulatory policies may also push MFIs into the space. For example an increase
  in the profit taxes in Bolivia has led some institutions to abandon their smallest clients.
14      EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                             Alternative revenue source: Although interest rates on VSE loans are generally lower
                             than micro loans, compressing financial margins, serving smaller VSEs can still
                             produce attractive returns as operational costs per dollar lent tend to be lower and for
                             clients with a good credit history loan losses are smaller. Over the long-term, VSEs may
                             also offer “total client profitability” versus just “product profitability” if MFIs develop
                             models that offer a range of products to VSE clients. Furthermore, in some segments
                             and market contexts, where economic growth is dynamic and VSEs are benefitting
                             from growth themselves, VSEs may be less interest rate sensitive. MFIs can offer these
                             high growth enterprises more appropriate loans of larger sizes, while reducing the need
                             for enterprises to borrow from a variety of institutions, which is a cost savings in itself.
                             PO

                               One MFI in Peru has identified the small enterprise “sweet spot” as those businesses
                               with funding needs of around $20,000. Their prospecting is geared to clients needing
                               $20,000 as they are not as interest rate sensitive as larger clients, are not on as many
                               banks’ radars, and most importantly, are posed to grow and represent a long-term
                               investment for the MFI.


     Figure 1. Drivers of Proactive and Organic VSE Models for MFIs

                           Proactive Model                        Organic Model

                                Blue Ocean                              Client
                                Opportunity                            Retention


                   Long-Term                           High                           Competition
                    Strategy                         Liquidity                         in “Micro”

                                                      Asset
              “Leap-up”                           Diversi cation                            “Step-up”


                     Large SE                       Regulatory                           Limited SE
                  Market Potential                   Incentives                            Market


                                 Regulated
                                 Institution                              NGO
                                                                                  IV. INSTITUTIONAL STRATEGY                  15




B. “Step-up” or a “Leap-up”?: Who is the
target market?
The second consideration when choosing a business model for serving very small
enterprises is a thorough understanding of who the target market is. Our research has
found that MFIs tend to serve an VSE segment with some common characteristics (with
variations by country and sector) which include a relatively low level of formalization,
record keeping that is somewhat informal and “in house”, and a larger scale and volume
of sales than traditional microenterprises (see Section V and VIII).

For MFIs whose primary motivation for entering the VSE
space is to retain their existing clients, the move likely                     Example of a Step-up
constitutes a “step-up” from their micro clients. They            “We have all been offering large loans to micro
need larger loans with potentially longer tenors, but are         enterprises without having to develop a different
likely still informal and have poor record keeping, thus          technology for lending.  These are enterprises that are
credit analysis based on microenterprise lending including        growing, but still behave like microenterprises. They
character references and cash flows “created” by loan             are informal, pay no or low taxes, employees don’t
officers are still very relevant. Even some MFIs whose            have fixed salaries….Slowly, there is a development
expansion motives may be more proactive may find that             of real small businesses. They are registering in
their target market is not very different from their existing     FUNDEMPRESA and separating family from business.
client base and still just a “step-up”. In both these cases,      They require a different analysis. “  
the Organic Model may prove sufficient to successfully
expand to serve VSEs.                                                                          - Director of a Bolivian MFI

However, in some cases, an MFI may find that the VSEs it hopes to serve have
significantly different financial needs, require much larger loan amounts and/or that
the sales, analysis or risk management of these clients is wholly differ than their micro
clients. Thus, the expansion constitutes a “leap-up.” This may be because their existing
market niche is quite low. For example, when they may be using village banking or
group lending to serve this niche; hence the expansion requires not just tweaks in
their lending methodology but the development from scratch of an individual lending
methodology for VSEs. The expansion may require a “leap-up” if an MFI decides to
target a slightly larger and more formal niche than that of their faster-growing micro
clients. In these cases, especially if there is also sufficient scale (see below), an MFI is
likely to find that the Proactive Model allows it to better organize itself internally to
serve VSEs and microenterprises.

It is important to note, that even though an MFI may initially enter the VSE space in
order to continue serving their best clients, most that are successful at VSE lending do
eventually expand to serve other VSEs as well. For example, the VSE portfolio of one
Bolivian MFI that began VSE lending in 2006 is now comprised of 50% new clients
and 50% old clients. New clients already make up approximately 26% another MFI’s
VSE portfolio in Peru and they have been offering VSE loans for less than two years.
So long as the new clients are similar to the original market niche identified by the MFI
this should not dramatically impact the MFI’s choice of VSE business model.
16         MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                                 C. Considerations of Market Context
                                  The market context of the VSE business is another major factor in deciding which
                                                            business model to adopt. When evaluating the market
     A SWOT analysis is critical to refining the approach   context, an MFI must look at the size of the target market,
     for entering the VSE market.   MFIs can use this       the existing competition and its competitive advantages in
     document as a framework for thinking about their       serving VSEs in order to determine the potential scale of
     own competitive strengths and weaknesses for           the VSE business for them. This scale must justify both
     serving this market, comparing these with their        entry into the market as well as support the operational
     planned services with both banks and informal          costs of the business model. The larger the scale, in number
     lenders in the market.                                 of clients, loan sizes and breadth of product offering, the
                                                            greater the argument to adopt the Proactive Model.

                                 Size of the target market: When determining market size, it is not sufficient to simply
                                 look at the number of VSEs in the country. An MFI must also consider how many
                                 are located in the areas in which the MFI operates and what their financial needs are,
                                 both credit and non-credit. An MFI should try to quantify how many “high-potential”
                                 microenterprises there are, especially those where financing is a major constraint to
                                 growth. To do so, it must take into consideration the overall health of the market. Is
                                 the potential market limited by a small country or weak economy? Are there other
                                 non-financial constraints to the development of VSEs in the market that would affect
                                 the MFI’s business?

                                 Competitive environment: In addition to determining the size of the market, the MFI
                                 should consider the competitive environment and how this may impact how they
                                 choose to serve VSEs. Do the VSEs in the market already have access to financial
                                 services or is this a blue ocean opportunity? Is the market slightly, moderately or very
                                 competitive? Who is the competition (banks, other MFIs, other types of financial
                                 institutions)? It is also important that an MFI investigate the types of products and
                                 services others are offering to VSEs. Although there may be some financial institutions
                                 already in the market, their products may be inappropriate for VSEs but VSEs are
                                 bending products tailored for smaller or larger firms to their needs as there are no
                                 appropriate alternatives. For example, they may be cobbling together multiple loans to
                                 meet their full credit needs or using personal credit cards for business purposes. They
                                 may also be accessing bank loans based on personal credentials and/or collateral as
                                 opposed to business assets, and thus taking on great personal risk.

                                 Competitive advantages: Given the size of the market and the competitive
                                 environment, the MFI must then determine how much of the potential market it can
                                 reasonably capture.

                                 •	 External considerations: The MFI should consider how it can compete with the
                                    existing competition (See Section V below). Is there a niche currently not being
                                    served? Is it able to offer more appropriate products specifically geared towards VSEs
                                    that perhaps do not already exist? Will it be able to provide better, faster customer
                                    service? Will its collateral and/or lending requirements be more flexible, leveraging
                                    is microfinance background, and thus be able to serve VSEs excluded by existing
                                    providers? Will it compete on price, and if so, is this sustainable?
                                                                                   IV. INSTITUTIONAL STRATEGY                17




•	 Internal considerations: An MFI must also consider where there are internal factors
   that may limit the growth of its future VSE business. For example, does its mission
   limit the resources it is willing to dedicate to VSEs or are there legal (see below) or IT
   constraints (see Section XIII) to offering a breadth of VSE products? Additionally,
   expanding to VSE requires the involvement of all areas of the MFI, not only the
   commercial areas. Does the MFI have the capacity and resources to coordinate and
   mobilize managers across business lines or is it under-resourced or too busy with
   other projects? Another key consideration is funding (see Section XIV). VSE loans
   turn over more slowly and use up available funds more quickly, so this may limit an
   MFI’s ability to grow quickly.


D. Considerations of Legal Structure
The legal structure of an MFI is another influential factor
in determining the type of business model to adopt for VSE             How Interest Rate Caps Affect VSE
lending. The more formal and regulated an institution,                        Lending –Ecuador
generally the more it makes sense for the institution to
adopt the Proactive Model. These institutions are more             Although interested in moving into the small
likely to be able to offer a broader range of products to          enterprise space, one Ecuadorean MFI notes that it
VSEs (short and long term loans, savings and current               has not made the move because of the government’s
accounts, payments and transfer service). It may make              size based interest rate caps. The current caps
sense for the development and provision of these services          are 28% for loans under $10,000, 21% for loans
to be more centralized as in the Proactive Model. The              between $10,000 and $20,000 but only 11.8% for
ability to cross-sell a variety of products and increase the       loans above $20,000 for businesses with annual
revenue generated per customer can also help to offset the         sales over $100,000, range in which most VSEs fall.
higher operating costs of the Proactive Model.                     The spread over their financing costs, 7-8% is just
                                                                   not sufficient. Although the MFI is regulated and
On the other hand, an NGO that is only able to offer               takes deposits, they have to offer a high interest rate
basic credit products may be better served by the Organic          of these deposits in order to attract deposits from
Model as it is less costly to put in place and to operate on       the more traditional banks and the repatriation fee of
an ongoing basis. For these MFIs there is less of a need to        foreign funds also raises their financing cost.
have a separate business unit for VSEs as the breadth of
product offering will be limited and less complex. (See section IV below).

The legal structure of an MFI also has other implications on their entry into the VSE
space. Most notably, it may affect their ability to raise funds and the cost of the funds,
with deposits generally a far cheaper source of funding that external loans. Thus non-
deposit taking institutions may find it more difficult to compete for VSE clients if the
market is very interest rate sensitive.

The legal structure can also affect risk management. Regulated institutions are obliged
to comply with provisioning requirements, which may vary for micro and VSE loans,
guarantee requirements and client information requirements. For example, in Bolivia
clients borrowing over $15,000 must have real guarantees and MFIs must be prepared
to evaluate and register these guarantees. Non-regulated institutions may be able to
side step some of these regulations and serve VSEs regulated institutions cannot.
18   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          However, they may face other constraints because of their legal structure, just as not
                          having access to credit bureau information, which negatively impacts their ability to
                          assess willingness to pay.


                          E. Other Considerations
                          Regardless of the business model chosen, getting board of directors and senior
                          management buy-in to the VSE expansion plan is essential to an institution’s success.
                          Once the big picture strategy has been agreed on and the basic business model defined,
                          the institution can start mapping out the project components and how the necessary
                          changes and/or developments in each area of the institution. A Steering Committee
                          than includes members from all relevant areas of the institution can work to define
                          how and in what order these changes need to occur. Management should also clearly
                          define who has responsibility and accountability for the implementation of the project.
                          Some MFI’s have found it incredibly useful to have a project coordinator in charge of
                          overseeing the implementation process and ensuring that each relevant area is on track.
                          For example, an MFI in Colombia encountered many delays and setbacks in the first
                          six months of their implementation because they did not have a project coordinator to
                          ensure work was being done on all fronts.

                          It is also important to remember that the VSE business model may change over time as
                          motivations, market context or other the characteristics of clients change. For example,
                          when one Bolivian MFI first starting serving VSEs in 2006, they employed the Organic
                          Model as they were mostly growing with their clients. However, they observed that at
                          the time there were very few other institutions serving this market niche and became
                          more proactive in seeking out new clients. Since then they have transformed into a
                          bank (in part to increase funding sources for VSE lending), and migrated to a more
                          Proactive Model to lending to VSEs including specialized loan officers in branches
                          where the size of the market allows for it and more in-depth loan analysis of VSE loans,
                          but not a separate business unit for VSEs.
                                                                         V. DEFINING THE VALUE PROPOSITION   19




V. Defining the Value
Proposition

                                  Defining the value proposition checklist
  •	 Define specific small enterprise segments or subsegments to target
  •	 Identify a market gap in access to appropriate small enterprise loans
  •	 Define the institutional value proposition to VSEs – Is it compelling?


Above we discuss two basic models (or a combination thereof) that MFIs can consider
when moving into the VSE market. A critical consideration in both the Proactive and
Organic Models is the definition of the target market and a keen identification of the
value proposition that the MFI is offering this market. When determining a market
strategy, identifying and articulating a value proposition is the first step in determining
a market strategy. Additionally, an MFI should assess its value proposition vis-à-vis
the alternative sources of financial services, both formal and informal used by VSEs.
Keeping this in mind will assure that the MFI’s analysis of the potential market does
not “over-shoot” and can help define a more precise commercial strategy based on
serving segments rather than offering products (See section VI).


“Ants Dressed as Elephants”
Because of the broad variation in regulatory definitions and firm sizes of MSMEs,
common practice has moved into accepting a definition based on loan sizes for
financial institutions lending to MSMEs. This simplification can distort results,
however, potentially either over- or under-estimating business size. One Bolivian MFI
noted that some VSEs are “ants dressed as elephants” referring to the likelihood that
many microenterprises are being characterized as VSEs because of their loan size rather
than their own characteristics of organization, employees, or asset or revenue size. In
other cases, “elephants” might also be dressed as “ants” when there is no information
about the total outstanding loans of an enterprise. One Bolivian MFI we visited for this
publication noted that based on loan size, some 40% of clients were VSEs, however,
using the government’s definition of VSE that takes into account sector, sales volume,
assets and number of employees, only 17% of clients were defines at VSEs.


Different VSE Segments Obtain Different Value
The value proposition of MFIs to serve VSEs may vary depending on how VSEs
are defined. VSEs are not homogeneous but cover a broad range of characteristics
including employees, size, formality, tax status, and their role in a commercial and
service ecosystem. As discussed above, Organic models tend to target largely informal
businesses that have outgrown “micro” loans but still require a credit technology
that draws from microcredit where financial statements, invoices and receipts are
incomplete or perhaps do not exist. MFIs’ value added compared to banks in this
20                  MICROFINANCE AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A CALL FOR BASEL




                                                                  segment is high, as they can retain good clients without
     Figure 2: Example of Peruvian MFI SE                         requiring onerous new processes. The value proposition
     Sub-Segmentation by Loan Size                                begins to weaken when the VSEs targeted have greater
                                                                  levels of formality, or may be large enough to require new
                                                                  technologies and larger capital allocations that may be
                                                                  beyond the scope of many MFIs. To the extent that MFIs
     Lower Value
        of MFIs




                                     US$ 50,000+                  can begin to segment their clients more granularly, taking
                                                                  into account that those that receive US$10,000 have
                                                                  different needs than those who borrow US$100,000 and
                                                                  that their formality, size and financial and management
                                     US$ 25,000 - 50,000
                                                                  capacity can vary substantially, they can also differentiate
     Higher Value




                                                                  the types of service offered.
                                     US$ 7,000 - 25,000
     of MFIs




                                                                     To better distinguish and serve the various segments
                                                                     within “small enterprise”, one MFI in Peru has developed
                                                                     three sub-segments of SEs that are defined by loan size but
                                                                     also help to differentiate between three types of business:
                                     1) the very small partly informal enterprise; 2) the formal small enterprise; and 3) the
                                     “corporate” small enterprise (See Figure 2). As a rule of thumb, the MFI considers that
                                     those enterprises in the smaller loan ranges are more likely to lack formal employees
                                     or records while larger businesses may be more formal, paying taxes, being registered
                                     in public records of chambers of commerce, or do business with large government
                                     or corporate entities. By sub-segmenting SEs into these categories, the MFI is better
                                     able to specifically tailor its products and services and policies and procedures to each
                                     segment, maximizing its value proposition. However, this method does not avoid the
                                     problem of potentially dressing “ants” as “elephants” where microenterprises may be
                                     receiving loans that are considered “Very Small Enterprise” products.


                                     Considering the MFI Value Proposition: Banks vs. MFIs
                                 Defining VSEs and sub-segments within the VSE category can be useful in determining
                                 the specific value proposition of an MFI. Both banks and MFIs can be well positioned
                                 to serve VSEs. The value proposition of banks typically lies in that they can offer lower
                                 interest rates on loans, larger loans sizes, transactional accounts, and slightly more
                                                               complex products and services that some growing small
             VP Tip #1: Consider the value                     businesses may need. For VSEs with less complex financial
        proposition of an MFI vis-a-vis both                   needs, there is still value in working with a bank as it will
      formal and informal alternatives when                    be able to meet the VSE’s more robust financial needs as
              defining the target market.                      it continues to grow and develop. This creates a potential
                                                               incentive for clients to build a relationship with a specific
     Example: One MFI in Peru has determined that banks        bank to obtain access to services in the future. Nonetheless,
     rarely lend less than US$30,000. Thus, they have          MFIs can offer VSEs access to finance when banks may not
     determined that lending up to $30,000 is the most         be comfortable taking a risk. This MFI value proposition
     appropriate market niche for their VSE strategy since     appears to be most compelling when MFIs’ VSE clients are
     customers in this nche do not have access to lower-       informal. Unregistered and lacking financial statements,
     cost bank loans.                                          these VSEs are often unable to access bank loans (in some
                                                               limited examples of countries with extensive downscaling
                                                                         V. DEFINING THE VALUE PROPOSITION                  21




of banks). When MFIs move into a more formal VSE or SME segments, the scale tips
against them in terms of their value proposition and they can be pushed to reduce
interest rates to levels that may no longer support the business case for VSE expansion. It
is critical for MFIs interested in this segment to consider three main commercial issues:

•	 Are VSE customers able to access loans from alternative sources and what are these?

•	 What type or sub-segment of VSEs can they offer the most attractive value
   proposition to?

•	 How much flexibility will the MFI have in reducing interest rates and increasing
   loan sizes, while still remaining agile in their loan methodology?


A Personal Touch
One value proposition often referred in the literature is the “personal” service that MFIs
can offer. Low-income clients might feel uncomfortable or intimidated walking into a
traditional bank, and are more at ease with MFI services
and personnel that are designed to be more approachable               What are the comparative advantages
and respectful regardless of clients’ education, financial                            of one MFI in Peru
status or experience. One MFI in Bangladesh explained:                                 Vis-a-vis banks?*
“For us, VSEs are our corporate clients, our priority clients.
We treat them very well, while for the banks they are their         Flexibility: Some VSE borrowers who have been with
least important client and they often look at them with             this MFI for some time noted that at the beginning,
disdain.” While anecdotally this “personal touch” is often          had to provide a lot of documentation for a loan, but
cited as an advantage, it is difficult to substantiate.             now   could skip this step to get a loan more easily
                                                                    with the MFI.
Interviews with clients and loan officers at four leading
                                                                    Speed: The disbursement of loans in one or two days
institutions in Peru and Bolivia offered some additional
                                                                    was noted as an advantage, however, in one case, a
nuance on this topic. Indeed, MFIs are seen as offering more
                                                                    customer complained of a three day turnaround.
personal service. But probing more deeply into the meaning
of “personal” is key to understanding the relevance this may        * From interviews with 5 small business clients
have in terms of value added for small business clients. Some
clients interviewed for this report meant personal when they said “personal”. They were
strongly attached to their loan officer, and perhaps the MFI that helped them get on their
feet when they were much smaller businesses and much riskier clients. However, other
clients seemed to associate “personal” service with MFIs’ processes and products than
with their personal relationship with the MFI or loan officer (See box above). These may
include more flexible requirements for larger loans, speedier loan disbursements or less
cumbersome documentation. One General Manager of an MFI in Bolivia notes: “clients
have grown more sophisticated, they compare loan terms and they are not uncomfortable
walking into a bank as they were once”. The box above illustrates some of the specific
characteristics clients of one MFI in Peru perceived to be the MFIs comparative advantage.
While loan officers and clients alike may refer to this as “personal” service, it is not limited
to the relationship between the loan officer or the MFI and the client, but refers more
to the MFI’s more flexible approach to informal lending to VSEs. A personal touch is
a component, which is perhaps more relevant where banks are not reaching VSEs, but
should not be overestimated if MFIs want to reach a broad range of VSEs.
22       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                                                Considering non-Bank Competition for
      What are the comparative advantages                       MFIs
                of one MFI in Peru                              Banks are of course not always the only alternative source
        vis-a-vis non bank alternatives?*                       of financing for VSEs. Although Peru’s banks have been
                                                                scaling down to reach some of the relatively smaller urban
     Convenience: A client reported that in the past
                                                                businesses, in many countries in the region, this is yet to be
     he had managed four loans at once. However,
                                                                the norm. This does not protect MFIs from competition
     this was a logistical headache and said that he
                                                                in the VSE segment, however. Alternative funding sources
     learned that it is not worth your time. Instead,
                                                                can include: 1) multiple MFIs, combining various “micro”
     he preferred a single larger loan, even if the
                                                                loans to meet their needs; 2) supplier loans and leasing
     interest rate is slightly higher.
                                                                contracts; or 3) informal sector loans. These alternatives
     Flexibility: Suppliers may be able to lend VSEs            are likely to be less desirable to VSE clients than one larger
     money for specific inputs but cannot help fund             loan from an MFI or bank. Loans from multiple MFIs
     the growth and expansion of a business.                    may be difficult to manage and organize while supplier
                                                                loans can be restrictive, as they do not offer cash in hand.
                                                                Supplier loans are quite common but typically used only
                                  to buy equipment or merchandise, thus limiting their flexibility, especially when loans
                                  are aimed at investing for expansion. Informal loans from friends or family can be
                                  attractive, often offering lower interest rates, but may not reach the amounts required by
                                  customers. Additionally, they may come with the social burden of expected reciprocity.

                                  In summary, the value proposition of an MFI can be twofold: it can offer VSE clients a
                                  personal touch, where clients and their loan officer or other staff build loyalty and trust
                                  over time, and perhaps more importantly, flexible terms that are customized to the
                                  constraints of informal VSEs where clients may not be able to meet the documentation,
                                  collateral and other requirements of bank loans; or, it can offer VSEs the opportunity
                                  to consolidate their financing with one institution, reducing the non-financial costs of
                                  borrowing This section and sections VII and VIII on Credit Methodology and Risk
                                  touch on some of the repercussions that this comparative advantage may have on an
                                  institution’s credit risk management practices, where flexibility must be balanced with
                                  a higher risk of making larger loans.
                                                                                VI. COMMERCIAL STRATEGY                  23




VI. Commercial Strategy

                                        Commercial strategy checklist
  •	 Target the market (s) where the MFI’s value proposition is strongest
  •	 Mine existing data on large loans to assess initial potential demand and needs
  •	 Implement additional market studies or leverage existing studies
  •	 Define products to meet the needs of these target segments
  •	 Collaborate with Finance, Risk, and Credit departments to ensure products can be offered sustainably
  •	 Collaborate with HR department to identify HR requirements
  •	 Identify an appropriate prospecting strategy for reaching existing and new clients in SE
  •	 Identify a marketing strategy that includes  VSEs without excluding “micro” segment



A. Understanding Your Market
Proactive and Organic models may approach product
development differently. A Proactive model is more likely       CS Tip #1: Market studies can start with
to define a target market that includes a “blue ocean”          a relatively low-cost analysis of existing
market that is largely unserved by the financial sector. Its          clients focusing on “larger”client
product development process should be more deliberate,                              performance.
including a hypothesis of potential needs, client surveys or
qualitative market research and a pilot of a new product        Example: A Peruvian MFI we visited identified that
tailored to the needs of this market. One institution using     its larger micro clients were borrowing from multiple
a Proactive model interviewed for this publication noted        sources,  likely because their investment needs were
that it had implemented both market studies and pilots          higher   than  what typical microenterprise working
prior to offering VSE loans, while most of the institutions     capital  loans  could offer. By offering larger loans,
using Organic models had not. Organic models tend               they were able to better serve and retain these
to instead make small adaptations to existing products          clients.
to meet the needs of existing clients. This “learn as you
go” approach, can be less expensive and require fewer human resources to oversee the
process. However, it may limit the potential for innovation or out of the box thinking,
in particular in developing products that can help retain good clients.

VSE market studies are often not prioritized within institutions because they can be
costly, time consuming, and ultimately offer insights that an MFI may feel it already
intuitively knows about its clients. It is important to consider various types of studies
and approaches that suit an institution’s budget, time and existing knowledge. It is
also important to think about studies that may offer insight about a range of market
segments spanning from micro to medium enterprises to leverage the investment. It
may also help identify potential products and services that can be offered to various
segments rather than only a narrow slice of VSEs (See CS Tip #2).
24       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                                                 Where little is known about a VSE market, institutions
        CS Tip #2: Market studies can help                       fear that the cost of being a first mover outweighs the
        identify specific VSE segments and                       benefits. One institution in Central America interviewed
        their product needs. Some of these                       for this study suggested that market studies should
       new products may also be useful for                       be a public good, offered through technical assistance
         growing “micro” clients or larger                       grants by donors and made accessible to all institutions
            “small/medium” size firms.                           in the market. When one MFI invests in developing
                                                                 such know-how and appropriate products, it is likely
     Example: One Proactive model MFI implemented                that others will soon copy these products thus saving
     an in-depth market study of its MSME clients to             the investment and potentially threatening the market
     identify VSE needs. It identified a process by which        share gained by a first mover.
     enterprises’ needs evolve from working capital to
     investment loans, then current accounts, money
     transfers, credit cards and bank guarantees.   By           B. Product Development
     offering this broad range of products, the institution
     felt that it could capture a range of VSEs from those       Characteristics of Predominant Credit
     that were small and slowly starting to need new             Products
     products to those that already required a broad              As microenterprises grow into VSEs, their needs for
     range of products.                                           financial products and services may change. In Latin
                                                                  America and the Caribbean, we assume that these
                                                                  microenterpreneurs will have had some access to informal
                                                                  or formal loans, and begin with an analysis of credit
     CS Tip #3: Market studies in institutions                    needs. While this may oversimplify the needs of a very
         adapting a more Organic model for                        small business, it also reflects the revenue drivers that
     entering the VSE market can start small,                     may compel MFIs to engage this segment. VSE loans,
       beginning with an analysis of existing                     at minimum, will have larger loan sizes. Often this is
          client data and behavior of larger                      driven by the needs of clients as they grow. Throughout
                          clients.                                this publication we discuss some of the consequences of
                                                                  making larger loans on credit methodology, credit risk,
     Example: While few institutions interviewed for              financing and operations. In particular, we note that
     this study used data mining techniques to analyze            pressures in competitive microfinance markets may lead
     client behavior and needs, most had access to quite          institutions to increase loan sizes for microenterprises that
     detailed data about clients’ loan size, business size,       may threaten to leave the institution unless they obtain
     and growth.  This information can be a first step in         a larger VSE loan. Throughout our interviews we noted
     segmenting ranges of VSEs and identifying which              the tension between an institution’s need to manage its
     might be more able to handle larger loans.                   credit risk as loans become larger, and the pressure on
                                                                  loan officers to retain good clients are often at odds. This
                                  tension is especially critical in VSE lending because as loan sizes increase, risk cannot
                                  be spread out as easily among multiple loans, and loan officers are compensated on their
                                  success securing a smaller number of larger loans. The additional credit risk implied by
                                  VSE lending can be offset through greater guarantees, where more significant collateral
                                  is required. This comes with its own set of complexities as we discuss in Section VIII,
                                  including the lack of documentation or difficulty in assessing properties. The design
                                  of VSE loans and their collateral requirements must take into consideration not just
                                  the capacity of VSEs to provide real collateral, but also the costs of documenting and
                                  registering this collateral and their impact on the overall cost of the loan.
                                                                                  VI. COMMERCIAL STRATEGY                 25




With size, loan tenors may also increase, especially if
loans are being used for investment purposes. Many MFIs            CS Tip #4: Credit and savings products
offering small business loans have been offering loans for          that can increase the “stickiness” of
up to four years rather than traditional 1-year or lesser            a relationship with an MFI can help
terms. Nevertheless, this is not always the case. MFIs             retain good clients and improve their
interviewed for this study often noted that VSE clients              profitability. One example is credit
can have a hard time with the discipline of paying back           lines, which are often well-regarded by
loans over a longer time period, additionally, longer loans
                                                                  these customers because of the ease of
require a more disciplined engagement between the loan
                                                                   requirements, speed of disbursement,
officer or MFI and the client, since contact can be more
limited. We have observed that VSE loan tenors are more
                                                                         and flexible payment terms.
commonly of two years and under in this segment.                   Additionally, credit lines strengthen a
                                                                   relationship of trust between a client
Additionally, to avoid this risk of losing the client                 and an institution that can foster
relationship, some MFIs have worked on increasing the                              retention.
“stickiness” of their client relationships (See CS Tip #4)
that can be looser when there is a less frequent interaction      Example:  A leading Costa Rican MFI believes that
between a loan officer and a client with longer-term loan         credit lines have helped to ensure the retention of
maturity.                                                         some of their better small business clients who make
                                                                  frequent withdrawals on credit lines vs. Much less
Most importantly, interest rates are typically lower for          frequent business loan withdrawals.   In Peru, an
VSE loans than for microfinance loans. In most MFIs               MFI notes that offering credit lines can drive  small
interviewed, these rates are not set as a result of a costing     business client loyalty.
exercise but based on market trends and client demands.
In more competitive markets VSE loans are offered at
much lower rates than micro loans. Table 1 offers an
example of one MFI’s interest rate schedule for larger USD        Table 1. Example of interest rates by loan
loans, illustrating the relationship between loan size and        size of a Bolivian MFI
interest rates.                                                       Loan amount USD            Annual Interest Rate
For MFIs that offer VSE loans to existing clients, reducing        2,000-5,000                           26% +
interest rates does not always mean switching clients into a       5,000-10,000                          23%+
different product as they grow out of microcredit and into         10,000- 20,000                        20% +
VSE loans. In practice some MFIs using Organic models,
offer their best clients a “preferential ” interest rate rather    20,000-30,000                         18% +
than VSE Product. Where countries are regulated with               30,000- 40,000                      17.5% +
interest rate caps on VSE loans, this type of pressure is          40,000- 50,000                        17% +
exacerbated. An Ecuadorean MFI manager interviewed                 50,000- 100,000                       16% +
for this study noted that they do not make loans over US$
                                                                   100,000 +                             15% +
20,000 because the government caps interest rates on
those loans at 11%, which is not sustainable for the MFI.
26         EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




       One MFI visited for this study offers an interesting example of how interest rate pressures can be detrimental to
       the business case. In Peru, where the VSE segment is highly competitive, managers complained of pressure from
       loan officers to reduce interest rates for their best clients for fear of losing their business. As this segment likely
       already has lower margins than the microenterprise segment, this type of pressure can ultimately lead to a decline
       in profitability and potentially a decision to exit or reduce exposure to VSEs.



                                    Characteristics of other Credit Products
                                  MFIs interviewed for this study note that credit product needs for VSEs are not
                                  significantly different from those of microenterprises. They may be more inclined
                                  to borrow for investment (and thus take larger loans at lower interest rates) than
                                                             microenterprises. In general both fixed investment loans
                                                             and working capital loans are attractive for VSEs (See CS
          CS Tip #5: VSEs are more likely to                 Tip#5). Additionally, VSE owners will take on mortgages,
        borrow for investment and working                    either for the business or the owner’s own home. These can
     capital equally. Both products should be                be used to build or expand workshops or sales outlets or
                     made available.                         improve the living standards of VSE owners. Credit lines
                                                             are also attractive, offering VSEs the opportunity to borrow
     Examples: One MFI in Peru noted that about half
                                                             only what they need and pay these down as soon as they
     the loans in the VSE segment were for investments
                                                             are able. Other products such as factoring and leasing may
     vs. Working capital.
                                                             be interesting (See Box), but are still rare in MFIs, partly
                                                             because of the informality of the clients in this segment.
                                  Additionally, regulatory restrictions can be a limitation to offering these products. In
                                  Peru, MFIs were only authorized to use factoring in 2008, for example.



       Factoring can be attractive to those VSEs working with small contracts from government or municipal offices or
       larger companies.  There may be demand limitations that constrain MFIs from developing these products, however.  
       Firstly, VSEs are often concentrated in commercial or service sectors, where clients are retail or individuals, even
       some producers sell their products in the retail market.  Additionally, even when VSEs are in productive sectors and
       sell to larger buyers, these may not always be willing to accept an invoice and tax registration, as they themselves
       may be informal.
       Leasing tends to be offered in even fewer cases, and opportunities are perhaps more limited. The same reasons
       that limit factoring may limit demand for leasing products. Additionally, those VSEs that buy equipment or vehicles
       often buy these second-hand. One MFI client interviewed for this study bought a complex machine for cleaning and
       recalibrating car engines directly from a producer in China instead of in Peru through a distributor.  This reduced the
       overall cost of the equipment, but also limited financing options for this US$15,000 machine.
                                                                                 VI. COMMERCIAL STRATEGY               27




Non- Credit Products
VSEs, even more so than microenterprises, may have financial needs beyond typical
credit products. For MFIs hoping to remain in the segment for the long-term the
identification of these needs and long-term strategies
on how to meet this needs, either internally or through         CS Tip #6: Banks earn money from VSE
partnerships, is essential. Moreover, taking a broader,          relationships beyond loans and MFIs
longer-term approach to VSEs can increase the profitability
                                                                  can begin to look at profitability in
of the relationship with a VSE, as it incorporates not only
                                                                 terms of total customer profitability
the VSE loans, but also the relationship with the enterprise,
its owners, and family members and employees. Banks                  over time and across products.
often approach this segment with a strategy that relies on    Examples: Letters of Credit. A Bolivian MFI
cross selling vehicle loans and mortgages to owners, family   interviewed for this study is offering its SME clients
members and staff. Additionally, banks can earn revenues      Letters of Credit, a fee-based service targeted at a
and ensure a longer, “stickier” relationship through          small segment of the market and typically offered by
fee for service products. For MFIs, which often have a        banks, it has helped VSEs that were otherwise unable
more limited product offering, this holistic approach to      to participate in public procurement opportunities.
customer profitability can be tougher to realize. “Leading”   These can be based on existing CDs, savings
MFIs, which typically have a broad product offering have      accounts, credit lines or fixed asset guarantees,
mimicked some of these strategies with credit products,       many of these offered by the MFI to its VSE clients.
offering vehicle and mortgage loans to VSE owners and
their families. For smaller MFIs with fewer product offerings, VSE profitability will
rely primarily on the revenue stream of one credit product.

While cross-selling credit products can often be a way to achieve greater profitability
from VSE clients, in low-income VSE markets in Latin America, there is less scope to
cross sell investments, deposit services and fee for services as with larger businesses.
Nevertheless, non-credit services at no fee or low fees have been popular with VSEs
in some of the cases interviewed for this study and may offer a way for MFIs to boost
profitability and create “sticker” relationships. One example is a Bolivian MFI that
we interviewed, which offers letters of credit for clients seeking to work with local
governments or other contractors that require these (See CS Tip #6).

Few MFIs, including banks and regulated entities have developed current accounts
for VSE clients, but customers are using other types of products as a transactional
alternative. For example, one MFI in Peru offers savings accounts that look much like
current accounts. These have no limits or charges on deposits and withdrawals, low
minimum balances and debit cards linked to an ATM network. While savings balances
are low, this is not necessarily a reflection of the lack of interest in the accounts, but
instead of the transactional purpose these are used for. Additionally, VSEs with savings
accounts can use these to make payroll disbursements to employees directly at the
MFI’s cashiers without issuing checks. They can also make transfers between cities
to suppliers or clients at no cost. In Bolivia, one MFI has introduced international
wire transfers to meet the needs of VSE clients that buy products directly from China
or other countries. While such services are not typically used to diversify revenue,
they can improve customer satisfaction and “stickiness” as well as generate demand for
future fee-based products.
28         CLOSING THE CREDIT GAP FOR FORMAL AND INFORMAL MSMEs




                                                              MFIs that are not regulated to take deposits can be
      CS Tip #7: Smooth backoffice systems                    especially disadvantaged in the face of VSE needs for
      and partnerships with banks that are                    non-credit products and services as transactional accounts
       not competing for the segment can                      such can be a critical and attractive product for this
     help overcome the challenge of limited                   segment. Technology offers the potential to overcome
     product offerings by non-deposit taking                  some of these challenges by linking MFIs to banks, non-
                   institutions.                              bank correspondent networks and other service providers
                                                              seamlessly in countries where these are not in direct
     Examples: One MFI we spoke to in Costa Rica is           competition with MFIs for the segment (See CS Tip #7).
     not authorized to take deposits. Clients receive loan
     disbursements directly through partner banks and
     are able to deposit payments into these accounts.
                                                              Convenience and customer service
                                                               Customer service, in particular convenience is a critical
                                                               need for VSEs and can be defined in a variety of ways.
                                 Interviews with 12 VSE clients of MFIs in Peru and Bolivia for this document revealed
                                 that there are a variety of conveniences and time saving services that VSE customers
                                 either used or asked for. Not all were products, and in many ways, services were more
                                 relevant to these clients. These included:

                                 Save travel time:
                                 •	 ATMs or non-bank correspondents in peripheral areas of large cities where branch
                                    presence was low
                                 •	 Branch offices near businesses when available
                                 •	 Frequent loan officer visits to businesses to offer new products, check in on business
                                    performance

                                 Save money and time hiring bookkeeper or tracking accounts
                                 •	 Lack of requirements for formal receipts, invoices, and tax documents for obtaining
                                    a loan

                                                              Save travel time and/or cost of wiring funds
      CS Tip #8: Balancing convenience and                    •	 Inter-city wire transfers for no cost or low cost to send or
       “touch” is critical when automating                       receive payment for merchandise
               client relationships.                          •	 International wire transfers to facilitate imports of
                                                                 machinery, inventory and other goods
     Examples: A specialized MSME Bank in Bolivia
     spends time training small business clients to use       “Personal service”
     on-line banking to reduce transaction costs and          •	 Friendliness of staff at branches and in the field
     branch time but their competitors note that this         •	 Ability to address problems and offer solutions
     financial institution does not scrimp on relationship    •	 Understanding of the clients’ business needs
     banking, offering an extensive period of time with       •	 Personal relationships between the loan officer and client
     customers, understanding their business and
     providing customer support on commercial issues.          The section above discusses the preference for “personal
                                                               service” of some VSE clients, suggesting that this can play
                                 an important role in strengthening client relationships and ensuring “stickiness” and
                                 longevity in a client relationship. This is a critical consideration when determining to
                                 what extent low-touch conveniences such as online services have to be balanced with
                                 effective, and efficient personal service. Customer service encompasses both high and
                                 low touch points and can be an important differentiator.
                                                                                 VI. COMMERCIAL STRATEGY                  29




C. Prospecting and Marketing
Identifying the appropriate VSE customers can be a challenge. Typically, an institution
implementing an Organic model for reaching VSEs will begin by servicing its own
“graduating” clients. Over time, as they build experience with these clients, they seek
out new VSEs. We visited two intuitions in Peru that have been serving VSEs actively
since 2009. In both cases, VSE loans represent approximately 40% of their total
portfolio volume. In one institution, this represented year
on year growth of 69% in volume and 40% in number of               CS Tip #9: To poach or not to poach.
loans above US$7,000. This type of growth and volume           Many MFIs in fast growing countries in
cannot typically be achieved solely through graduation of
                                                               the region have aggressively increased
microenterprise clients in such a short time. Conservative
                                                                    their VSE portfolios, serving their
estimates from the literature suggest that 6-10% of
microenterprises graduate to become small enterprises.
                                                                    existing growing microenterprise
While MFIs don’t typically track this rate, even in high        clients while recruiting new clients. In
growth countries such as Peru, these are perceived by these      countries where microenterprises are
MFIs to be no higher than 50%. One Peruvian institution           not growing as successfully, existing
noted that 50% of its VSE borrowers are new clients to               clients may be more limited and
the institution, which were prospected through references         seeking new VSE clients a necessity.
by existing clients, poaching of loan staff from other         This adds to the risk of an VSE strategy,
institutions, and agreements with employers and other         as many MFIs note that “known” clients
organizations. In Bolivia, one institution echoed that             offer lower portfolio risk. Poaching
aggressively growing an VSE portfolio involves poaching,        loan officers of competing institutions
since it is difficult to recruit new clients and not enough       to gain know-how can be useful, but
existing clients graduate (See CS Tip #9). Nonetheless,
                                                                    obtaining new VSE clients through
another MFI in Bolivia noted that their rapid growth in
                                                                  poaching can add to the risk of over
the VSE segment was almost completely a result of client
references and not poaching strategies.
                                                                 indebting VSEs by offering larger and
                                                                     faster loans to gain their business.
Marketing to VSEs is most effective through word of
                                                               Example: An MFI in Bolivia highlights that most of
mouth and face-to-face prospecting. As such, offering
                                                               its in-house expertise in VSE lending was obtained
good service and convenient terms is critical to secure
                                                               by hiring middle managers and credit offers from
new business. Additional strategies used by some MFIs
                                                               specialized financial institutions that serve VSEs. This
to reach a broader business have included sponsoring
                                                               has sped up the institution’s know-how significantly.
sports teams or community activities as well as modifying
brochures to reflect larger businesses. Most of the MFIs       Example: An MFI in Central America notes that
interviewed for this research did not dramatically attempt     those VSE clients that are not served by banks are
to alter their brand image to serve the VSE market, in         the key “blue ocean” segment for MFIs. However,
large part because their first VSE clients tended to be their  they can be the riskiest to serve. Without transparent
existing clients and they capitalized on their strong brand    information and efficient credit bureaus, it can be
with these clients. There is a tension, for MFIs that focus    difficult to distinguish good VSEs from bad ones.
on the microenterprise sector to avoid alienating their key
microenterprise customer by changing their image too radically. At best, these changes
are described as “tweaks”. In the case of some MFIs, small changes at the branch level
such as shorter lines, waiting areas and more senior staff for VSE clients can attract
the attention of existing clients on a path to growth. In other cases, the costs are not
30   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          justified. In Bolivia, the regulatory authorities do not allow preferential lines for specific
                          groups, and this is not a possibility.

                          Working with supply chains is relatively common for banks downscaling into SME,
                          financial institutions that are more active in the SME and even larger corporate sectors
                          can be best positioned to lend to value chains as a commercial strategy. MFIs with a
                          large microenterprise portfolio that are moving into VSE are less likely to take a supply
                          chain approach, particularly in urban markets where VSE loans are often concentrated.
                          Unlike banks, they do not have access to larger companies that can link them to their
                          suppliers, limiting their ability to go “down” the chain to link into new businesses.
                          Nevertheless, supply chains can be used to identify larger businesses within a “micro”
                          market, where MFIs go “up” from their traditional market, tapping into existing micro
                          clients, or visit areas where there is a large concentration of micro clients and begin to
                          scout the area for their suppliers.


                          D. Other Considerations
                          A commercial strategy for MFIs to serve VSEs should identify a key market segment,
                          or multiple segments and define the MFI value proposition for each. Few institutions
                          have implemented market studies of these segments, and even fewer have shared these
                          so as to glean possible new opportunities to serve VSEs with financial products and
                          services. At minimum, VSEs require some adaptation of traditional microenterprise
                          loans including working capital and fixed investment loans with longer tenors, lower
                          interest rates and larger loan sizes. All of these changes will imply adaptations to an
                          MFIs business model including in Credit, Risk, Finance, Operations, IT and other
                          areas as discussed in the sections below. These will also require adaptations to a
                          commercial strategy. Credit and non-credit products must be available to VSEs to
                          serve their needs, but also to increase the total profitability of relationships with these
                          businesses. Aggressive prospecting may not be necessary, but can be depending on the
                          market context. In highly competitive markets, MFIs will have to assess what their key
                          competitive advantage is when serving VSEs: product, interest rate, speed of service,
                          risk appetite, etc. While interest rates are important, in some markets, having a greater
                          appetite for risk and the willingness to lend larger amounts against a given collateral
                          item can often be highly effective in attracting VSEs. However, this in turn places
                          additional pressures on the management of risk of these loans. Potentially, non-financial
                          services are also needed, in particular training and support services that can help firms
                          grow and reach a slightly larger and more stable segment of “small” entrepreneurship.
                          Experiments to link these into existing credit offerings are extremely limited in the
                          region, and a greater understanding of these linkages may help further expand the
                          demand, growth and “stickiness” of VSE customers of MFIs.
                                                                                           VII. CREDIT ANALYSIS               31




VII. Credit Analysis

                                              Credit analysis checklist
  •	 Reengineer credit analysis process to ensure the different risk profile of VSEs is addressed
  •	 Upgrade analysis of client’s “capacity to pay” to include historical monthly P&L, horizontal analysis, supplier
     references, cross-referencing and documentation of financial information
  •	 Potentially include projected monthly P&L as part of capacity to pay analysis
  •	 Revise loan guarantee policies, requirements and procedures for larger loans. Ensure guarantee policies balance
     the risk appetite of the MFI with the collateral guarantee capacities of the clients and the costs of documentation.
  •	 Include requirements of the regulatory authorities in all policies
  •	 Work with HR to incorporate new analysis and policies in HR training


Regardless of whether an MFI chooses to adopt the Proactive or Organic Model when
expanding upmarket to serve VSEs, it needs to revise and upgrade its credit analysis
policies in light of VSEs different risk profile. For MFIs expanding upmarket mainly
to retain their existing clients, it is easy for an MFI to fall into the trap of only making
minimal adjustments to its credit analysis as clients already have a track record with the
institution and are “low-hanging fruit.” However, there are
significant challenges to making loans to new VSEs, and                CA Tip #1: Don’t fall into the “trap” of
depending on the market, they may be one of the riskiest                 thinking that knowing your existing
segments of the market. Simply using “micro” technology                     clients is sufficient for analyzing
to serve these informal VSEs can increase portfolio risk.                 their risk when offering Very Small
Strong internal controls and auditing functions are also                               Enterprise loans.
essential to contain loan officers and branches when there
is strong pressure to offer larger loans and not lose clients.       Example: Various MFIs we spoke to streamlined
                                                                     VSE loan processes for existing clients, where very
In addition to differentiating between micro and VSE                 little financial and business data were collected for
credit analysis and risk management policies, it may be              existing clients, but more extensive data and analysis
necessary for an MFI to do further sub-segmentation                  was required of new clients. While in the short-term,
within VSEs (See section V). For example, in Peru,                   this does not appear to lead to delinquencies in
where VSEs are defined by the superintendence as those               existing clients, the model has not been “tested” in
with loans of between $7,500-$100,000, there are huge                LAC countries during a macroeconomic downturn,
differences in small enterprise sophistication, formality            where historical performance may not be sufficient
and financial needs. Thus, blindly using the government’s            to predict future performance.
definitions could result in inappropriate credit analysis
and increased risk.


  In one MFI in Peru, we found that VSEs have the highest PAR of any segment. The MFI has PAR30 of 8-9% for its
  Very Small portfolio vs. 4% for its Micro portfolio and 5% Small. This likely reflects the pressure to compete and
  disburse large amounts more quickly.
32       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  Most MFIs in Latin America that have expanded upmarket to serve VSEs have
                                  adopted three basic credit analysis methodologies. It is important to note that these
                                  methodologies may not have been fully tested as the macroeconomic conditions in
                                  many of these markets have been quite favorable to micro enterprise and very small
                                  enterprise growth. However, these represent some of the more common approaches
                                  used by MFIs to date. Additional approaches exist, including credit scoring used by
                                  some banks or consumer lending institutions. In particular, anecdotal evidence from
                                  Peru suggested that both specialized MFIs as well as downscaled banks used scoring
                                  models to determine all of part of the willingness to pay analysis. However, limited
                                  evidence is available on the performance of VSEs using credit scoring.

                                  •	 A “Micro Plus” methodology with some added prudence and cross-referencing of
                                     financial information.

                                  •	 A “Specialized VSE” hybrid that adds to “Micro Plus” further cross-referencing, some
                                     additional analysis and collateral guarantees and an annualized cash flow analysis.
                                     It may include a SWOT and other external risk analysis of the business and sector.

                                  •	 A “Pro-Forma VSE” which examines historical cash slows as well as an assessment of
                                     future cash flows based on an investment plan, though loan amounts are not always
                                     linked to the results of this analysis.

                                                                MFIs having adopted the Organic Model are more likely
        CA Tip #2: Outside support may be                       to use one of the first two credit methodologies, especially
         necessary when adopting a more                         in very competitive markets where clients are resistant to
     rigorous methodology (Specialized VSE/                     delays in loan disbursement caused by a more thorough
     Pro-forma VSE) for analyzing VSE loans.                    analysis of a business. MFIs having adopted the Proactive
     These borrow from SME methodologies                        Model are more like to have adopted a “Specialized VSE”
         with some special techniques for                       hybrid methodology to serve VSEs, or even a “Pro-Forma
     estimating financial information that is                   VSE” model that borrows from the SME methodology of
                                                                institutions such as ProCredit. Regardless of the model,
                   not recorded.
                                                                however, credit analysis needs to be adapted to take into
     Example: One Bolivian MFI hired loan officers with         account the greater risk. Micro loan methodologies are
     VSE experience and worked with external consultants        likely insufficient to evaluate the risk of larger loans (often
     to initiate a credit methodology that could analyze        used for investment or leaps into a new stage of growth),
     VSE risk in greater depth than a simple “Micro Plus”       where VSEs themselves may not be as well prepared to
     method.                                                    analyze their own investment and risk. However, the
                                                                complexity of the credit analysis must be weighed against
                                  both the MFI’s cost of conducting it (in order to maintain profitability for the sector)
                                  as well as the impact of its agility and flexibility in serving its clients.
                                                                                         VII. CREDIT ANALYSIS           33




A. Capacity to Pay Upgrades
There are five main ways the evaluation of a SE’s capacity to pay may vary from the
evaluation of a micro client’s capacity to pay. These differences can be viewed as a
spectrum: Organic Models will have made the first one or two adjustments to their
capacity to pay analysis and potentially the third, while Proactive Models are likely to
have made the first four adjustments and maybe the last to their analysis.

Better validation of financial information: For VSE lending MFIs tend to require
additional validation of the financial information reported
by clients and crosschecking the information from multiple
                                                                 Sample “Validation” Check or “Cruce”
directions. For example, revenues might be checked against
sales receipts, register books or work orders. Margins          A cross-check seeks to verify either the sales or the
might be asked for directly and checked against financial       margins…the analyst will look at the inventory, ask
statements (if available), but also calculated by looking at    about sales, ask about margins, ask about purchases
raw sales and purchases. Although similar checks are done       and then also calculate the margin.
for micro loans, they tend to be simpler and more trust is
placed in the hands of the micro client to accurately estimate sales and profit figures.

Greater documentation: Both the documentation required from clients as well
as the documentation loan officers are required to complete tends to be greater for
VSE loans than micro loans. For VSE loans, MFIs tend to require greater proof of
financial information through sales receipts, tax payments, etc., and this proof must be
documented in the loan files. It may also include more documentation from references
(providing letters of reference rather than just an oral validation) from suppliers and
other creditors (landlords, etc.). Additionally, greater documentation of collateral may
be required. For example, in Bolivia, some MFIs do not require land or property titles
for smaller loans, but will require these for VSE loans. Loan officers might visit these
homes and take photos of them to include in loan files. In one MFI, an architect
accompanies the loan officer on the visit to assess its value independently. Loan files are
longer and more detailed and tend to take three to four times longer for a loan officer to
complete. Although, it is prudent to have more stringent documentation requirements
for larger loans, these requirements must be tailored to what an VSE can reasonably
be expected to have, not so costly to obtain as to make the loan unviable, and not
too burdensome on loan officers, or an MFI risks losing one of its key competitive
advantages over the banks to serving this market – its agility and flexibility. Audited
financial statements, for example, are rarely available and cost-prohibitive for some
VSEs.

Formalized evaluation of external risks: Inherent in most microfinance lending is
an “understanding” of the external risks a client’s business faces. Loan officers tend to
know their markets and customers well and because most businesses are simple, can
quickly get a sense of how a business is positioned in the market and what external
pressures it might face. However, there is rarely a formal analysis or documentation
of these risks and this “understanding” is not institutionalized. Because of the size
of the loans and the relative flexibility of microenterprises, should a negative external
event occur, microentrepreneurs are generally able to continue to meet their loan
34        EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                                                  obligations, often through other household income. The
         CA Tip #3: A“horizontal analysis” of                     larger the business and the loan, the less likely that this
       financial data can help MFIs see if the                    will be possible and the more complex the risks faced
         trends in the business are positive,                     by the VSE. Thus, for VSE lending it is recommended
         negative or static and if its growth                     that a more formal analysis of external risks is conducted
               warrants a larger loan.                            and that these risks be documented as part of the loan
                                                                  file. This analysis can include: a description of suppliers,
      Example: One Bolivian MFI looks at historic financial       a description of clients, a SWOT or additional market
      data for existing clients in order to see if the business   analysis. Developing in-house expertise or working in
      has grown and if they can prudently increase the            conjunction with local universities and think tanks can
      loan size.                                                  be useful if exposure to certain economic segments is
                                                                  significant. Additionally, implementing ex-post analysis of
                                     sectorial risk concentration and imposing limits on this can help to cap this exposure
                                     (See Risk tip #4).

                                    More in-depth cash flow analysis: Most MFIs only look at a static “snapshot” of
                                    cash flow when making micro loans, whereas a more nuanced moving “video” of cash
                                    flow works better for VSE lending. Usually this is a 12-month cash flow for VSE loans
                                    that will capture the seasonality of the business and checks that the business will have
                                    the funds needed to make repayments during this cycle. Given the informality of the
                                    businesses, the loan officer must generally work with the client to create this cash flow.
                                    Thus the cash flow serves as a tool for evaluating capacity to pay, but also a medium
                                    through which the loan officer gets to know the client and business and an initial sense
                                    of willingness to pay. (See Figure 3 below).




        Figure 3. Comparison of VSE cash flow analysis of various credit models
           Micro Plus                         Specialized SE                                 Pro-Forma SE
     •	 Weekly or monthly          •	 Calculate weekly or monthly P&L           •	 Calculate annual/seasonal P&L (See
        P&L                           (See Micro Plus)                             Specialized SE)
        •	 Business Sales          •	 Ask if this month’s sales are average,    •	 Calculate the business margin (Sales- Cost
        •	 Costs of goods sold        poor or better than usual                    of Goods Sold)
        •	 Family income/          •	 Assign a sales revenue figure for each    •	 Estimate additional purchases (inventory)
           expenses (informal         type of month (i.e. “what does a bad         from the use of the upcoming loan
           businesses)                month look like in terms of sales? What   •	 Estimate the growth in sales (using margin
        •	 Less loan payments         does a good month look like?)                calculations) that this will produce
           and other obligations   •	 Review each month of the year to          •	 Based on the increase in sales figures,
                                      determine whether it is an average,          construct a projected annual P&L [where
     •	 Horizontal analysis
                                      good or bad month.(i.e. Is May usually       revenue = margin x new inventory].
        of prior loans and
                                      a good month? What about June,?)          •	 Subtract the cost of operations
        growth in cash flow
                                   •	 Calculate excess cash profit monthly      •	 Calculate the remainder to ensure that it
        from earlier stages
                                      and annually to ensure that it is            is sufficient to cover loan payment
        (for existing clients)
                                      sufficient to cover loan payments
                                                                                           VII. CREDIT ANALYSIS   35




Pro forma cash flow analysis: Some MFIs may also take into consideration the pro
forma impact of the loan on a business’s cash flow and capacity to pay. As many VSEs
may be using the loan for investment purposes, this is very reasonable, especially as
many fast growing VSEs might not qualify for the funds needed for investment based
strictly on historical performance. Most of the Pro Credit Banks conduct this type of
analysis, as do some traditional banks, but this is not standard practice for most MFIs
moving upmarket in Latin America. Many MFIs consider it too risky to lend based on
growth assumptions, especially given the degree of specialized analytical skills needed
to do so. For example, how much a loan increases the bottom line varies if it is used
to upgrade an existing facility, purchase a new building, move to a better location or
increase inventory.

When selecting an approach to measuring capacity to pay, MFIs should consider
the rigor they need and balance this with their internal capacity to implement a
methodology, incorporate it into training and control processes and balance it
with ex-post risk analysis. In addition, the cost of the analysis must be taken into
consideration and justified for the size of the loan and the margins they offer. Figure 3
offers a summary of key approaches to assessing capacity to pay.


B. Willingness to Pay Adjustments
In microfinance, willingness to pay has traditionally been judged based on informal
character analysis and references and “ensured” through a variety of mechanisms
including: group guarantees, individual guarantors or the pledging of small assets as
collateral. Clients are generally offered larger loans as they build a credit history with
the institution. For VSE clients that are graduating from micro clients, willingness to
pay may be less of an issue because the client already has a strong track record with the
MFI. Willingness to pay is otherwise measured with some relatively traditional bank-
like tools, adjusted to the realities of informal sector enterprises. For example, credit
bureaus are consulted where they are available, but where they are not, or if they only
publish information about delinquent loans rather than overall indebtedness, their
utility is reduced. Character references are another common requirement. Measuring
character by asking regular business colleagues such as suppliers to vouch for a client
can be an important validation of their responsibility and good judgment. Often
formal letters are asked of suppliers or larger customers of a business. Finally, while
collateral tends to play a small role in microcredit, it typically plays a larger role in VSE
loans. Collateral is mostly taken in the form of property or land titles (and to a lesser
extent vehicle or machinery) but there is varying flexibility in terms of the required
documentation and assessment of property.


Credit bureaus
The MFIs interviewed for this research have generally placed a large emphasis on
credit history for determining a VSE’s willingness to pay. However, most are located in
countries with strong credit bureaus and information. In both Peru and Bolivia, credit
bureaus capture information not just from banks, but also regulated microfinance
36       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                                                institutions (as well as NGOs that volunteer information).
     CA Tip #4: Credit bureaus have helped take                 This makes it very easy to check not just repayment
     some of the “guesswork” out of evaluating                  history, but also overall indebtedness. We were informed
        willingness to pay, but may encourage                   that one institution in Peru, uses a credit bureau (Equifax)
       lending larger amounts to stay ahead of                  for an initial screening and also to determine loan size.
                                                                While credit bureau information is useful and should be
       the competition and meet disbursement
                                                                one factor in determining willingness to pay, care must be
      targets, leading to over indebtedness and                 taken not to rely too heavily on it.
            problems with capacity to pay.
                                                                In countries without strong credit bureaus or where MFIs
     Example: In Peru, it is not uncommon for VSE clients
                                                                do not have access to the information in the credit bureau,
     to have 3 or 4 loans with different institutions. One
                                                                MFIs face additional risks when lending to VSEs as
     MFI discussed with us a critical risk noting that when
                                                                compared to microenterprises, as clients are more likely to
     they decide to reduce the requested amount of a loan
                                                                have had prior loans with other institutions. For example
     for a client because their capacity to pay analysis
                                                                in Costa Rica, many of the VSEs target by a leading MFI
     cannot justify it, they face a greater risk that other
                                                                are large enough that they may have had access to bank
     MFIs will make these additional loans, placing the
                                                                loans in the past, but because the MFI is an NGO they
     client’s capacity to pay even more at risk. Analysis
                                                                can’t check the repayment records for these clients. This
     of credit bureau data for indebtedness of clients
                                                                increases the risk that they will simply get the bank’s worst
     suggests this may be taking place.
                                                                performing clients.


                                  Guarantees and Collateral
                                  In addition to assessing a VSE’s willingness to pay, MFIs can “ensure” willingness
                                  to pay through collateral guarantees and guarantors. While it is prudent for MFIs
                                  expanding upmarket to consider requiring guarantees for VSE loans, when determining
                                  their guarantee policy, they must balance their tolerance for risk with the guarantee
                                  capacities of their clients and the costs of documenting collateral guarantees. One of the
                                  key competitive advantages that MFIs have in expanding upmarket is their traditional
                                  flexibility in terms of guarantees. If they are too strict with guarantees for VSE lending,
                                  they risk becoming too bank-like and losing their competitive advantage. Often it is
                                  not that the VSE doesn’t have assets, but rather that the documentation on these assets
                                  is incomplete and insufficient for many banks or that the cost and effort of obtaining
                                  the necessary documentation/registration of collateral does not justify the loan size.
                                  Additionally, assets may be difficult to value as they might be homes in neighborhoods
                                  where property values are low, or in poorly constructed buildings, for example.

                                  Most of the MFIs interviewed for this research do not take real guarantees for micro
                                  loans. Most only required a guarantor or a pledge of machinery, appliance or other
                                  small assets, and for many micro clients, the MFIs require no guarantee at all. For
                                  VSEs there is greater divergence in guarantee policies. Most of the MFIs interviewed
                                  require “real” guarantees for larger loans. Acceptable “real” guarantees tend to include
                                  property, land, vehicles, deposits and some machinery.

                                  However, what is considered a larger loan varies. At one Peruvian MFI the standard
                                  practice for a normal risk clients is to require real guarantees for loans over $11,000, but
                                  a low risk, preferred client can borrow up to $44,000 without a guarantee. At another
                                                                                        VII. CREDIT ANALYSIS                37




Peruvian MFI, clients can borrow up to $35,000 without
a guarantee. Meanwhile, in Bolivia the regulator requires                        Credit Scoring
real collateral for loans of over $15,000. The later may
help control systemic risk, but also limits many businesses’   MFIs can also utilize credit scoring to help in the credit
capacity to borrow, especially those growing quickly and       analysis process. None of the MFIs we interviewed
in search of funding for investments.                          for this research used credit scoring, however, it is
                                                               used by some institutions in Latin America working
When MFIs do decide to take real collateral on a loan, it      with VSEs. It is best suited for those institutions
is important that this collateral is valued correctly and is   already familiar with credit scoring and/or those
sufficient to meet the institution’s collateral requirements.  with rich data bases from which to develop a credit
Unfortunately many loan officers do not have the skills        scoring model. It also requires external or internal
or training required to correctly estimate the value of        expertise to develop such a model. In addition, the
collateral, such as a house. This puts both the institution    MFI should have a sophisticated MIS and a team able
and the client at risk should there be a problem with          to track and analysis the efficacy of the model. An ill
repayment as the MFI’s exposure may not be covered by          designed model can quickly increase an MFIs credit
the real value of the collateral and the client may be left    risk exposure. Even a well designed model must still
with nothing, or worse yet, still indebted, even after the     be fine-tuned on a regular basis (every 6 months in a
sale of the house. One MFI in Bolivia has dealt with this      challenging credit environment).
problem by having a third party, usually an architect;
provide an estimate of the real value of the collateral. Another MFI reduces the stated
value by 20% to ensure some caution.
38   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                           VIII. CREDIT RISK MANAGEMENT              39




VIII. Credit Risk Management

                                     Credit risk management checklist
  •	 Revise loan approval authority based on segments and/or loan size, balancing branch autonomy and agility with
     risk management
  •	 Revise recovery procedures for VSE loans taking into consideration potentially new guarantees and collateral
  •	 Set limits on sector concentrations at institutional and branch level
  •	 Set up a proactive portfolio monitoring system, tracking micro and VSE loan portfolios separately at an
     institutional, branch and loan office level
  •	 Strengthen internal controls to prevent fraud and ensure compliance with new policies and procedures
  •	 Establish periodic reviews of collateral valuations to ensure risk coverage metrics are met


One prerequisite for an MFI to successfully expand upmarket is that their existing
credit risk management policies and procedures are already strong. An institution that
is struggling with credit risk is in no position to take on the risks of a new segment
before it gets the rest of its house in order. Decentralization in microfinance is often
considered essential because it allows an MFI to control costs and quickly disburse
loans to clients, a quality valued by microentrepreneurs. However, it places a lot of
authority in the hands of the branches. With clear standardized credit analysis and risk
management policies and procedures, as well as good internal controls, risks arising
from this concentration of power at the branch level can be mitigated when making
larger VSE loans. Overall in Latin America, successful expansion upmarket to serve
VSEs appears to involve some level of centralization (or perhaps re-centralization) of
risk management, be it at the loan approval stage or the monitoring and tracking stage.
For VSE loans, if MFIs seek to maintain this degree of decentralization it should be
offset with greater rigor in loan analysis and requirements.


A. Loan Approval and Oversight
Speed of service is key for microloans and loan approval is generally decentralized.
For very small micro loans, senior loan officers or credit committees comprised of
several loan officers may have approval authority. For
larger micro loans, loan approval often requires branch      Risk Tip #1: Loan approval for VSE loans
manager signoff. However, for VSEs, full autonomy for         should not be delegated completely to
loan approval should generally not rest at the branch                          the branches.
level, despite potential reductions in the agility of loan
disbursement. If they don’t already exist, an MFI should     Example: At a Peruvian MFI we visited, loans below
establish different levels of loan approval based on loan    $25,000  can be approved by the branch manager,
size and segment served. For sectors that are considered     but loans above $25,000 must be approved by a
more risky, regional or national loan approval may be        regional manager, and loans above $50,000 must be
required at a lower loan size.                               approved  at a national level
40       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                   It may be possible to maintain greater authority at the branch level for VSE loans if
                                   risks are mitigated in other ways, such as through more in-depth credit analysis or the
                                   involvement of more branch staff. For example, for larger loans, one Peruvian MFI
                                   requires loan officers to present loans to a credit committee that includes branch staff
                                   whose incentives are not linked to approval amounts.

                                  As we discuss in the Human Resources section below, in the Proactive Model, the
                                  sales and credit analysis functions are sometimes separated in order to better control
                                  risk and allow for greater staff specialization. However, this is atypical for most
                                                               MFI’s micro loans and also uncommon for MFIs using
      Risk Tip #2: Credit risk can be reduced                  a more Organic Model. Nonetheless, an effective risk
       by involving more branch staff in the                   management strategy for VSE loans, even under the
                                                               Organic Model, is to require additional oversight prior
                 loan approval process.
                                                               to loan approval. For example, at another Peruvian MFI,
     Example: A Peruvian MFI we visited for this study         larger loans require an additional visit to the client by a
     requires loan officers to present larger loans to a       non-analyst or a regional supervisor. On the one hand
     subgroup of branch staff including non loan officers.     this can help avoid fraud, and on the other it’s a second
     This presentation and discussion can identify new         opinion on a client’s capacity and willingness to repay a
     business risks for the VSE, and allows for input from     loan from someone whose incentives are not linked to
     staff whose incentives are not linked to disbursement     loan approval. In certain economic sectors, it may also be
     targets..                                                 useful for MFIs to consider hiring industry specialists to
                                                               contribute to the credit analysis.


                                   B. Monitoring and tracking structures
                                   and policies
                                   VSE lending requires proactive monitoring, even in Organic Models. Proactive
                                   monitoring can help identify risky loans or sectors as soon as or even before they become
                                   problematic and help the MFI to avoid similar risks going forward. Centralized risk
                                   monitoring and tracking appears to be more effective in reducing portfolio at risk, but
                                   requires a sophisticated and agile MIS. It is absolutely essential that an MFI’s MIS allow
                                   for the micro and VSE loans to be tracked separately, ideally at the institutional, branch
                                   and loan officer level. This allows the risk department to identify not only problematic
                                   segments, but also the source of these segments, and to adjust policies accordingly.

                                                                 Setting portfolio concentrations limits also helps in risk
       Risk Tip #3: Centralized, proactive                       mitigation. Concentration limits based on loan size can
     monitoring of VSE loans allows risks to                     help MFIs limit VSE risk, especially when first entering
                                                                 the sector. Regulators may also mandate these limits for
       be identified and mitigated early.
                                                                 MFIs, such as in Bolivia. Sectorial concentration limits
     Example: One MFI in Peru has automated alerts and           are also useful when lending to VSEs, especially if MFIs
     controls and also does in-depth portfolio analysis          are using new promotion strategies, such as value-chains,
     daily. It then adjusts a branch’s autonomy if its           that might result in sectorial concentrations. More
     overall portfolio at risk or a sector’s portfolio at risk   defined limits to subsector concentration (i.e. restaurants,
     is too high.                                                transport, clothing manufacturing, grocery, etc.) are more
                                                                 effective than broad limits such as services, commerce,
                                                                              VIII. CREDIT RISK MANAGEMENT         41




agriculture. Applying limits at the institutional and the branch level can further reduce
risk, but limits may need to be adjusted in certain markets. For example, an MFI with
an institutional limit of 10% for livestock loans, may need to have a branch limit of
25% in rural regions.



                 Why are delinquency rates so much lower in Bolivia than in Peru?
  •	 Regulatory focus
     •	 Regulators concerned with over indebtedness and repayment mandate processes, collateral requirements and
        authorization (soon also interest rates)
  •	 Lending methodology: Capacity to Pay Analysis
     •	 Monthly/seasonal cash flow projections
     •	 Loan officers “build” a monthly P&L based on seasonal estimates
     •	 Greater validation of P&L and balance sheets through invoices, receipts, tax documentation
     •	 In Peru, documentation showing the intended use of loan is often required
  •	 Lending methodology: Willingness to Pay/Collateral
     •	 Bolivia: Regulator mandates real guarantees (property) for loans over US$15,000
     •	 Peru: MFIs usually ask for real guarantees for loans above US$30,000
     •	 In Bolivia, more emphasis is given on the analysis of collateral to ensure it is fairly valued
  •	 Branch Autonomy
     •	 Peru offers more branch autonomy for larger loans for faster loan disbursements
     •	 Bolivia centralizes authorization of larger loans at the expense of slower disbursements
     •	 Ex: Bolivia up to $7,000 in Peru up to $20-30,000



C. Recovery policies
There are three major adaptions to recovery policies that MFIs must consider when
expanding upmarket to serve VSEs. This first is who is responsible for initial recovery
efforts. Generally this responsibility falls on loan officers for micro loans, however, for
VSE loans, which represent a greater risk for the MFI should they not be recovered,
a team approach or support from the branch manager or recovery specialist may be
required. The second is the timing of recovery efforts. If a micro client falls 1 or 2
months behind in paying their loan, it is hard for them to regularize the loan. However,
business cycles for VSEs are more volatile and they may miss a payment, which can
negatively impact an MFI’s cash flow, but are more likely to be able to regularize their
payments. The third major difference in recovery policies is that for VSE loans that have
real collateral, the case can be addressed to the legal system for recovery and because
the loan amounts are greater the cost of servicing them legally is more worthwhile.
However, in many countries in Latin America, this can be a long process and requires
the support of lawyers, either internal or external.
42         EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




            Risk Tip #4: Sectorial risk matters, especially in VSE loans. MFIs can either have
         sectorial expertise and analyze risk ex-ante, limit sectorial exposure and analyze risk
                                             ex-post, or both.
       Example: One MFI noted that in 2009, during a financial crisis, businesses in the tourism sector suffered, affecting
       the institution’s portfolio. At the time, loans were relatively small and the risk was less concentrated but the event
       alerted the MFI to the risk of sectorial concentration. Rather than having sectorial expertise and analysis, however,
       the MFI has chosen to limit exposure to any one sector to 10% of its portfolio.
       Example: Another MFI in Nicaragua developed an in-house VSE lending methodology with few sectorial limits.
       Their portfolio was also highly concentrated in cattle raising and when the financial crisis hit in 2008, the poor
       performance in this segment of its business was one of the main contributors to its downfall.



                                     D. Regulations
                                     Regulators can impact VSE lending in a variety of ways. Regulations designed to limit
                                     systemic risk help MFIs to mitigate risks, but can also impact a MFIs ability to serve
                                     VSEs. Bolivia’s regulator, for example, has several restrictions to VSE lending, such as
                                     limiting loan size to twice equity, requiring that VSEs pay taxes in order to qualify for
                                     higher loan amounts, and limiting SME lending to 30% for MFIs. The later forces
                                     MFIs that want to make significant moves into the VSE market to also consider
                                     transformation, while the tax payment requirement may encourage smaller VSEs to
                                     seek out multiples lenders.


                      Asset backed financing as a way to mitigate risk: can mfis do it?
        One non-traditional way for MFIs to increase VSEs access to finance while mitigating risks is to develop asset
        backed financing products. For example, MFIs can offer leasing services, where the MFI maintains ownership of
        the equipment being leased for the duration of the “loan.” Thus far there have been very few instances of MFIs
        offering these types of services in Latin America, in large part because the methodologies are so different from
        the traditional microfinance model and require more advance legal operations to implement and in part because
        VSEs often purchase equipment second hand. Some additional considerations regarding VSE asset-backed lending:
          •	 Using accounts receivable may not work for very many VSEs as they tend to be more informal and their
             accounting less reliable.
          •	 Warehousing might work for some types of VSEs. However, it requires a sophisticated MIS system that many
             MFIs may not have and can be costly to implement if there is not significant scale.
          •	 Factoring may work for VSEs that work with a few larger clients, including municipalities and public agencies.
             However, this is not the case for most VSEs in Latin America that tend to work with retail or individual clients.  
             It also requires access to reliable credit information on an SE’s clients.
          •	 Purchase order finance may be the easiest asset backed product for MFIs to develop, however, it requires more
             oversight than some of the other options as the product is not yet produced. It has already been tried by some
             MFIs, but has not reached scale.

     Source: USAID 2009.
                                                                                       IX. HUMAN RESOURCES            43




IX. Human Resources

                                           Human resources checklist
     •	 Determine whether the target market (per branch) justifies exclusive VSE loan officers or can be managed by
        loan officers who cover various segments
     •	 Decide whether loan officers should be in charge of sales, loan analysis and relationship management or if
        some specialization of functions is needed
     •	 Adjust compensation and incentives structures to motivate VSE staff and avoid potential conflicts
     •	 Ensure loan officers have adequate experience and finanical analysis capacity for VSE sector
     •	 Assess internal capacity and training curriculum to identify gaps in training for VSE loan analysis
     •	 Ensure that training (classroom and field) offers sufficient opportunities to work on cases and “practice”
        lending
     •	 Assess whether training curriculum and delivery gaps can be filled internally or require external resources
     •	 Incentivize tutoring and mentoring by senior staff to new staff
     •	 Incorporate refresher trainings into core training process
     •	 Update training through lower-cost technologies


A. Sales and loan analysis staff
Having adequately qualified and well trained field staff is key to the success of any MFI’s
expansion upmarket. Who staff is made up of depends on the model and methodology
adopted by the MFI, but there are two key decisions, which need to be made:

•	 Should the MFI have specialized VSE loan officers or can loan officers serve both
   micro enterprises and VSEs concurrently?
•	 Should loan officers be in charge of sales, analysis and relationship management or
   should there be additional specialization of functions for VSEs?


Specialized VSE Loan Officers – the Proactive Model
In the Proactive Model, there are specialized loan officers to serve VSEs. In addition
to serving a different clientele, these loan officers are likely to have different targets,
compensation, and training, and potentially different education and work experience
than micro loan officers. These loan officers may report to the branch manager or
directly to a head quarter’s based VSE manager. Under this model, VSEs that approach
the MFI are directed to a VSE loan officer for service. Likewise, a micro enterprise
client that grows into a small enterprise client is transferred from their micro loan
officer to a new VSE loan officer.

There are several advantages to this model.

•	 Loan officers can specialize in high growth VSE sectors and perhaps identify
   opportunities for new clients in the market.
44       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  •	 Loan officers can evaluate a business in an in-depth, holistic manner analyzing the
                                     market sector, the business’ investment plans and the details of business performance
                                     with greater care.
                                  •	 Risk management is likely to be stricter, having distinct criteria and greater
                                     centralization of approvals for loans made by VSE loan officers.
                                  •	 “Micro” loan officers can focus on smaller loans and meeting growth targets without
                                     the distraction of volume targets.

                                  Nonetheless, there are also several potential disadvantages to this model:

                                  •	 The model is costly, relying on more highly paid, senior loan officers to specialize in
                                     VSE loans, even where volume may not justify a dedicated resource.
                                  •	 VSE loan officers can lose enthusiasm and leave if an MFI cannot retain clients with
                                     their existing services.

                                                                The key benefit of this model is that it allows loan officers
     HR Tip #1: Having dedicated VSE or SME                     to be selected specifically based on their ability to work
      staff makes sense only when branch                        with VSEs, and to hone their promotion, credit analysis
                 volume merits it.                              and relationship manager skills to the sector. This
     Example: One MFI in Bolivia has three levels of            specialization should allow an MFI to both grow its VSE
     loan officers (micro, micro/small and SME), yet only       portfolio quickly and maintain a higher quality portfolio.
     assigns a SME loan officer to a branch if they have        The key disadvantage to this model, however, is that it can
     over $2 MM in portfolio.                                   be more costly to start-up and operate as there are now two
                                                                (or more) loan officers covering each geographic market.
                                  In markets with a relatively high concentration of VSEs or when the characteristics and
                                  needs of VSEs are quite distinct from micro enterprises, the benefits of the model are
                                  more likely to outweigh its costs.

                                                                The figure of a specialized loan officer can also lead to some
        HR Tip #2: Team incentives at the                       internal conflicts between micro and VSE loan officers at
      branch level can reduce moral hazard                      a branch as micro loan officers may resent “giving their
       and tension between micro and VSE                        best clients away” to other loan officers simply because
      loan officers over client “ownership.”                    the client graduated. Likewise, it can lead to inefficiencies
                                                                and potential loss of clients if not properly implemented.
     Example: Senior loan officers from one MFI in Peru         For example, when an MFI in Peru hired specialized
     are the primary “VSE” lenders at the branch and            loan officers in the past, they actually saw a reduction
     have incentives that help meet their goals. However,       in their portfolio, because micro loan officers were not
     the team shares branch incentives and colleagues are       passing on VSE leads to the VSE loan officers. One way
     asked to occasionally visit each other’s applicants or     to mitigate such conflict is to ensure that strong branch
     jointly visit delinquent clients to foster teamwork and    level performance benefits all loan officers; to compensate
     ensure that protocols are being enforced.                  microloan officers for lost clients and to incentivize them
                                                                to share leads with their VSE colleagues.
                                                                                     IX. HUMAN RESOURCES                 45




Multipurpose Loan Officers – the Organic Model
It is relatively uncommon to see MFIs operating the Organic Model that have
specialized VSE loan officers. This is in large part due to the fact that one of the main
reasons they expanded upmarket was to retain their best clients, an incentive for MFIs
and loan officers alike. Thus, in most purely Organic Models, loan officers work with
both micro and VSE clients.

There are several advantages to this model.

•	 Loan officers can keep their clients as they grow, strengthening the relationship that
   has already been formed.
•	 There can be lesser potential conflict between micro and VSE loan officers including
   when referring leads for potential new clients
•	 Businesses with greater growth potential can obtain larger loan sizes without
   hesitation from loan officers who may fear losing their clients when they outgrow
   them.
•	 Loan officers know their clients and can evaluate
   businesses with greater speed of service.                         HR Tip #3: Allowing only “senior”
•	 The model is less costly, especially in markets with
                                                                    loan officers with a certain amount
   relatively few VSEs or where clients are widely dispersed.
                                                                   of experience to serve VSEs can help
Nonetheless, there are also several potential disadvantages                   mitigate risk.
to this model:
                                                                Example: According to management of one  leading
•	 Limits the focus a loan officer can place on recruiting      Peruvian MFI, some degree of specialization is
   VSEs.                                                        required to serve VSEs, but this specialization can
•	 Sales and promotion strategies of existing loan officers     be acquired through experience and at most of
   may be lacking or inappropriate for SEs.                     their branches, the senior loan officers have this
•	 Credit analysis skills of existing loan officers may be      experience.
   insufficient to serve VSEs.
•	 Lack of specialization may limit an analyst’s ability to perceive risks in new loans or
   additional client needs.
•	 Getting the compensation and incentive structures               HR Tip #4: Conflict between junior and
   right can be complicated.
                                                                  senior loan officers can be mitigated
MFIs can compensate for the potentially weaknesses of              by clearing defining the career path
not having specialized VSE staff, by only allowing more          for junior loan officers and by building
senior loan officers that have already proved themselves          mentoring into the targets and incen-
to serve VSEs. However, care must be taken to ensure                   tives of senior loan officers.
this does not lead to poor “micro” service as senior loan
officers have to spend most of their time building more         One Bolivian MFI offers loan officers financial
rigorous VSE loan files. Moreover, just as with specialized     incentives, certification, and promotion opportunities
VSE loan officers, prohibiting junior loan officers from        for senior loan officers that contribute to training
serving VSEs may create conflicts between junior and            of more junior staff. This ensured that the more
senior analysts.                                                complex skills required of VSE loans are transferred
                                                                down, not only in terms of technical requirements
                                                                but qualitative analysis.
46       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  Specialization of sales and credit functions: Is relationship
                                  banking needed?
                                  Given their larger size, in some markets MFIs may find that VSEs require more
                                  sophisticated sales and relationship management than their micro clients. This is more
                                  likely to be the case when MFIs have made a “leap-up” in their expansion. In such
                                  markets it may make sense for MFIs to separate the sales/relationship management
                                  functions from the credit analysis functions. This separation makes it easier for an MFI
                                  to find staff with the higher level of sales and relationship management skills needed,
                                  without compromising the financial and credit analysis skills that may be necessary.

                                  Most Pro Credits, which epitomizes the Proactive Model, have separated their sales and
                                  credit analysis functions for their small enterprise clients. The relationship manager/
                                  loan officer is in charge of selling the product and making sure the client meets basic
                                  criteria. Then a back-office credit officer collects the financial information and does the
                                  credit analysis. Together the two draft the credit memo.

                                  An MFI using an Organic Model is unlikely to separate the sales and credit analysis
                                  functions for its VSE loans unless these functions are already separated for its micro clients.
                                  For example, this may be the case for MFIs with centralized credit analysis functions.


                                  B. Compensation and incentive
                                  adaptations
                                                                 In both the Proactive and the Organic Models, it is
        HR Tip #5: VSE incentive schemes                         essential to adapt loan officer incentives to take VSE
     should focus on portfolio quality. Some                     loans into consideration. Loan officers working with
        schemes have eliminated variable                         VSE clients will quickly see a jump in their portfolios,
     incentives for loan officers alltogether,                   but slower growth and potentially even a reduction in
     while others incentivized more on vol-                      the number of clients served. Additionally, VSE loan
       ume rather than number of clients.                        officers concentrate much more institutional risk in their
                                                                 portfolios, and delinquency may have to play a stronger
     Example: One Costa Rican MFI that follows a Pro             role in their incentive schemes. Thus the MFI must adjust
     Credit model, compensates VSE sales executives on           the incentive systems to compensate for this as well as to
     a commission basis, while credit analysts, who are          accommodate their goals for the sector.
     responsible for analyzing loans are paid on a fixed
     salary.                                                    For MFIs with specialized VSE loan officers, developing
                                                                a compensation and incentive system can be more
     Example: At One MFI in Colombia, VSE variable              straightforward as the incentives for micro loan officers
     pay is 70% related to portfolio quality and 30%            and VSE officers are largely independent. Typically a larger
     dependent on portfolio size.                               portion of a VSE loan officer’s compensation is fixed as
                                                                compared to micro loan officers. The variable portion of
                                  her/his salary is weighted more towards size of the portfolio, while for micro loan officers,
                                  number of clients has greater weight. There may be exceptions to this under certain market
                                  conditions. For example, in order to break into a market, an MFI may choose to put greater
                                  emphasize on the number of VSE clients rather than portfolio size, especially if the hope is
                                  to identify high potential micro or VSE clients and grow with these clients.
                                                                                      IX. HUMAN RESOURCES                47




For MFIs that do not have specialized VSE loan officers,
getting incentives right can be more complicated. Variable       HR Tip #6: Linking non-specialized loan
pay weighted too much towards portfolio size can cause           officer variable pay to specific VSE and
loan officers to place too much focus on VSEs at the             micro targets can ensure neither sector
expense of their micro clients. Likewise, pay weighted too                     is neglected.
much towards number of clients will not motivate loan
officers to seek out new VSE loans, which are generally          Example: At one MFI in Peru, loan officers have
more time-consuming to analyze and process. Additionally         specific targets for both micro and small enterprises
low incentives for delinquency can place the portfolio at        and their incentives are linked to meeting both of
risk, especially when VSE loans are prioritized.                 these targets. Targets vary on the seniority of the
                                                                 loan officer as well as the branch/market served.
Compensation structures for MFIs that separate the sales         Example of targets:
and credit analysis functions must also appropriately
incentivize both staff (See HR Tip #5). One approach is          •	 Senior loan officer: 35 micro loans and 5-6 small
to have relationship managers that make a commission if             loans a month
loans are approved, while credit officers are paid on a fixed    •	 Junior loan officer: 20 micro loans and 1-2 small
basis. If credit officers have variable pay linked to portfolio     loans a month
quality, it may create too strong of an incentive not to take
enough risk. Following the financial crisis, most Pro Credit banks moved to a model of
fixed rather than variable compensation, to counter some of these pressures. While this
was well received in many of these institutions, few others have followed suit, fearing
that fixed salaries might reduce staff incentives to grow portfolios.


C. Specialized Capacity and
Qualifications

Internal vs. External Hires
Ensuring staff is adequately qualified and trained to work with VSEs is essential to
the successful expansion upmarket. In the Organic Model, as staff are generally not
specialized in VSEs, the emphasis is on training rather than staff selection (see Training
section below). However, even in the experiences that we studied for this document of
more Proactive Models, the preference seems to be to first look internally for staff able
to serve VSEs and then to expand the search externally if necessary.

Convincing the best loan officers that they should shift
from micro to VSE clients can be complicated as it requires       Quotes from micro loan officers at one
more work for the loan officer and can also be more risky.                    MFI in Peru:
For example, at a leading Bolivian MFI, SME loan officers
have monthly goals to disburse $100,000 and it takes two            “The problem is that if I am a VSE loan officer
weeks to a month to disburse a SME loan, while micro                and I don’t find VSE clients, I don’t get paid.”
loan officers have a goal of only $30,000 and disburse
loans in 1-4 days. It may require initial pay guarantees            “The VSE clients sometimes [leave us and]
and assurance that in the long-term a VSE loan officer can          go to the banks and your portfolio can fall
earn more than a micro loan officer and/or that it will lead        dramatically with the loss of just one client.”
to greater chance of promotion.
48       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  An VSE loan Officer Profile
                                  Microfinance institutions that offer individual loans typically find that the ideal profile
                                  for a VSE loan officer is someone with a college degree, ideally in finance, economics,
                                                                or engineering, but also some experience in micro or
      HR Tip #7: Experience trumps education                    VSE lending. This experience is more important for VSE
            for loan officers lending to small                  loan officers than for micro loan officers, who may be
                                                                green and learn on the job. Experience helps ascertain
                         enterprise.
                                                                qualitative characteristics of a business owner that are
     •	 Example: One MFI in Colombia created a new              better perceived with experience (trust-worthiness, values,
        profile for VSE loan officers and recruited them        persistence) and that are critical to repayment capacity.
        internally. Now, every 3 months they offer an           One MFI branch manager notes: the “sense of smell of
        internal course of VSE lending in each of the big       a loan officer is important. If there is a doubt [about the
        cities in Colombia and based on how participants        willingness to pay of the client], we reject the loan.” Even
        do, they select new VSE loan officers.                  for non-specialized VSE loan officers, it is a good idea for
                                                                an MFI to require a minimum amount of experience. A
                                  leading Peruvian MFI requires a loan officer to have at least 1 year of experience with
                                  the institution before they can serve VSEs. If there is no staff with sufficient experience
                                  in-house, MFIs can also consider poaching this experience from other institutions (see
                                  section VI). We interviewed one MFI in Peru that sought to grow its VSE portfolio
                                  quickly and could not wait for loan officers to “graduate;” thus, it hired VSE loan
                                  officers with not only experience in VSE but also with an existing portfolio that it
                                  could move to the institution.


                                  D. Training and Support
                                  A strategy of internal promotion might lead to a loan officer staff with a good “sense
                                  of smell” but a weak preparation in formal analysis of larger business. This is one of
                                  the greatest weaknesses of the Organic models and one that must be actively addressed
                                  when entering the VSE market. Even when the staff working with VSEs is specialized,
                                  without the appropriate training staff can reach a limit in in terms of understanding
                                  business size/investment complexity. Staff shifting from micro to VSEs or expanding
                                  to VSEs typically need additional training in:

                                  •	 How to conduct additional more in-depth credit analysis: creating simple balance
                                     sheets and P&L statements; cross referencing strategies; stress-testing existing
                                     balance sheets and income statements; detailing and projecting monthly cash flow
                                     analysis; ascertaining the business’ SWOT, including an understanding of market
                                     trends and opportunities.
                                  •	 Processes: Ensuring compliance with processes and protocols for approvals of larger
                                     loans, including interfacing with IT systems.
                                  •	 Guarantees: what are the guarantee policies for VSE loans; how to appropriately
                                     value the guarantees; paperwork/legal requirements of recording guarantees
                                  •	Prospecting: new prospecting techniques for VSEs; sales skills; relationship
                                     management techniques.
                                                                                        IX. HUMAN RESOURCES                   49




Training generally includes both classroom training
and on-the-job training. In the case of VSEs, there may
                                                                    HR Tip #8: Testing staff in the field in
be a greater need for classroom training in order to
                                                                 advance of classroom training can weed
fully prepare loan officers for more complicated credit
analysis. One MFI visited for this study only offered             out those prospective candidates that
three classroom days of training and only three hours of            are not suited for field work prior to
technical training on financial math and analysis with           investing    costly classroom time in them.
no case study work and found that this was insufficient         •	 Example: An MFI in Peru “tests” new hires in
for staff. Another MFI struggled with the content of               the field for three - four weeks prior to starting
financial and case study training and noted that external          classroom training to save on training costs.
consultants with experience were hired to develop this
material in coordination with the credit area of the MFI.
In-depth classroom training with a case study approach offers a guarantee of quality
and care of small business loan analysis. This classroom training is reinforced with on-
the-job training and mentorship.


           Example of a Training Process for a hybrid (Proactive/Organic MFI Model)
  One MFI offers three full months of training for new loan officers, where all prospects receive three months of
  training including:
  •	 One month of classroom training (including institutional mission, vision and values; credit methodology and
     analysis),
  •	 One month of combined classroom and field training,
  •	 A final month of primarily field training.
  More experienced loan officers spend more time in the field earlier on but are still required to participate in the first
  month’s classroom training. While the training process is standardized for micro and VSE loan officers, VSE loan
  officers are trained in more in-depth analysis with case studies including mechanisms for cross-referencing financial
  information, which is critical to the formation of a balance sheet and cash flow statement in informal businesses.

Many MFIs are resistant to providing extensive
classroom training, as it can be very costly. During                HR Tip #9: On-the-job training can be
the initial expansion to VSEs, training costs can be                more valuable than a classroom, but
mitigated by utilizing online and video training and/or             MFIs cannot assume that junior staff
by decentralizing trainings through an initial training of           will learn these lessons quickly and
trainers. Once an MFI has started offering loans to VSEs,
                                                                   well unless senior staff is appropriately
it may prove less costly to pay VSE/senior loan officers to
                                                                     incentivized to teach junior staff .
train new officers and also help weed out weak candidates
early on. A personnel policy that fosters low turnover and         Example: One MFI pays its trainers, who are also
high employee satisfaction is also key to avoid losing an          loan officers, an additional fee for serving as trainers
MFI’s investment in training.                                      and also offers them one Saturday off a month and
                                                                   points towards future promotions.
50   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                             HR Tip #10: Costly training must be balanced with a personnel
                            policy that fosters low turnover and high employee satisfaction
                                            to avoid losing investment in HR.
                            Example: One MFI notes that while their salary is perhaps slightly below market
                            rates in the MFI sector in Bolivia, it offers attrractive pension, health and insurance
                            benefits as well as a flexible work schedules for employees that prefer a more
                            balanced work/life schedule. The HR manager notes that this keeps their loan officer
                            turnover rate lower than the rest of the market.
                                                                                X. OPERATIONAL STRATEGY                 51




X. Operational Strategy

                                       Operational strategy checklist
  •	 Evaluate and strengthen operational controls in anticipation of expansions
  •	 Conduct a full mapping of processes and procedures for new products/segment with Operations department to
     ensure each step is accounted for
  •	 Ensure that internal controls are strengthened at the branch level through branch operations team
  •	 Consider potential changes in cash needs of branches and review insurance, transportation and cash management
     policies
  •	 Include IT in discussions to address any need to add cells or information requirements for new products
  •	 Ensure IT reports segment loans by MSME segment and sector and highlight VSE



A. Discussion of Organizational
Structure and adaptations needed to
various areas
Operations are critical to all aspects of an MFI and will need to adapt to any changes
when loans or other products are developed or risk management processes and controls
are changed. These changes are not especially relevant to VSE lending but come up
at any point when MFIs develop new products. Thus while operations should not be
forgotten, they will not likely require strategic decisions
or broad changes. It will be important to review the               Op Tip #1: Consider changes in cash
policies, processes and protocols for any new VSE loan
                                                                      management needs at branches.
with operations to ensure that these are communicated
to branches through branch managers and that protocols          Example: One MFI in Peru notes that larger loans
are followed. Where credit analysis is centralized for VSE      let to a need to become more efficient with the
loans, for example, operations staff will be made aware of      institution’s cash management. Armored trucks,
new protocols for loan approvals. If these involve greater      for example, were costly and charged fixed rates
attention or new processes for operations staff at the          per mobilized vehicle and number of stops but also
branch level, these will need to be communicated, and           variable fees depending on how much money was
potentially trained.                                            being moved. By increasing loan amounts, the
                                                                volume of cash at each branch increased and so did
Additionally, in some cases, where loan sizes and turn over     the costs of moving this cash. The MFI addressed this
are much larger and more frequent, cash management and          by centralizing the decision of when to move money
insurance needs must be reviewed and potentially revised        rather than allowing branches to call in for trucks
(See Tip #1). This includes the maximum allowable cash          (they were typically more conservative and preferred
held and insured at branches and transportation of cash.        to stay “light” on cash. Additionally, they increase
Because this might add costs to existing processes, it is       the amount of cash that each truck carried, ensuring
important to evaluate this and optimize costs.                  to stay below the insured limit by sending trucks out
                                                                with greater frequency.
52       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  B. IT changes and adaptations

                                  The Bare Essentials
                                  An expansion upmarket to serve VSEs with ease may require adaptations and even
                                  an upgrade of an MFI’s information technology. An appropriate MIS is essential to
                                  successful expansions in that in can help an MFI manage its risk and also control costs.
                                  Some of the key adaptations and requirements for the IT system include:

                                  •	 Adding the VSE loan product(s) to the MIS: As discussed above, the terms of
                                     the basic loan products for microenterprises and VSEs are different, most notably
                                     in their sizes, but also in their tenors and possibly their repayments cycles. The MIS
                                     must be flexible enough to accommodate these differences.

                                                               •	 Adding other VSE products to the MIS: VSEs are
        OP Tip #2: Launching new products                         also interested in other credit products, such as credit
     lines in conjuntion with IT upgrades can                     lines, in which the balance outstanding can fluctuate
      cause delays in both and also increase                      daily. Calculating the interest due, managing liquidity
                an institution’s risk.                            and monitoring the risk of such products require more
                                                                  robust and sophisticated MIS than typical microcredit
     Examples: We visited an MFI that had recently                products. An MIS that is not transactionally strong
     upgraded its IT system. The new system is robust and         enough to incorporate these products may constrain the
     allows for a wide range of VSE products, however,            institution’s ability to offer such products to VSEs.
     the adjustment period has been difficult. The IT staff
     have been very busy with migrating the data to the        •	 Ability to track the VSE and micro portfolios
     new system and unable to respond quickly to the              separately: Monitoring and tracking the MFIs VSE and
     data requests from the business units.                       ME portfolios is essential for risk management purposes.
                                                                  It allows management to monitor the expansion
                                  upmarket from an early stage and to identify risks and make adjustments quickly to
                                  policies and procedures. At a minimum the system needs to have a field that allows the
                                  institution to identify a VSE client/product from its micro clients and the ability to
                                  produce reports based on this. The more automated these reports are the better.

                                  Most of the institutions that were interviewed for this document are bank-like
                                  institutions and already had core-banking software in place prior to expanding
                                  upmarket. This software is typically flexible and adaptable enough to accommodate
                                  VSE loans with longer tenors for example. Thus, the expansion upmarket required
                                  tweaks to the existing software (i.e. adding the new VSE loans to the system, activating
                                  new fields in the system, developing new reports and interfaces to extract data from the
                                  system, etc.), but not a major change to the MIS or an upgrade.

                                  However, MFIs that do not already have robust core-banking systems in place, likely
                                  the non-regulated institutions, may encounter greater challenges in getting their MIS
                                  ready to accommodate the new sector. In some cases the MIS may be so inflexible that
                                  the only way incorporate the VSE business will be to upgrade to a new system. This
                                  can be very costly and time consuming and may impact an MFI’s decision to enter the
                                  market all together.
                                                                                X. OPERATIONAL STRATEGY                 53




The Bells and Whistles
In addition to the basic IT requirements above, there are many other ways technology
can be used to facilitate an expansion upmarket. Generally, the more robust the system,
the better. An ideal IT system would typically address:

•	 The ability to track the income and expenses of the VSE and micro portfolios
   separately in order to monitor the profitability of each segment and to facilitate
   business line management.

•	 The need for segmentation and analysis for market strategy and product
   development/refinement. This may require an additional software that can be
   linked to the core MIS. It may also be useful for an MFI to have statistical analysis
   software to help in its segmentation.

•	 The need for data for risk management purposes. As
   above, this might require using additional software to        OP Tip #3: Technology can be used to
   manipulate data more flexibly. Down the line, the MFI         help reduce costs and streamline pro-
   may begin to use its data to develop risk management          cesses and procedures for VSE loans.
   alerts, or a scoring system for VSEs.
                                                                 Examples: A Peruvian MFI has digitalized a portion
•	 Flexibility in designing new reports. The system              of their loan files in order to reduce the paperwork
   should allow for flexibility in designing reports and         burden of VSE loans. This digitalization has helped
   allow middle office users to customize their reports,         it control costs, streamlined loan approval for
   especially for monitoring and tracking purposes. The          larger loans not approved at the branch level and
   business and risk units should be conducting the bulk         strengthened its internal controls and auditing.
   of the data analysis for the MFI, and should not be
   beholden to the IT department. In one Peruvian MFI, for example, the IT system
   offers the possibility to download cross tabs for some specific information but does
   not allow for an analysis of VSE loans by gender, for example, or by branch. This can
   limit the sophistication of both market and risk analysis.

•	 Paperwork for small business loans is more voluminous and adds costs – digitalizing
   parts of the loan file can add efficiency. Digitalization can also help to streamline
   processes and reduce transaction times when MFIs decide to adopt more centralized
   loan approval and risk management. For example, branches can upload loan
   applications and key paperwork and credit committees at the regional and/or
   headquarters level can easily review the files and make credit decisions.
54   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                                    XI. FINANCIAL STRATEGY                55




XI. Financial Strategy

                                          Financial strategy checklist
  •	 Estimate the upfront costs of VSE expansion and changes in cost structures
  •	 Conduct cost-benefit analysis and/or financial pro forma model of VSE expansion
  •	 Develop a method to measure and monitor the profitability of VSE loans and/or VSE clients over time
  •	 Modify ALM models to include longer tenor funding and lower interest rates
  •	 Revise funding strategy to guarantee adequate liquidity for VSE portfolio growth
  •	 Seek out lower cost funding, as VSEs are more interest rate sensitive than micro enterprises
  •	 Ensure there are longer-term funding sources available to match the longer maturities of VSE loans



A. Costs and Profitability
An expansion upmarket to serve VSEs implies a variety of upfront costs as well as a
shift in the overall cost structure of the institution. The upfront costs are greater in
the Proactive Model as there are more major changes to
the organizational structure of the institution; however,       FS Tip #1: Prior to making the move upmarket, an
there are also upfront costs in the Organic Model related       MFI should attempt to estimate upfront costs and
to planning and research; policy, procedures and system         ongoing shifts in cost structure and incorporate them
tweaks; product piloting; etc. Overtime, it appears that        into a cost-benefit analysis and/or financial proforma
some of the upfront costs can offer long-term gains,            model.
specifically in terms of portfolio risk (and reducing the
cost of provisioning). While little data exists, upgrading credit processes and controls
from microfinance practices may play an important role in keeping delinquency down
in this segment.


Measuring Costs
Depending on the market context, the ongoing cost
structure of an MFI can also shift dramatically with an
expansion upmarket. On the one hand, interest rates on             FS Tip #2: Early movers into the VSE
VSE loan are generally lower than micro loans, compressing           market, may be better positioned
financial margins. On the other hand an MFI is able to              long-term as the market gets more
disburse a larger amount to a single client and (ideally)                      competitive.
reduce its operating costs per dollar lent. Cross selling
                                                                Example:  One Bolivian MFI was able to invest and
may help boost revenues but for many MFIs this may be
                                                                grow its VSE business prior to the market becoming
limited. How loan losses affect cost structures depends on
                                                                very competitive and interest rate senstive. Now, it
the market, the exact segment and the strength of an MFI’s
                                                                continues to be profitable.  Interest rates are 11-12%,
credit and risk management systems.
                                                                compared to 20% for its micro loan portfolio, but
MFIs expanding upmarket should ideally be able to               delinquency rates are lower and costs contained.
monitor the costs and profitability of their VSE business
56       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                                               and micro business separately. In the Proactive Model this
       FS Tip #3: Operational costs per client                 is likely easier to do as the business lines are already largely
         are higher for VSE loans, however,                    separated and are likely to have their own cost centers.
      operational costs per dollar lent should                 At the branch level, VSE and micro cost centers can be
                         be lower.                             established and front-line staff assigned accordingly. Back-
                                                               office and support staff and branch overhead costs will
     Example: Loan officers at two Peruvian MFIs               need to be distributed based on usage. At a headquarters
     reported spending 3 to 4 times as long preparing a        level, the VSE unit and micro unit should also be assigned
     VSE loan file compared to a micro loan file. In Bolivia   their own cost centers and the costs of shared units (i.e.
     disbursement times for VSE loans ranged from two          marketing, IT, etc.) should be distributed based on usage.
     to four weeks as loan officers prepared files and         In the Organic Model it may be much more difficult to
     credit committees analized loans.                         separate out the costs of the VSE and micro enterprise
                                                               businesses as the same staff are likely to work on both and
                                 it requires an MFI to be able to estimate their time allocations. Nonetheless, developing
                                 a product costing model or cost/revenue models can be very useful as it allows an MFI
                                 to make informed decisions about its VSE business; to identify inefficiencies in its
                                 processes and develop cost saving solutions.


                                  Per loan vs. per client profitability
                                  Product profitability can be analyzed per operation (loan) or per client. Given that the
                                  business case for VSE clients is intrinsically long-term, benefiting from the historical
                                  performance of a firm, an MFI’s relationship with the firm and its potential growth,
                                  there is an argument for attempting to analyze the profitability on a per client versus per
                                  product basis for VSEs. A VSE borrower is a potentially “sticky” client, which is able to
                                  acquire more than one product at any given moment and over time. As such, analyzing
                                  total client profitability over time may be more relevant than understanding only the
                                  profitability of a specific loan product. While important, few institutions interviewed
                                  for this document had analyzed the cost of these loans, and none had determined the
                                  best approach to costing (per product or per client). This is largely because some of the
                                  institutions interviewed did not have product costing capabilities prior to expanding
                                  upmarket, nor did they develop them alongside the development of the VSE lending.


                                  Cross-selling
                                  Institutions able to offer a wider range of products may be able to offset costs and
                                  increase the profitability per VSE client through cross selling. However, it is important
                                  that MFIs not overestimate revenue generation through cross selling. Many of the
                                  VSEs served by MFIs have very similar profiles as their micro clients and cross-selling
                                  opportunities may be limited. Cross-selling strategies to keep client relationships “sticky”
                                  may be more appropriate, where MFIs generate greater loyalty while maintaining VSE
                                  loans, as the core revenue generator is the loan.
                                                                                     XI. FINANCIAL STRATEGY                 57




B. Asset/Liability Management and
Funding Strategy
Offering larger VSE loans can quickly work through an
MFI’s funding, especially as VSE loans tend to be longer-         FS Tip #4: Deposit taking institutions
term loans. Thus, when expanding upmarket to serve                have an advantage over non-deposit
VSEs an MFI must have a strong risk management system           taking institutions in terms of reducing
and framework in place. Asset/liability management,                               fuding costs.
on particular becomes critical. One MFI interviewed
for this study demonstrated sophisticated monitoring of        Example: One of the reasons that One MFI we visited
their financial risks including asset/liability and liquidity  in Bolivia transformed from an NGO to a Bank was to
management. The institution integrated this process            increase their funding options to support the growth
into general management and commercial processes and           of their VSE and SME portfolios. It is now financing
planning to ensure risk was both monitored and managed.        over 60% of its portfolio through deposits at a
An institution moving into VSE should carefully consider       financial cost of only 2.7%, making its average cost
its funding strategy and ensure adequate funding is            of funding only 5.3%.
available for VSE portfolio growth. Portfolio returns
are rarely sufficient to fund portfolio growth and even less so VSE portfolio growth,
thus MFIs must seek other sources of funding, be it from local depositors, domestic
or lenders, international investors/microfinance investment vehicles (“MIVs”), or
domestic capital markets.

The ability to lower funding costs is key to economically serving VSEs, who are more
interest rate sensitive than micro loan clients. Thus, institutions able to capture low-
cost deposits or offer no-cost current accounts have an advantage over NGOs or other
non-deposit taking institutions when serving VSEs. However, many MFIs expanding
upmarket may not legally be able to take deposits, or may fully have developed these
services yet. The increase in the number of Microfinance Investment Vehicles (MIVs),
as well as funds from multilateral investors, has made it easier for these MFIs to consider
expanding upmarket. Larger and stronger MFIs, in particular, have some bargaining
power and are able to get larger loans, for longer tenors and at somewhat preferential
interest rates from these sources.

VSE lending may require an MFI to review its asset and
liability management (ALM) and make adjustments to                FS Tip #5: Care must be taken to match
its funding sources to mitigate mismatches in currencies          maturities and currencies of VSE loans
and maturities. Deposit taking MFIs with ample liquidity          and funding sources, however interest
may find it beneficial to access more costly international         rates on such loans are typically high.
investments in order to match the maturities of their assets
                                                                  Example: We interviewed a Peruvian Cooperative
and liabilities, especially if their deposits tend to be very
                                                                  MFI that funds the majority of its lending through
short term or on demand (See FS Tip #5). Local currency
                                                                  member deposits, but finds it necessary to
bonds in local markets can address the problem of currency
                                                                  supplement these funds with external longer-term
mismatches that international investors often don’t. In
                                                                  financing. This financing is relatively small, however
both Peru and Bolivia, the local bond/commercial paper
                                                                  and its overall funding cost is not largely affected by
markets are growing and some MFIs are able to access
                                                                  the higher interest rates on such loans.
funds there. The terms are still relatively short, generally
58   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          one-year, but the intention is to try to build out a longer-term yield curves, where a
                          promising, local currency, longer-term source of funding in the future.
                                                                                               XII. CONCLUSIONS   59




XII. Conclusions

This document aims to explore some of the key strategic and commercial drivers for
MFIs expanding upmarket into VSE lending, and to outline many of the decisions
and adaptations that these institutions need to make when moving into the segment.
It assumes that MFIs expanding upmarket are of sufficient size and resource capacity
to consider entering new markets or deepening their presence in existing market. This
document is written from the general perspective of MFIs stepping “up” or perhaps
even leaping “up” into the VSE sector, where microcredit is the initial starting point
and VSEs are a key next step. However, this document can also be useful for financial
institutions seeking to ‘down-scale’ into VSE lending – the checklists are still valid,
even if the starting point for the institution is at the opposite end of the axis from MFIs.
This document is based on the Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) VSE lending
experience, specifically based on interviews and field visits with institutions from the
region. Our desk review revealed that within LAC, many of the MFIs with the most
experience in VSE lending come from countries that have “leading” microfinance
markets. Often these have strong regulatory regimes, widespread use of credit bureaus,
and a competitive market environment. Many of these countries have also experienced
a period of strong economic growth over the last years, which has trickled down to
the micro and small businesses that are served by the sector. As such, the experiences
referenced in this document are to some extent “untested” as they have not been
challenged by severe downturns in growth or financial sector strains.

•	 Many LAC MFIs are well positioned to move into VSE lending, if they haven’t
   already begun to “organically”. MFIs in LAC represent a broad range of sizes,
   expertise and markets for small loans. According to the IDB/MIF,8 the microcredit
   portfolio in LAC includes over US$40 billion offered through over 1,000 institutions
   and serving at least 20 million clients. While loans across the region’s MFIs average
   US$2,000, many can be much larger. Regulated institutions, which represent 86%
   of all MFIs, in particular average US$2,500 loans (compared to an average US$800
   for unregulated institutions). These may be best positioned to have the structure,
   systems and capital to branch out into larger loans within our definition of VSEs
   (US$7,000-30,000).9

•	 However, most MFIs in LAC have difficulty offering low interest rates to price-
   sensitive VSEs. Most MFIs have trouble competing with banks, which have lower
   funding cost structures. As such, they often charge higher average interest rates on
   their loans and presenting a potential competitive disadvantage when it comes to
   VSE lending. Unlike banks, most MFIs obtain almost all of their revenues from
   lending. They are generally unable to diversify loan revenues with fee-based income
   because of their limited product offering as well as the liquidity constraints of the
   low-income segment they serve. Additionally, the operational cost of lending to
   microentrepreneurs exceeds that of banks, especially for smaller microfinance loans.
60       EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                                  •	 MFI’s must compete by offering convenient, flexible access to loans, and
                                     targeting those segments that are least served by banks. MFIs’ typically higher
                                     cost of funding and resultant difficulty in competing with banks on interest rates
                                     pose a challenge for these institutions who may otherwise offer an attractive value
                                     proposition to VSEs in terms of convenient, flexible and agile services. In markets
                                     where formal alternative VSE funding exists (primarily from downscaled banks), this
                                     pressure can be brutal, pushing interest rates down and forcing some institutions to
                                     relax credit policies excessively to maintain an advantage over their less flexible bank
                                     competition. In the case of one institution interviewed for this study, this pressure
                                     has made the VSE sector look increasingly unprofitable as interest rates have come
                                     down to stay competitive while credit quality has declined as a result of excessively
                                     lax loan approval policies for VSEs. In other cases, where MFIs fill an identified
                                     gap, the VSE segment can be an attractive source of both growth and profitability.
                                     Efficiency and effective risk management and controls are key.

                                  •	 We identify two primary ways that MFI’s enter the VSE segment: Organically
                                     or Proactively. These drive many of the subsequent choices about commercial,
                                     operational, human resource, credit and risk management strategies. We analyze
                                     institutions that have grown organically into lending to VSEs (Organic models) and
                                     find that strong and efficient processes can help overcome some of the additional
                                                                costs of lending to VSEs, which should typically involve
       Proactive vs. Organic Models for MFIs                    more in-depth loan analysis implemented through more
                       serving VSEs                             experienced and higher-paid staff. While investing in
                                                                more Proactive models (See Box), which include more in-
     The “Proactive Model- (P)” borrows from the                depth (and lengthy) credit analysis, human resources and
     know-how and processes most typical in banks. It           capacity building, risk management and controls can be
     is more complex and/or deliberate in that it requires      costly, it may eventually be necessary for all MFIs in the
     important structural decisions and adaptations from        VSE segment. These MFIs can start lending to VSEs that
     the start. The model has been actively disseminated        represent their own “graduated” clients early on. Their
     by Pro Credit (IPC 2012).   It generally targets a         relationship with the VSEs and familiarity with their
     business segment that is outside of an MFI’s existing      business and character can help overcome some of the
     client base, and may also be underserved by the            weaknesses inherent in upscaling credit methodologies
     financial system.                                          designed for microenterprise to assess VSE risk.
     The “Organic Model-(O)” follows a more organic
                                                                •	 Regardless of whether MFIs enter the VSE market
     process, often in reaction as an MFI’s microenterprise
                                                                   by lending to existing clients, they typically start
     portfolio begins to grow in asset size by more than
                                                                   seeking new VSE clients as they grow. Only a small
     its client growth.  While it may initially represent a
                                                                   percentage of microenterprises tend to graduate to
     reaction to client trends, it does require strategic
                                                                   VSEs, limiting the MFIs growth in the sector, and over
     decision-making and adjustments to the traditional
                                                                   time, existing clients may also hit ceilings, unable to
     microfinance business model. However, these
                                                                   grow or expand because their own business capacity may
     adjustments are less pronounced compared to the
                                                                   be challenged. Thus, MFIs will also likely stray from
     Proactive Model.   They typically allow the MFI to
                                                                   purely serving graduated clients and move into new
     target a new market segment without major costs or
                                                                   markets. Some will be clients of other institutions and
     changes to its operational structure early on.
                                                                   others might be “blue ocean” opportunities.
                                                                                            XII. CONCLUSIONS   61




•	 Growth and expansion to serving new VSE clients will require more effort in
   balancing an institution’s commercial strategy and growth with appropriate
   credit risk management. VSE lending requires a more in depth effort to understand
   the business, its risks and opportunities and potential benefits of investment. Growth
   must be carefully balanced with a more cautious approach to larger loans. Even MFIs
   who enter the VSE segment somewhat organically, must eventually adopt a more
   Proactive approach to VSE lending. They must manage their risk more proactively
   as well as measure and analyze it in more depth. Often, this process requires an
   investment in resources to strengthen processes and systems as well as an increase in
   funding for VSE lending.
62   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY   63




Bibliography

General SME and SME Financial
Background
Beck, Thorsten, et al (2008): “Banking Financing for SMEs around the World:
Drivers, Obstacles, Business Models, and Lending Practices.” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper, No. 4785, November 2008.

De la Torre, Augusto, et al (2008): “Banking Involvement with SMEs: Beyond
Relationship Lending.” World Bank.

Ernst & Young (2013). “Technical Note on the Verification of IFC’s SME Loan Size
Proxies.” DRAFT. Prepared for the IFC.

Gibson, Tom and H.J. van der Vaart (2008): “A Less Imperfect Way of Defining Small
and Medium Enterprises in Developing Countries.” Brookings Institution.

Hinton, Peter (2010): “Developing SMEs: a case study in transformational
development.” SDG. Powerpoint presentation.

IFC (2009). “SME Banking and Knowledge Guide.”

Khrystyna, K., M. Mirmulstein, and R. Ramalho. 2010. “Micro, Small, and Medium
Enterprises around the World: How Many Are There, and What Affects the Count?”
IFC and World Bank.

Leeds, Roger (2003). “Financing Small SMEs in Developing Countries: Learning
from Experience”. Transnational Publishers, 2003.

Mckinsey (2012) Micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in emerging markets:

how banks can grasp a $350 billion opportunity. Banking Practice Report.

OECD (2006). “Financing SMEs and Entrepreneurs.” Policy Brief.

Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, SME and Entrepreneurship
Division (2006): The SME Financing Gap, Volume I, Theory and Evidence SMEs.

Sia, Manuel & Nails, Donna (2008). “Winning Strategies for Successful Small
Business Lending.” Exchanging Views Series #6, ShoreCap Exchange.

Stein, Peer, Tony Goland, Robert Schiff (2010). “Two trillion and counting: Assessing
the credit gap for MSME in the developing world.”

UNCTAD (n.a.): “Growing Micro and Small Enterprises in LDCs. The Missing
Middle in LDCs. Why micro and small enterprises are not growing.” ITE/TEB/5.
64   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA




                          UNDP (2004): “Unleashing Entrepreneurship: Making Business Work for the Poor”.
                          Commission on the Private Sector and Development.

                          UNDP (2008): “Creating Value for All: Strategies for Doing Business With the Poor”.

                          USAID (2009). Enabling SME Access to Finance. FS Series #4.

                          World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2007): “Promoting SME for
                          Sustainable Development”.


                          LAC Specific
                          Asociacion de Supervisores Bancarios de las Americas (2012): “How to Contribute to
                          Financial Inclusion: Inventory of Products and Services Available in the Region.

                          Banco Central de Reserva del Peru (2012). “Reporte de Estabilidad Financiera”.
                          Noviembre 2012.

                          IDB 2012. “Las PYMES de America Latina y el Caribe: Un Negocio Estrategico para
                          los Bancos de la Region.” 5th Regional Survey in Latin America and the Caribbean.
                          IDB.

                          Rojas-Suarez, Liliana, Federacion Latinoamerica de Bancos (2007). “Promoting Access
                          to Financial Services: What does Data about Bancarization in Latin America Tell us?”.
                          FELEBAN.

                          Titelman, Daniel (2011): “Financiamiento en Costa Rica: miro, pequeña y mediana
                          empresa. Qué nos dice la demanda?” CEPAL.


                          Upscaling Specific
                          CGAP (2012). “Financing Small Enterprises: What Role for MFIs?” Focus Note No.
                          81. CGAP.

                          CGAP (2011). Role of MFIs in Serving Micro and Small Enterprises, Industry Survey
                          2011. CGAP.

                          Ferranti, David and Anthony Ody (2007). “Beyond Microfinance: Getting Capital to
                          SMEs to Fuel Faster Development.” Policy Brief 159. Brookings Institution.

                          Gonzales, Adrian (2012). “Are Non-Microenterprise Loans Less Resilient to Domestic
                          Shocks? Lessons from the 2009 Economic Recession.” MicroBanking Bulletin, March
                          2012. Microfinance Information Exchange.

                          GTZ. “Upscaling: Enhancing Access to SME Credit.” SMEDSEP Information Brief
                          5.
                                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY   65




Databases and Resource Banks
www.smetoolkit.org – in particular local counterparts for regional toolkits	

rru.worldbank.org/Documents/Other/SMEDatabase.xls

MSME-CI-Data.xls. “MSME country indicators.”

http://smefinanceforum.org

www.gmsbizforum.com -> SME Finance Conference

www.enterprisesurveys.or
66   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                                                                             ENDNOTES   67




Endnotes

1.	 Stein (2010) estimates that the total unmet need for credit by all MSMEs
    in emerging markets today is in the range of $2.1-2.5 trillion, and that of the
    estimated 365-445 million MSMEs in the developing world, approximately 70
    percent do not use external financing from financial institutions. The global SME
    financing gap is estimated at $700-850 billion.

2.	 Very small enterprise is a term recently introduced by the IFC that refers to smaller
    small enterprises. See the next section for a discussion of firm size definitions.

3.	 For example, a study in Costa Rica study showed that more SEs reported there to
    be less than sufficient access to finance than micro or large enterprises, where SEs
    were defined as those with 6-30 employees.

4.	 De la Torre (2008) found that small firms finance, on average, 13 percentage
    points less of their investments with external finance when compared to large
    firms. Stein (2010) estimates that the total unmet need for credit by all MSMEs
    in emerging markets today is in the range of $2.1-2.5 trillion, and that of the
    estimated 365-445 million MSMEs in the developing world, approximately 70
    percent do not use external financing from financial institutions. The global SME
    financing gap is estimated at $700-850 billion.

5.	 We used the IDB’s definition in place of the IFC definition for 2 reasons: 1) it was
    designed to be regionally specific and 2) an Ernst and Young study noted that the
    IFC’s loan size proxy for medium enterprises often captured “small” enterprises
    according tot the IFCs’ other criteria (employees, sales and assets). Although it is
    perhaps a bit wide, it encompasses the bulk of the different loan size definitions we
    encountered in our phone interviews and secondary research.

6.	 Or in the case of Peru, beginning from US$7,000

7.	 According to the results of FELABAN’s survey, the use of specialized risk assessment
    techniques in assessing risks, in micro, small, and medium size enterprises and
    clients from medium-low income levels is still very poor. As a result, a large part of
    these clients are considered high-risk and low-profitability clients; therefore, non-
    desirable from a financial point of view.

8.	 Trujillo, Veronica, Microfinance in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Sector
    in Numbers 2013, FOMIN, 2013

9.	 Trujillo, Veronica, Microfinance in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Sector
    in Numbers 2013, FOMIN, 2013
68   EXPERIENCES OF MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS SERVING VERY SMALL TO SMALL ENTERPRISES IN LATIN AMERICA
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
www.ifc.org




                               JULY 2014
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
